Task and Spatial Frequency Effects on Face 
Specialization 
Matthew N. Dailey Garrison W. Cottrell 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
U.C. San Diego 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0114 
{mdailey, ary}cs. ucsd. edu 
Abstract 
There is strong evidence that face processing is localized in the brain. 
The double dissociation between prosopagnosia, a face recognition 
deficit occurring after brain damage, and visual object agnosia, difficulty 
recognizing other kinds of complex objects, indicates that face and non- 
face object recognition may be served by partially independent mecha- 
nisms in the brain. Is neural specialization innate or learned? We sug- 
gest that this specialization could be the result of a competitive learn- 
ing mechanism that, during development, devotes neural resources to the 
tasks they are best at performing. Further, we suggest that the specializa- 
tion arises as an interaction between task requirements and developmen- 
tal constraints. In this paper, we present a feed-forward computational 
model of visual processing, in which two modules compete to classify 
input stimuli. When one module receives low spatial frequency infor- 
mation and the other receives high spatial frequency information, and 
the task is to identify the faces while simply classifying the objects, the 
low frequency network shows a strong specialization for faces. No other 
combination of tasks and inputs shows this strong specialization. We 
take these results as support for the idea that an innately-specified face 
processing module is unnecessary. 
1 Background 
Studies of the preserved and impaired abilities in brain damaged patients provide important 
clues on how the brain is organized. Cases ofprosopagnosia, a face recognition deficit often 
sparing recognition of non-face objects, and visual object agnosia, an object recognition 
deficit that can occur without appreciable impairment of face recognition, provide evidence 
that face recognition is served by a "special" mechanism. (For a recent review of this 
18 M. N. Dailey and G. W. Cottrell 
evidence, see Moscovitch, Winocur, and Behrmann (1997)). In this study, we begin to 
provide a computational account of the double dissociation. 
Evidence indicates that face recognition is based primarily on holistic, configural informa- 
tion, whereas non-face object recognition relies more heavily on local features and analysis 
of the parts of an object (Farah, 1991; Tanaka and Sengco, 1997). For instance, the distance 
between the tip of the nose and an eye in a face is an important factor in face recognition, 
but such subtle measurements are rarely as critical for distinguishing, say, two buildings. 
There is also evidence that configural information is highly relevant when a human be- 
comes an "expert" at identifying individuals within other visually homogeneous object 
classes (Gauthier and Tarr, 1997). 
What role might configural information play in the development of a specialization for face 
recognition? de Schonen and Mancini (1995) have proposed that several factors, including 
different rates of maturation in different areas of cortex, an infant's tendency to track the 
faces in its environment, and the gradual increase in visual acuity as an infant develops, 
all combine to force an early specialization for face recognition. If this scenario is correct, 
the infant begins to form configural face representations very soon after birth, based pri- 
marily on the low spatial frequency information present in face stimuli. Indeed, Costen, 
Parker, and Craw (1996) showed that although both high-pass and low-pass image filter- 
ing decrease face recognition accuracy, high-pass filtering degrades identification accuracy 
more quickly than low-pass filtering. Furthermore, Schyns and Oliva (1997) have shown 
that when asked to recognize the identity of the "face" in a briefly-presented hybrid image 
containing a low-pass filtered image of one individual's face and a high-pass filtered image 
of another individual's face, subjects consistently use the low-frequency component of the 
image for the task. This work indicates that low spatial frequency information may be more 
important for face identification than high spatial frequency information. 
Jacobs and Kosslyn (1994) showed how differential availability of large and small receptive 
field sizes in a mixture of experts network (Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan, and Hinton, 1991) 
can lead to experts that specialize for "what" and "where" tasks. In previous work, we 
proposed that a neural mechanism allocating resources according to their ability to perform 
a given task could explain the apparent specialization for face recognition evidenced by 
prosopagnosia (Dailey, Cottrell, and Padgett, 1997). We showed that a model based on 
the mixture of experts architecture, in which a gating network implements competitive 
learning between two simple homogeneous modules, could develop a specialization such 
that damage to one module disproportionately impaired face recognition compared to non- 
face object recognition. 
In the current study, we consider how the availability of spatial frequency information af- 
fects face recognition specialization given this hypothesis of neural resource allocation by 
competitive learning. We find that when high and low frequency information is "split" 
between the two modules in our system, and the task is to identify the faces while simply 
classifying the objects, the low-frequency module consistently specializes for face recog- 
nition. After describing the study, we discuss its results and their implications. 
2 Experimental Methods 
We presented a modular feed-forward neural network preprocessed images of 12 differ- 
ent faces, 12 different books, 12 different cups, and 12 different soda cans. We gave the 
network two types of tasks: 
Learning to recognize the superordinate classes of all four object types (hereafter 
referred to as classification). 
2. Learning to distinguish the individual members of one class (hereafter referred to 
Task and Spatial Frequency Effects on Face Specialization 19 
as identification) while simply classifying objects of the other three types. 
For each task, we investigated the effects of high and low spatial frequency information on 
identification and classification in a visual processing system with two competing modules. 
We observed how splitting the range of spatial frequency information between the two 
modules affected the specializations developed by the network. 
2.1 Image Data 
We acquired face images from the Cottrell and Metcalfe facial expression database (1991) 
and captured multiple images of several books, cups, and soda cans with a CCD camera 
and video frame grabber. For the face images, we chose five grayscale images of each of 12 
individuals. The images were photographed under controlled lighting and pose conditions; 
the subjects portrayed a different facial expression in each image. For each of the non-face 
object classes, we captured five different grayscale images of each of 12 books, 12 cups, 
and 12 cans. These images were also captured under controlled lighting conditions, with 
small variations in position and orientation between photos. The entire image set contained 
240 images, each of which we cropped and scaled to a size of 64x64 pixels. 
2.2 Image Preprocessing 
To convert the raw grayscale images to a biologically plausible representation more suitable 
for network learning and generalization, and to experiment with the effect of high and 
low spatial frequency information available in a stimulus, we extracted Gabor jet features 
from the images at multiple spatial frequency scales then performed a separate principal 
components analysis on the data from each filter scale separately to reduce input pattern 
dimensionality. 
2.2.1 Gabor jet features 
The basic two-dimensional Gabor wavelet resembles a sinusoid grating restricted by a two- 
dimensional Gaussian, and may be tuned to a particular orientation and sinusoidal fre- 
quency scale. The wavelet can be used to model simple cell receptive fields in cat primary 
visual cortex (Jones and Palmer, 1987). Buhmann, Lades, and yon der Malsburg (1990) 
describe the Gabor "jet," a vector consisting of filter responses at multiple orientations and 
scales. 
We convolved each of the 240 images in the input data set with two-dimensional Gabor 
(a ' ' s  5 s 7,)and subsampled an 
filters at five scales in eight orientations ,v, , 7, , :Y, --, 7, s 
8x8 grid of the responses to each filter. The process resulted in 2560 complex numbers 
describing each image. 
2.2.2 Principal components analysis 
To reduce the dimensionality of the Gabor jet representation while maintaining a segrega- 
tion of the responses from each filter scale, we performed a separate PCA on each spatial 
frequency component of the pattern vector described above. For each of the 5 filter scales 
in the jet, we extracted the subvectors corresponding to that scale from each pattern in the 
training set, computed the eigenvectors of their covariance matrix, projected the subvectors 
from each of the patterns onto these eigenvectors, and retained the eight most significant 
coefficients. Reassembling the pattern set resulted in 240 40-dimensional vectors. 
20 M. N. Dailey and G. W. Cottrell 
Inputs 
Module 1 
Gate 
Ioo.-.l 
Figure 1: Modular network architecture. The gating network units mix the outputs of the 
hidden layers multiplicatively. 
2.3 The Model 
The model is a simple modular feed-forward network inspired by the mixture of experts 
architecture (Jordan and Jacobs, 1995); however, it contains hidden layers and is trained by 
backpropagation of error rather than maximum likelihood estimation or expectation maxi- 
mization. The connections to the output units come from two separate input/hidden layer 
pairs; these connections are gated multiplicatively by a simple linear network with soft- 
max outputs. Figure 1 illustrates the model's architecture. During training, the network's 
weights are adjusted by backpropagation of error. The connections from the softmax units 
in the gating network to the connections between the hidden layers and output layer can 
be thought of as multiplicative connections with a constant weight of 1. The resulting 
learning rules gate the amount of error feedback received by a module according to the 
gating network's current estimate of its ability to process the current training pattern. Thus 
the model implements a form of competitive learning in which the gating network learns 
which module is better able to process a given pattern and rewards the "winner" with more 
error feedback. 
2.4 Training Procedure 
Preprocessing the images resulted in 240 40-dimensional vectors; four examples of each 
face and object composed a 192-element training set, and one example of each face and 
object composed a 48-element test set. We held out one example of each individual in 
the training set for use in determining when to stop network training. We set the learning 
rate for all network weights to 0.1 and their momentum to 0.5. Both of the hidden layers 
contained 15 units in all experiments. For the identification tasks, we determined that a 
mean squared error (MSE) threshold of 0.02 provided adequate classification performance 
on the hold out set without overtraining and allowed the gate network to settle to stable 
values. For the four-way classification task, we found that an MSE threshold of 0.002 was 
necessary to give the gate network time to stabilize and did not result in overtraining. On 
all runs reported in the results section, we simply trained the network until it reached the 
relevant MSE threshold. 
For each of the tasks reported in the results section (four-way classification, book identi- 
fication, and face identification), we performed two experiments. In the first, as a control, 
both modules and the gating network were trained and tested with the full 40-dimensional 
pattern vector. In the second, the gating network received the full 40-dimensional vector, 
Task and Spatial Frequency Effects on Face Specialization 21 
but module 1 received a vector in which the elements corresponding to the largest two Ga- 
bor filter scales were set to 0, and the elements corresponding to the middle filter scale were 
reduced by 0.5. Module 2, on the other hand, received a vector in which the elements cor- 
responding to the smallest two filter scales were set to 0 and the elements corresponding to 
the middle filter were reduced by 0.5. Thus module 1 received mostly high-frequency infor- 
mation, whereas module 2 received mostly low-frequency information, with aleemphasized 
overlap in the middle range. 
For each of these six experiments, we trained the network using 20 different initial random 
weight sets and recorded the softmax outputs learned by the gathag network on each training 
pattern. 
3 Results 
Figure 2 displays the resulting degree of specialization of each module on each stimulus 
class. Each chart plots the average weight the gating network assigns to each module for 
the training patterns from each stimulus class, averaged over 20 training runs with different 
initial random weights. The error bars denote standard error. For each of the three reported 
tasks (four-way classification, book identification, and face identification), one chart shows 
division of labor between the two modules in the control situation, in which both modules 
receive the same patterns, and the other chart shows division of labor between the two 
modules when one module receives low-frequency information and the other receives high- 
frequency information. 
When required to identify faces on the basis of high- or low-frequency information, com- 
pared with the four-way-classification and same-pattern controls, the low-frequency mod- 
ule wins the competition for face patterns extremely consistently (lower right graph). Book 
identification specialization, however, shows considerably less sensitivity to spatial fre- 
quency. 
We have also performed the equivalent experiments with a cup discrimination and a can 
discrimination task. Both of these tasks show a low-frequency sensitivity lower than that 
for face identification but higher than that for book identification. Due to space limitations, 
these results are not presented here. 
The specialized face identification networks also provide good models of prosopagnosia 
and visual object agnosia: when the face-specialized module's output is "damaged" by re- 
moving connections from its hidden layer to the output layer, the overall network's general- 
ization performance on face identification drops dramatically, while its generalization per- 
formance on object recognition drops much more slowly. When the non-face-specialized 
(high frequency) module's outputs are damaged, the opposite effect occurs: the overall net- 
work's performance on each of the object recognition tasks drops, whereas its performance 
on face identification remains high. 
4 Discussion 
The results in Figure 2 show a strong preference for low-frequency information in the face 
identification task, empirically demonseating that, given a choice, a competitive mecha- 
nism will choose a module receiving low-frequency, large receptive field information for 
this task. This result concurs with the psychological evidence for configural face repre- 
sentations based upon low spatial frequency information, and suggests how the developing 
brain could be biased toward a specialization for face recognition by the infant's initially 
low visual acuity. 
On the basis of these results, we predict that human subjects performing face and object 
22 M. N. Dailey and G. W. Cottrell 
0.2 t 
0.0 
0.2 t 
0.0 
0.2- 
0.0 
Classification (control) 
Faces Books Cups Cans 
Stimulus Type 
Book id task (control) 
Faces Books Cups Carls 
Stimulus Type 
Face id task (control) 
Faces Books Cups Cans 
Stimulus Type 
Module 1 
Module 2 
Module 1 
Module 2 
r Module 1 
z, Module 2 
Classification (split frequencies) 
1.0- 
{).6 
0.2 
0.0 
Faces Books Cups Cans 
Stimulus Type 
Book id task (split frequencies) 
0.8 
0.6 
ø'41 
0.2 
0.0 
Faces Books Cups Cans 
Stimulus Type 
Module 1 
(high freq) 
Module 2 
(low freq) 
Face id task (split frequencies) 
1.0 . 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
Faces Books Cups Cans 
Stimulus Type 
Module 1 
(high freq) 
Module 2 
(low freq) 
Module 1 
(high freq) 
Module 2 
(low freq) 
Figure 2: Average weight assigned to each module broken down by stimulus class. For each 
task, in the control experiment, each module receives the same pattern; the split-frequency 
charts summarize the specialization resulting when module 1 receives high-frequency Ga- 
bor filter information and module 2 receives low-frequency Gabor filter information. 
Task and Spatial Frequency Effects on Face Specialization 23 
identification tasks will show more degradation of performance in high-pass filtered images 
of faces than in high-pass filtered images of other objects. To our knowledge, this has not 
been empirically tested, although Costen et al. (1996) have investigated the effect of high- 
pass and low-pass filtering on face images in isolation, and Parker, Lishman, and Hughes 
(1996) have investigated the effect of high-pass and low-pass filtering of face and object 
images used as 100 ms cues for a same/different task. Their results indicate that relevant 
high-pass filtered images cue object processing better than low-pass filtered images, but the 
two types of filtering cue face processing equally well. Similarly, Schyns & Oliva's (1997) 
results described earlier suggest that the human face identification network preferentially 
responds to low spatial frequency inputs. 
Our results suggest that simple data-driven competitive learning combined with constraints 
and biases known or thought to exist during visual system development can account for 
some of the effects observed in normal and brain-damaged humans. The study lends sup- 
port to the claim that there is no need for an innately-specified face processing module -- 
face recognition is only "special" insofar as faces form a remarkably homogeneous cate- 
gory of stimuli for which within-category discrimination is ecologically beneficial. 
References 
Buhmann, J., Lades, M., and von der Malsburg, C. (1990). Size and distortion invari- 
ant object recognition by hierarchical graph matching. In Proceedings of the IJCNN 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, volme II, pages 411-416. 
Costen, N., Parker, D., and Craw, I. (1996). Effects of high-pass and low-pass spatial 
filtering on face identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 38(4):602--612. 
Cottrell, G. and Metcalfe, J. (1991). Erapath: Face, gender and emotion recognition using 
holons. In Lippman, R., Moody, J., and Touretzky, D., editors, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 3, pages 564-571. 
Dailey, M., Cottrell, G., and Padgett, C. (1997). A mixture of experts model exhibiting 
prosopagnosia. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, pp. 155-160. Stanford, CA, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
de Schonen, S. and Mancini, J. (1995). About functional brain specialization: The de- 
velopment of face recognition. TR 95.1, MRC Cognitive Development Unit, London, 
UK. 
Farah, M. (1991). Patterns of co-occurrence among the associative agnosias: Implications 
for visual object representation. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 8:1-19. 
Gauthier, I. and Tart, M. (1997). Becoming a "greeble" expert: Exploring mechanisms for 
face recognition. Vision Research. In press. 
Jacobs, R. and Kosslyn, S. (1994). Encoding shape and spatial relations -- The role of 
receptive field size in coordinating complementary representations. Cognitive Science, 
18(3):361-386. 
Jacobs, R., Jordan, M., Nowlan, S., and Hinton, G. (1991). Adaptive mixtures of local 
experts. Neural Computation, 3:79-87. 
Jones, J. and Palmer, L. (1987). An evaluation of the two-dimensional Gabor filter model 
of simple receptive fields in cat striate cortex. J. Neurophys., 58(6):1233-1258. 
Moscovitch, M., Winocur, G., and Behrmann, M. (1997). What is special about face 
recognition? Nineteen experiments on a person with visual object agnosia and dyslexia 
but normal face recognition. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(5):555--604. 
Parker, D., Lishman, J., and Hughes, J. (1996). Role of coarse and fine spatial information 
in face and object processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception 
and Performance, 22(6): 1445-1466. 
Schyns, P. and Oliva, A. (1997). Dr. Angry and Mr. Smile: The multiple faces of perceptual 
categorizations. Submitted for publication. 
Tanaka, J. and Sengco, J. (1997). Features and their configuration in face recognition. 
Memory and Cognition. In press. 
