Learning Human-like Knowledge by Singular 
Value Decomposition: A Progress Report 
Thomas K. Landauer Darrell Laham 
Department of Psychology & Institute of Cognitive Science 
University of Colorado at Boulder Boulder, CO 80309-0345 
{ landauer, dlaham} psych. colorado. edu 
Peter Foltz 
Department of Psychology 
New Mexico State University Las Cruces, NM 88003-8001 
pfoltzcrl. nmsu. edu 
Abstract 
Singular value decomposition (SVD) can be viewed as a method for 
unsupervised training of a network that associates two classes of events 
reciprocally by linear connections through a single hidden layer. SVD 
was used to learn and represent relations among very large numbers of 
words (20k-60k) and very large numbers of natural text passages (lk- 
70k) in which they occurred. The result was 100-350 dimensional 
"semantic spaces" in which any trained or newly added word or passage 
could be represented as a vector, and similarities were measured by the 
cosine of the contained angle between vectors. Good accuracy in 
simulating human judgments and behaviors has been demonstrated by 
performance on multiple-choice vocabulary and domain knowledge 
tests, emulation of expert essay evaluations, and in several other ways. 
Examples are also given of how the kind of knowledge extracted by this 
method can be applied. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, imbuing machines with human-like knowledge has relied primarily on 
explicit coding of symbolic facts into computer data structures and algorithms. A serious 
limitation of this approach is people's inability to access and express the vast reaches of 
unconscious knowledge on which they rely, knowledge based on masses of implicit 
inference and irreversibly melded data. A more important deficiency of this state of affairs 
is that by coding the knowledge ourselves, (as we also do when we assign subjectively 
hypothesized rather than objectively identified features to input or output nodes in a neural 
net) we beg important questions of how humans acquire and represent the coded 
knowledge in the first place. 
46 T. K. Landauer, D. Laham and P Foltz 
Thus, from both engineering and scientific perspectives, there are reasons to try to design 
learning machines that can acquire human-like quantities of human-like knowledge from 
the same sources as humans. The success of such techniques would not prove that the 
same mechanisms are used by humans, but because we presently do not know how the 
problem can be solved in principle, successful simulation may offer theoretical insights 
as well as practical applications. In the work reported here we have found a way to induce 
significant amounts of knowledge about the meanings of passages and of their constituent 
vocab.!aries of words by training on large bodies of natural text. In general terms, the 
method simultaneously extracts the similarity between words (the likelihood of being 
used in passages that convey similar ideas) and the similarity of passages (the likelihood 
of containing words of similar meaning). The conjoint estimation of similarity is 
accomplished by a fundamentally simple representational technique that exploits mutual 
constraints implicit in the occurrences of very many words in very many contexts. We 
view the resultant system both as a means for automatically learning much of the 
semantic content of words and passages, and as a potential computational model for the 
process that underlies the corresponding human ability. 
While the method starts with data about the natural contextual co-occurrences of words, it 
uses them in a different manner than has previously been applied. A long-standing 
objection to co-occurrence statistics as a source of linguistic knowledge (Chomsky's 
1957) is that many grammatically acceptable expressions, for example sentences with 
potentially unlimited embedding structures, cannot be produced by a finite Markov 
pn:rmss whose elements are transition probabilities from word to word. If word-word 
probabilities are insufficient to generate language, then, it is argued, acquiring estimates 
of such probabilities cannot be a way that language can be leamed. However, our 
approach to statistical knowledge learning differs from those considered in the past in two 
ways. First, the basic associafional data from which knowledge is induced are not 
transition frequencies between successive individual words or phrases, but rather the 
frequencies with which particular words appear as components of relatively large nanual 
passages, utterances of the kind that humans use to convey complete ideas. The result of 
this move is that the statistical regularifies reflected are relations among unitary 
expressions of meaning, rather than syntactic constraints on word order that may serve 
additional purposes such as output and input processing efficiencies, error protection, or 
esthetic style. Second, the mutual constraints inherent in a multitude of such local co- 
occurrence relations are jointly satisfied by being forced into a global representation of 
lower dimensionality. This constraint satisfaction, a form of induction, was accomplished 
by singular value decomposition, a linear factorization technique that produces a 
representational structure equivalent to a three layer neural network model with linear 
activation functions. 
2 THE TEXT ANALYSIS MODEL AND METHOD 
The text analysis process that we have explored is called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) 
(Deemester etal., 1990; Landauer and Dumais, 1997). It comprises four steps: 
(1) A large body of text is represented as a matrix [ij], in which rows stand for individual 
word types, columns for meaning-g passages such as sentences or paragraphs, and 
cells contain the frequency with which a word occurs in a passage. 
(2) Cell entries ffreq;) are Wansformed to: 
!og(freqo + 1) 
freqi ß freq. 
-'. 1o " 
a measure of the first order association of a word and its context. 
Learning Human Knowledge by Singular Value Decomposition: A Progress Report 47 
(3) The matrix is then subjected to singular value decomposition (Berry, 1992): 
[ij] = [ik] [kk] [jk]' 
in which [ik] and [jk] have orthonormal columns, [kk] is a diagonal matrix of singular 
values, and k <= max (i,j). 
(4) Finally, all but the d largest singular values are set to zero. Pre-multiplication of the 
right-hand matrices produces a least-squares best approximation to the original matrix 
given the number of dimensions, d, (hidden units in a corresponding neural net model 
representation) that are retained. The SVD with dimension reduction constitutes a 
constraint-satisfaction induction process in that it predicts the original observations on the 
basis of linear relations among the abstracted representations of the data that it has 
retained. By hypothesis, the analysis induces human-like relationships among passages 
and words because humans also make inferences about semantic relationships from 
abstracted representations based on limited data, and do so by an analogous process. 
In the result, each word and passage is represented as a vector of length d. Performance 
depends strongly on the choice of number of dimensions. The optimal number is 
typically around 300. The similarity of any two words, any two text passages, or any 
word and any text passage, are computed by measures on their vectors. We have most 
often used the cosine (of the contained angle between the vectors in semantic d-space) -- 
which we interpret as the degree of qualitative similarity of meaning. The length of 
vectors is also useful and interpretable. 
3 TESTS OF LSA'S PERFORMANCE 
LSA's ability to simulate human knowledge and meaning relations has been tested in a 
variety of ways. Here we describe two relatively direct sources of evidence and briefly list 
several others. 
3.1 VOCABULARY & DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE TESTS 
In all cases, LSA was first trained on a large text corpus intended to be representative of 
the text from which humans gain most of the semantic knowledge to be simulated. In a 
previously reported test (Landauer and Dumais, 1997), LSA was trained on approximately 
five million words of text sampled from a high-school level encyclopedia, then tested on 
multiple choice items from the Educational Testing Service Test of English as a Foreign 
Language (TOEFL). These test questions present a target word or short phrase and ask the 
student to choose the one of four alternative words or phrases that is most similar in 
meaning. LSA's answer was determined by computing the cosine between the derived 
vector for the target word or phrase and each of the alternatives and choosing the largest. 
LSA was correct on 64% of the 80 items, identical to the average of a large sample of 
students from non-English speaking countries who had applied for admission to U.S. 
colleges. When in error, LSA made choices positively correlated (product-moment r = .44) 
with those preferred by students. We have recently replicated this result with training on a 
similar sized sample from the Associated Press newswire 
In a new set of tests, LSA was trained on a popular introductory psychology textbook 
(Myers, 1995) and tested with the same four-alternative multiple choice tests used for 
students in two large classes. In these experiments, LSA's score was about 60% lower 
than the class averages but above passing level, and far above guessing probability. Its 
errors again resembled those of students; it got right about half as many of questions rated 
difficult by the test constructors as ones rated easy (Landauer, Foltz and Laham, 1997). 
3.2 ESSAY TESTS 
48 T. K. Landauer, D. Laham and P Foltz 
Word-word meaning similarities are a good test of knowledge indeed, vocabulary tests 
are the best single measure of human intelligence. However, they are not sufficient to 
assess the correspondence of LSA and human knowledge because people usually express 
knowledge via larger verbal strings, such as sentences, paragraphs and articles. Thus, just 
as multiple choice tests of student knowledge are often supplemented by essay tests 
whose content is then judged by humans, we wished to evaluate the adequacy of LSA's 
representation of knowledge in complete passages of text. We could not have LSA write 
essays because it has no means for producing sentences. However, we were able to assess 
the accuracy with which LSA could extract and represent the knowledge expressed in 
essays written by students by simulating judgments about their content that were made by 
human readers (Landauer, Laham, Rehder, & Schreiner, in press). 
In these tests, students were asked to write short essays to cover an assigned topic or to 
answer a posed question. In various experiments, the topics included anatomy and 
function of the heart, phenomena from introductory psychology, the history of the 
Panama Canal, and tolerance of diversity in America. In each case, LSA was first trained 
either on a large sample of instructional text from the same domain or, in the latter case, 
on combined text from the very large number of essays themselves, to produce a high- 
dimensional (100-350 dimensions in the various tests) semantic space. We then 
represen each essay simply as the vector average of the vectors for the words it 
contained. Two properties of these average vectors were then used to measure the quality 
and quantity of knowledge conveyed by an essay: (1) the similarity (measured as the 
cosine of the angle between vectors) of the student essay and one or more standard essays, 
and (2) the total amount of domain specific content, measured as the vector length. 
In each case, two human experts independently rated the overall quality of each essay on a 
five or ten point scale. The judges were either university course instructors or professional 
exam readers from Educational Testing Service. The LSA measures were calibrated with 
respect to the judges' rating scale in several different ways, but because they gave nearly 
the same results only one will be described here. In this method, each student essay was 
compared to a large (90-200) set of essays previously scored by experts, and the ten most 
similar (by cosine) identified. The target essay was then assigned a "quality" score 
component consisting of the cosine-weighted average of the ten. A second, "relevant 
quantity", score component was the vector length of the student essay. Finally, regression 
on expert scores was used to weight the quality and quantity scores (However, the weights 
in all cases were so close to equal that merely adding them would have given comparable 
results). Calibration was pedormed on data independent of that used to evaluate the 
relation between LSA and expert ratings. 
The correlation between the LSA score for an essay and that assigned by the average of 
the human readers was .80, .64, .XX and .84 for the four sets of exams. The comparable 
correlation between one reader and the other was .83, .65, .XX and .82, respectively. In 
the heart topic case, each student had also taken a carefully constructed "objective" test 
over the same material (a short answer test with near perfect scoring agreemen0. The 
correlation between the LSA essay score and the objective test was .81, the average 
correlation for the two expert readers .74. 
A striking aspect of these results is that the LSA representations were based on analyses 
of the essays that took no accoant of word order, each essay was treated as a "bag of 
word". In extracting meaning from a text, human readers presumably rely on syntax as 
well as the mere combination of words it contains, yet they were no better at agreeing on 
an essay's quality or in assigning a score that predicted a performance on a separate test of 
knowledge. Apparently, either the relevant information conveyed by word order in 
sentences is redundant with the information that can be inferred from the combination of 
words in the essay, or the processes used by LSA and humans extract different but 
compensatingly useful information. 
Learning HumanKnowledge by Singular Value Decomposition: A Progress Report 49 
3.3 OTHER EVIDENCE 
LSA has been compared with human knowledge in several additional ways, some 
confirming the correspondence, others indicating limitations. Here are some examples, all 
based on encyclopedia corpus training. 
(1) Overall LSA similarity between antonyms (mean cos = .18) was equivalent to that 
between synonym s (mean cos = .17) in triplets sampled from an antonym/synonym 
dictionary (W & R Chambers, 1989), both of which significantly exceeded that for 
unrelated pairs (mean cos = .01; ps < .0001). However for antonym (but not for 
synonym) pairs a dominant dimension of difference could easily be extracted by 
computing a one dimensional unfolding using the LSA cosines from a set of words listed 
in Roget's (1992) thesams as related respectively to the two members of the pair. 
(2) Anglin (1970) asked children and adults to sort words varying in concept relations and 
parts of speech. LSA word-word similarity correlates .50 with children and .32 with adults 
for the number of times they sorted two words together. Conceptual structure is reflected, 
but grammatical classification, strong in the adult data, is not. 
(3) When people are asked to decide that a letter string is a word, they do so faster if they 
have just read a sentence that does not contain the word but implies a related concept (e.g. 
Till, Mross & Kintsch, 1988). LSA mirrors this result with high similarities between the 
same sentences and words. (Landauer & Dumais, 1997). 
(4) People frequently make a logical error, called the conjunction error by Tversky and 
Kahneman (1974), in which they estimate that the probability that an object is a member 
of a class is greater than that it is a member of a superset class when the description of 
the object is "similar" to the description of the subset. For example, when told that 
"Linda is a young woman who is single, outspoken...deeply concerned with issues of 
discrimination and social justice," over 80% of even statistically sophisticated subjects 
rate it more likely that Linda is a feminist bank teller than that Linda is a bank teller 
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1980). LSA similarities between descriptions of people and 
occupations of this kind taken from Shafir, Smith and Osherson (1990) were computed as 
the cosine between the vector averages of words in the paired person-occupation 
descriptions. Conjunction error statements were more similar to the subset than superset 
statement in 12 out of 14 cases (p<.01), showing that LSA's representation of sentential 
meaning reflected similarity relations of the sort that have been hypothesized to underlie 
the conjunction fallacy in human judgment. 
(5) A semantic subspace was constructed for words from natural kind and artifact 
categories whose differential preservation is characteristic of agnosias due to local damage 
from herpes simplex encephalitis (Warrington & Shallice, 1984). Principal components 
analysis of the similarities among these words as represented by LSA revealed that 
categories that tend to be lost contain words that are more highly inter-related than those 
in preserved categories (Laham, in press). 
Of course, LSA does not capture all of the human knowledge conveyed by text. Some of 
the shortfall is probably due merely to the use of training corpora that are still imperfectly 
representative of the language experience of a typical person, and to lack of knowledge 
from non-textual sources. For example, in all these studies, less total text was used for 
LSA training than even a single educated adult would have read. However, a more 
fundamental restriction is that the analysis does not reflect order relations between words, 
and therefore cannot extract information that depends on syntax. Because the analysis 
discovers and represents only unsigned continuous similarities, it can be used to induce 
only certain classes of structural relations, not including ones that express Boolean, causal 
or other non-commutative logical relations. As we have seen, this lack does not prevent 
accurate simulation of human cognition in many cases, possibly because humans also 
50 T. K. Landauer, D. Laharn and P Foltz 
frequently rely on similarity rather than syntax-based, discrete logic (Tversky and 
Kahneman, 1983); however, it does limit the utility of the results for populating the 
symbolic data structures commonly used to represent knowledge in traditional AI. On the 
other hand, as examples in the next section show, continuous-valued similarity relations 
can be fmiffully applied if appropriate computational use is made of them. 
4 SAMPLE APPLICATIONS 
LSA has been used successfully in a variety of experimental applications, including the 
essay scoring techniques described earlier. Here are some additional examples: 
(1) The technique has been used to improve automatic information retrieval by 20-30% 
over otherwise identical methods by allowing users' queries to match documents with the 
desired conceptual meaning but expressed in different words (Dumais, 1991, 1994). 
(2) By training on corpora of translated text in which the words of correslxmding 
paragraphs in the two languages are combined in the "bags of words", LSA has been able 
to provide at least as good retrieval when queries and documents are in a different language 
as when in the same language (Landauer and Littman, 1990). 
(3) LSA-based measures of the similarity of student essays on a topic to instructional 
texts can predict how much an individual student will learn from a particular text (Wolfe 
et al., in press; Rehder et al., in press). To do this, the full set of student essays and the 
texts in question are aligned along a single dimension that best accommodates the LSA 
similarities among them. Estimates from one such experiment showed that using LSA to 
choose the optimal one of four texts for each student (a text that is slightly more 
sophisticated than the student) rather than assigning all students the overall best text 
(which LSA also picked correctly) increased the average amount learned by over 40%. 
(4) LSA-based measures of conceptual similarity between successive sentences accurately 
predict differences in judged coherence and meamred comprehensibility of text (Foltz, 
Kintsch and Landauer, in press). 
5 SUMMARY 
SVD-based learning of the structure underlying the use of words in meaningful contexts 
has been found capable of deriving and representing the similarity of meaning of words 
and text passages in a manner that accurately simulates con'esponding similarity relations 
as reflected in several sorts of human judgments and behavior. The validity of the 
resulting representation of meaning similarities has been established in a variety of ways, 
and the utility of its knowledge representation illustrated by several educational and 
cognitive psychological research applications. It is obviously too early to assess whether 
the particular computational model is a true analog of the process used by the human 
brain to accomplish the same things. However, the basic process, the representation of 
myriad local associative relations between components and larger contexts of experience 
in a joint space of lower dimensionality, offers, for the first time, a candidate for such a 
mechanism that has been shown sufficient to approximate human knowledge acquisition 
from natural sources at natural scale. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank members of the LSA research group at the University of Colorado for valuable 
collaboration and advice: Walter Kintsch, Bob Rehder, Mike Wolfe, & M. E. Shreiner. 
We especially acknowledge two participants from the Spring 1997 LSA seminar at CU 
whose unpublished work is described: Alan Sanfey (3.3.4) and Michael Emerson (3.3.1). 
Thanks also to Susan T. Dumais of Bellcore. 
Learning Human Knowledge by Singular Value Decomposition: A Progress Report 51 
References 
Anglin, J. M. (1970). The growth of word meaning. Cambridge, MA: M1T. 
Berry, M. W. (1992). Large scale singular value computations. International Journal of 
Supercomputer Applications, 6, 13-49. 
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). 
Indexing By Latent Semantic Analysis. Journal of the American Society For 
Information Science, 41, 391-407. 
Dumais, S. T. (1991). Improving the retrieval of information from external sources. 
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 23, 229-236. 
Dumais, S. T. (1994). Latent semantic indexing (LSI) and TREC-2. In D. Harman (Ed.), 
National Institute of Standards and Technology Text Retrieval Conference. NIST 
special publication. 
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. K. (in press). Analysis of text coherence 
using Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes. 
Laham, D. (in press). Latent Semantic Analysis approaches to categorization. Proceedings 
of the Cognitive Science Society, 1997. 
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's problem: The Latent 
Semantic Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and representation of 
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240. 
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1997). Latent Semantic Analysis passes 
the test: knowledge representation and multiple-choice testing. Manuscript in 
preparation. 
Landauer, T. K., Laham, D., Rehder, B. & Schreiner, M .E. (in press). How well can 
passage meaning be derived without using word order. A comparison of Latent 
Semantic Analysis and humans. Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society, 1997. 
Landauer, T. K., & Littman, M. L. (1990). Fully automatic cross-language document 
retrieval using latent semantic indexing. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual 
Conference of the UW Centre for the New Oxford English Dictionary and Text 
Research (pp. 31-38). Waterloo, Ontario: UW Centre for the New OED. 
Myers, D. G. (1995). Psychology, Fourth Edition. NY, NY: Worth. 
Rehder, B., Schreiner, M. E., Wolfe, B. W., Laham, D., Landauer, T. K., & Kintsch, W. 
(in press). Using Latent Semantic Analysis to assess knowledge: Some technical 
considerations. Discourse Processes. 
Shafir, E., Smith, E. E., & Osherson, D. N. (1990). Typicality and reasoning judgments. 
Memory & Cognition, 3, 229-239. 
Till, R. E., Mross, E. F., & Kintsch. W. (1988). Time course of priming for associate 
and inference words in discourse context. Memory and Cognition, 16, 283-299. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. 
Science, 185, 1124-1131. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1980). Judgments of and by representativeness. In D. 
Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics 
and biases. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The 
conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315. 
Warrington, E. K., & Shallice, T. (1984). Category-specific semantic impairments. 
Brain, 107, 829-853. 
Wolfe, M. B., Schreiner, M. E., Rehder, B., Laham, D., Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & 
Landauer, T. K. (in press). Learning from text: Matching readers and text by Latent 
Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes. 
