Learning to Order Things 
William W. Cohen Robert E. Schapire Yoram Singer 
AT&T Labs, 180 Park Ave., Florham Park, NJ 07932 
{wcohen,schapire,singer} @research.att.com 
Abstract 
There are many applications in which it is desirable to order rather than classify 
instances. Here we consider the problem of learning how to order, given feedback 
in the form of preference judgments, i.e., statements to the effect that one instance 
should be ranked ahead of another. We outline a two-stage approach in which one 
first learns by conventional means a preference function, of the form PREF(u, v), 
which indicates whether it is advisable to rank u before v. New instances are 
then ordered so as to maximize agreements with the learned preference func- 
tion. We show that the problem of finding the ordering that agrees best with 
a preference function is NP-complete, even under very restrictive assumptions. 
Nevertheless, we describe a simple greedy algorithm that is guaranteed to find a 
good approximation. We then discuss an on-line learning algorithm, based on the 
"Hedge" algorithm, for finding a good linear combination of ranking "experts." 
We use the ordering algorithm combined with the on-line learning algorithm to 
find a combination of "search experts," each of which is a domain-specific query 
expansion strategy for a WWW search engine, and present experimental results 
that demonstrate the merits of our approach. 
1 Introduction 
Most previous work in inductive learning has concentrated on learning to classify. However, 
there are many applications in which it is desirable to order rather than classify instances. 
An example might be a personalized email filter that gives a priority ordering to unread 
mail. Here we will consider the problem of learning how to construct such orderings, given 
feedback in the form of preference judgments, i.e., statements that one instance should be 
ranked ahead of another. 
Such orderings could be constructed based on a learned classifier or regression model, 
and in fact often are. For instance, it is common practice in information retrieval to rank 
documents according to their estimated probability of relevance to a query based on a 
learned classifier for the concept "relevant document." An advantage of learning orderings 
directly is that preference judgments can be much easier to obtain than the labels required 
for classification learning. 
For instance, in the email application mentioned above, one approach might be to rank 
messages according to their estimated probability of membership in the class of "urgent" 
messages, or by some numerical estimate of urgency obtained by regression. Suppose, 
however, that a user is presented with an ordered list of email messages, and elects to read 
the third message first. Given this election, it is not necessarily the case that message three 
is urgent, nor is there sufficient information to estimate any numerical urgency measures; 
however, it seems quite reasonable to infer that message three should have been ranked 
ahead of the others. Thus, in this setting, obtaining preference information may be easier 
and more natural than obtaining the information needed for classification or regression. 
452 W. W. Cohen, R. E. Schapire and Y. Singer 
In the remainder of this paper, we will investigate the following two-stage approach to 
learning how to order. In stage one, we learn a preference function, a two-argument 
function PREF(u, v) which returns a numerical measure of how certain it is that u should 
be ranked before v. In stage two, we use the learned preference function to order a set of 
new instances U; to accomplish this, we evaluate the learned function PREF(u, v) on all 
pairs of instances u, v E U, and choose an ordering of U that agrees, as much as possible, 
with these pairwise preference judgments. This general approach is novel; for related work 
in various fields see, for instance, references [2, 3, 1, 7, 10]. 
As we will see, given an appropriate feature set, learning a preference function can be 
reduced to a fairly conventional classification learning problem. On the other hand, finding 
a total order that agrees best with a preference function is NP-complete. Nevertheless, we 
show that there is an efficient greedy algorithm that always finds a good approximation to 
the best ordering. After presenting these results on the complexity of ordering instances 
using a preference function, we then describe a specific algorithm for learning a preference 
function. The algorithm is an on-line weight allocation algorithm, much like the weighted 
majority algorithm [9] and Winnow [8], and, more directly, Freund and Schapire's [4] 
"Hedge" algorithm. We then present some experimental results in which this algorithm is 
used to combine the results of several "search experts," each of which is a domain-specific 
query expansion strategy for a WWW search engine. 
2 Preliminaries 
Let X be a set of instances (possibly infinite). A preference function PREF is a binary 
function PREF: X x X -- [0, 1]. A value of PREF(u, v) which is close to 1 or 0 is 
interpreted as a strong recommendation that u should be ranked before v. A value close to 
1/2 is interpreted as an abstention from making a recommendation. As noted above, the 
hypothesis of our learning system will be a preference function, and new instances will be 
ranked so as to agree as much as possible with the preferences predicted by this hypothesis. 
In standard classification learning, a hypothesis is constructed by combining primitive 
features. Similarly, in this paper, a preference function will be a combination of other 
preference functions. In particular, we will typically assume the availability of a set of N 
primitive preference functions R,..., Rv. These can then be combined in the usual ways, 
e.g., with a boolean or linear combination of their values; we will be especially interested 
in the latter combination method. 
It is convenient to assume that the Ri's are well-formed in certain ways. To this end, we 
introduce a special kind of preference function called a rank ordering. Let $ be a totally 
ordered set  with ' >' as the comparison operator. An ordering function into $ is a function 
f: X  $. The function f induces the preference function R., defined as 
1 iff(u) > f(v) 
.trf(., V) deal 0 if f(u) < f(v) 
« otherwise. 
We call Rf a rank ordering for X into $. If Rf(u, v) -- 1, then we say that u is preferred 
to v, or u is ranked higher than v. 
It is sometimes convenient to allow an ordering function to "abstain" and not give a 
preference for a pair u, v. Let 4' be a special symbol not in $, and let f be a function into 
S U {4'}. We will interpret the mapping f(u) = 4' to mean that u is "unranked," and let 
 if either u or v is unranked. 
R(u, v) = 
To give concrete examples of rank ordering, imagine learning to order documents based on 
the words that they contain. To model this, let X be the set of all documents in a repository, 
tThat is, for all pairs of distinct elements st, s2 E $, either st 
Learning to Order Things 453 
and for N words w,..., wv, let fi(u) be the number of occurrences of wi in u. Then 
R f, will prefer u to v whenever wi occurs more often in u than v. As a second example, 
consider a meta-search application in which the goal is to combine the rankings of several 
WWW search engines. For N search engines el,..., ev, one might define fi so that 
prefers u to v whenever u is ranked ahead of v in the list Li produced by the corresponding 
search engine. To do this, one could let fi(u) = -k for the document u appearing in the 
k-th position in the list Li, and let fi(tt) = qb for any document not appearing in 
3 Ordering instances with a preference function 
We now consider the complexity of finding the total order that agrees best with a learned 
preference function. To analyze this, we must first quantify the notion of agreement between 
a preference function PREF and an ordering. One natural notion is the following: Let X 
be a set, PREF be a preference function, and let p be a total ordering of X, expressed 
again as an ordering function (i.e., p(u) > p(v) iff u precedes v in the order). We define 
AGREE(p, PREF) to be the sum of PREF(u, v) over all pairs u, v such that u is ranked 
ahead of v by p: 
AGREE(p, PREF) = E PREF(u, v). (1) 
u,v:p(u)>p(v) 
Ideally, one would like to find a p that maximizes AGREE(p, PREF). This general opti- 
mization problem is of little interest since in practice, there are many constraints imposed 
by learning: for instance PREF must be in some restricted class of functions, and will 
generally be a combination of relatively well-behaved preference functions/i. A more 
interesting question is whether the problem remains hard under such constraints. 
The theorem below gives such a result, showing that the problem is NP-complete even if 
PREF is restricted to be a linear combination of rank orderings. This holds even if all the 
rank orderings map into a set $ with only three elements, one of which may or may not be 
qb. (Clearly, if $ consists of more than three elements then the problem is still hard.) 
Theorem 1 The following decision problem is NP-complete: 
Input: A rational number to; a set X; a set $ with IS[ >_ 3; a collection of 
N ordering functions fi : X --> S; and a preference function PREF defined as 
PREF(u,v) -- -4N= wiR(u,v) where w = (wl,... ,WN) is a weight vector in [0, 1] N 
with -?=1 wi = 1. 
Question: Does there exist a total order p such that AGREE(p, PREF) _> ? 
The proof (omitted) is by reduction from CYCLIC-ORDERING [5, 6]. 
Although this problem is hard when IS[ >_ 3, it becomes tractable for linear combinations 
of rank orderings into a set $ of size two. In brief, suppose one is given X, S and PREF as 
in Theorem 1, save that $ is a two-element set, which we assume without loss of generality 
to be $ = {0, 1}. Now define p(u) -- Yi Will(U). It can be shown that the total order 
defined by p maximizes AGREE(p, PREF). (In case of a tie, p(u) = p(v) for distinct u 
and v, p defines only a partial order. The claim still holds in this case for any total order 
which is consistent with this partial order.) Of course, when IS[ = 2, the rank orderings 
are really only binary classifiers. The fact that this special case is tractable underscores the 
fact that manipulating orderings can be computationally more difficult than performing the 
corresponding operations on binary classifiers. 
Theorem 1 implies that we are unlikely to find an efficient algorithm that finds the optimal 
total order for a weighted combination of rank orderings. Fortunately, there do exist efficient 
algorithms for finding an approximately optimal total order. Figure 1 summarizes a greedy 
454 W.. W.. Cohen, R. E. Schapire and Y.. Singer 
Algorithm Order-By-Preferences 
Inputs: an instance set X; a preference function PREF 
Output: an approximately optimal ordering function/5 
!etV - X 
for each v  V do 7r(v) = Y]-uv PREF(v, u) - Y]-uv PREF(u, v) 
while V is non-empty do 
let t = argmax,v 7r(u) 
let/5(t) = Igl 
v=v-{t) 
for each v E V do w(v) = w(v) + PREF(t, v) - PREF(v, t) 
endwhile 
Figure 1: A greedy ordering algorithm 
algorithm that produces a good approximation to the best total order, as we will shortly 
demonstrate. The algorithm is easiest to describe by thinking of PREF as a directed 
weighted graph where, initially, the set of vertices V is equal to the set of instances X, 
and each edge u - v has weight PREF(u, v). We assign to each vertex v  V a potential 
value -(v), which is the weighted sum of the outgoing edges minus the weighted sum of 
the ingoing edges. That is, 7r(v) --- Y.uv PREF(v, u) - Y.uv PREF(u, v). The greedy 
algorithm then picks some node t that has maximum potential, and assigns it a rank by 
setting )(t) = IvI, effectively ordering it ahead of all the remaining nodes. This node, 
together with all incident edges, is then deleted from the graph, and the potential values 
7r of the remaining vertices are updated appropriately.' This process is repeated until the 
graph is empty; notice that nodes removed in subsequent iterations will have progressively 
smaller and smaller ranks. 
The next theorem shows that this greedy algorithm comes within a factor of two of optimal. 
Furthermore, it is relatively simple to show that the approximation factor of 2 is tight. 
Theorem 2 Let OPT(PREF) be the weighted agreement achieved by an optimal total 
order for the preference function PREF and let APPROX(PREF) be the weighted agreement 
achieved by the greedy algorithm. Then APPROX(PREF) >_ «OPT(PREF). 
4 Learning a good weight vector 
In this section, we look at the problem of learning a good linear combination of a set of 
preference functions. Specifically, we assume access to a set of ranking experts which 
provide us with preference functions/i of a set of instances. The problem, then, is to learn 
a preference function of the form PREF(u, v) = y./N= Wijli(U ' U). We adopt the on-line 
learning framework first studied by Littlestone [8] in which the weight wi assigned to each 
ranking expert/i is updated incrementally. 
Learning is assumed to take place in a sequence of rounds. On the t-th round, the learning 
algorithm is provided with a set X t of instances to be ranked anti to a set of N preference 
functions/ of these instances. The learner may compute R(u, v) for any and all preference 
functions/} and pairs u, v  X t before producing a final ordering Pt of X t. Finally, the 
learner receives feedback from the environment. We assume that the feedback is an arbitrary 
set of assertions of the form '% should be preferred to v." That is, formally we regard the 
feedback on the t-th round as a set F t of pairs (u, v) indicating such preferences. 
The algorithm we propose for this problem is based on the "weighted majority algorithm" [9] 
and, more directly, on the "Hedge" algorithm [4]. We define the loss of a preference function 
Learning to Order Things 455 
Allocate Weights for Ranking Experts 
Parameters: 
1-- 1 
/3 6 [0, 1], initial weight vector w  6 [0, 1] N with y-]/N= wi 
N ranking experts, number of rounds T 
Dofort=l,2,...,T 
1. Receive a set of elements X t and preference functions/,...,/v. 
2. Use algorithm Order-By-Preferences to compute ordering function/t which ap- 
proximates PREFt(u, v) = -]?=! wiR(u, v). 
3. Order X t using 
4. Receive feedback F t from the user. 
5. Evaluate losses Loss(R, F t) as defined in Eq. (2). 
t ./3Loss(t 
6. Set the new weight vector w +l --- w i ' )/Zt where Zt is a normalization 
E/N= 
constant, chosen so that -w i = 1. 
Figure 2: The on-line weight allocation algorithm. 
/t with respect to the user's feedback F as 
Loss(R, F) de_f (u,v)F( 1 -- ti(U, V)) 
Irl (2) 
This loss has a natural probabilistic interpretation. If R is viewed as a randomized prediction 
algorithm that predicts that u will precede v with probability R(u, v), then Loss(R, F) is 
the probability of R disagreeing with the feedback on a pair (u, v) chosen uniformly at 
random from F. 
We now can use the Hedge algorithm almost verbatim, as shown in Figure 2. The algorithm 
maintains a positive weight vector whose value at time t is denoted by w t = (w,..., Wv ). 
If there is no prior knowledge about the ranking experts, we set all initial weights to be 
equal so that w - 1 IN. The weight vector w t is used to combine the preference functions 
ß r-N t-t 
of the different experts to obtain thee preference function PREFt = 2-,i=1 wi i. This, in 
turn, is converted into an ordering Pt on the current set of elements X * using the method 
described in Section 3. After receiving feedback F t, the loss for each preference function 
Loss(R, F t) is evaluated as in Eq. (2) and the weight vector w t is updated using the 
multiplicative rule  t+ t ./3œoss(lt,F ) [0, 1] is parameter, and Zt is 
" i '- w i / Zt where/3  a 
a normalization constant, chosen so that the weights sum to one after the update. Thus, based 
on the feedback, the weights of the ranking experts are adjusted so that experts producing 
preference functions with relatively large agreement with the feedback are promoted. 
We will briefly sketch the theoretical rationale behind this algorithm. Freund and 
Schapire [4] prove general results about Hedge which can be applied directly to this loss 
function. Their results imply almost immediately a bound on the cumulative loss of the 
preference function PREFt in terms of the loss of the best ranking expert, specifically 
T T 
E Løss(PREFt'Ft) <- aan n E Løss(R'Ft) + calnN 
t=l t=l 
where a a = In(1//3)/(1 -/3) and c a = 1 / (1 -/3). Thus, if one of the ranking experts has 
low loss, then so will the combined preference function PREFt. 
However, we are not interested in the loss of PREFt (since it is not an ordering), but rather in 
the performance of the actual ordering )t computed by the learning algorithm. Fortunately, 
456 W. W. Cohen, R. E. Schapire and E Singer 
the losses of these can be related using a kind of triangle inequality. It can be shown that, 
for any PREF, F and p: 
DISAGREE(p, PREF) 
Loss(Rp, F) < iF I + Loss(PREF, F) (3) 
where, similar to Eq. (1), DISAGREE(p, PREF) = 5-,,v:p(,)>p(v) (1 - PREF(u, v)). Not 
surprisingly, maximizing AGREE is equivalent to minimizing DISAGREE. 
So, in sum, we use the greedy algorithm of Section 3 to minimize (approximately) the first 
term on the right hand side of Eq. (3), and we use the learning algorithm Hedge to minimize 
the second tenn. 
5 Experimental results for metasearch 
We now present some experiments in learning to combine the results of several WWW 
searches. We note that this problem exhibits many facets that require a general approach 
such as ours. For instance, approaches that learn to combine similarity scores are not 
applicable since the similarity scores of WWW search engines are often unavailable. 
We chose to simulate the problem of learning a domain-specific search engine. As test 
cases we picked two fairly narrow classes of queries--retrieving the home pages of ma- 
chine learning researchers (ML), and retrieving the home pages of universities (UNIV). 
We obtained a listing of machine learning researchers, identified by name and affiliated 
institution, together with their home pages, and a similar list for universities, identified by 
name and (sometimes) geographical location. Each entry on a list was viewed as a query, 
with the associated URL the sole relevant document. 
We then constructed a series of special-purpose "search experts" for each domain. These 
were implemented as query expansion methods which converted a name, affiliation pair 
(or a name, location pair) to a likely-seeming Altavista query. For example, one expert 
for the ML domain was to search for all the words in the person's name plus the words 
"machine" and "learning," and to further enforce a strict requirement that the person's last 
name appear. Overall we defined 16 search experts for the ML domain and 22 for the UNIV 
domain. Each search expert returned the top 30 ranked documents. In the ML domain there 
were 210 searches for which at least one search expert returned the named home page; for 
the UNIV domain, there were 290 such searches. 
For each query t, we first constructed the set X t consisting of all documents returned by all 
of the expanded queries defined by the search experts. Next, each search expert i computed 
a preference function/. We chose these to be rank orderings defined with respect to an 
ordering function f/t in the natural way: We assigned a rank of f/t __ 30 to the first listed 
document, fi = 29 to the second-listed document, and so on, finally assigning a rank of 
.fi '- 0 to every document not retrieved by the expanded query associated with expert i. 
To encode feedback, we considered two schemes. In the first we simulated complete 
relevance feedback--that is, for each query, we constructed feedback in which the sole 
relevant document was preferred to all other documents. In the second, we simulated the 
sort of feedback that could be collected from "click data," i.e., from observing a user's 
interactions with a metasearch system. For each query, after presenting a ranked list of 
documents, we noted the rank of the one relevant document. We then constructed a feedback 
ranking in which the relevant document is preferred to all preceding documents. This would 
correspond to observing which link the user actually followed, and making the assumption 
that this link was preferred to previous links. 
To evaluate the expected performance of a fully-trained system on novel queries in this 
domain, we employed leave-one-out testing. For each query q, we removed q from the 
Learning to Order Things 457 
ML Domain University Domain 
Topl Top10 Top 30Av. rank Topl Top10 Top 30Av. rank 
Learned System (Full Feedback) 114 185 198 4.9 111 225 253 7.8 
Learned System ("Click Data") 93 185 198 4.9 87 229 259 7.8 
Naive 89 165 176 7.7 79 157 191 14.4 
Best (Top 1) 119 170 184 6.7 112 221 247 8.2 
Best (Top 10) 114 182 190 5.3 111 223 249 8.0 
Best (Top 30) 97 181 194 5.6 111 223 249 8.0 
Best (Av. Rank) 114 182 190 5.3 111 223 249 8.0 
Table 1: Comparison of learned systems and individual search queries 
query set, and recorded the rank of q after training (with /3 = 0.5) on the remaining 
queries. For click data feedback, we recorded the median rank over 100 randomly chosen 
permutations of the training queries. 
We the computed an approximation to average rank by artificially assigning a rank of 31 
to every document that was either unranked, or ranked above rank 30. (The latter case is 
to be fair to the learned system, which is the only one for which a rank greater than 30 is 
possible.) A summary of these results is given in Table 1, together with some additional 
data on "top-k performance"--the number of times the correct homepage appears at rank 
no higher than k. In the table we give the top-k performance (for three values of k) and 
average rank for several ranking systems: the two learned systems, the naive query (the 
person or university's name), and the single search expert that performed best with respect 
to each performance measure. The table illustrates the robustness of the learned systems, 
which are nearly always competitive with the best expert for every performance measure 
listed; the only exception is that the system trained on click data trails the best expert in 
top-k performance for small values of k. It is also worth noting that in both domains, the 
naive query (simply the person or university's name) is not very effective. Even with the 
weaker click data feedback, the learned system achieves a 36% decrease in average rank 
over the naive query in the ML domain, and a 46% decrease in the UNIV domain. 
To summarize the experiments, on these domains, the learned system not only performs 
much better than naive search strategies; it also consistently performs at least as well as, 
and perhaps slightly better than, any single domain-specific search expert. Furthermore, the 
performance of the learned system is almost as good with the weaker "click data" training 
as with complete relevance feedback. 
References 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[lO] 
D.S. Hochbaum (Ed.). Approximation Algorithms for NP-hard problems. PWS Publishing 
Company, 1997. 
O. Etzioni, S. Hanks, T Jiang, R. M. Karp, O. Madani, and O. Waarts. Efficient information 
gathering on the intemet. In 37th Ann. Syrup. on Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. 
P.C Fishbum. The Theory of Social Choice. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1973. 
Y. Freund and R,E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an 
application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 1997. 
Z. Galil and N. Megido. Cyclic ordering is NP-complete. Theor. Comp. Sci., 5:179-182, 1977. 
M.R. Gary and D.S. Johnson. Computers and Intractibility: A Guide to the Theory of NP- 
completeness. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1979. 
P.B. Kantor. Decision level data fusion for routing of documents in the TREC3 context: a best 
case analysis of worste case results. In TREC-3, 1994. 
N. Littlestone, Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: A new linear-threshold 
algorithm. Machine Learning, 2(4), 1988. 
N. Littlestone and M.K. Warmuth. The weighted majority algorithm. Information and Compu- 
tation, 108(2):212-261, 1994. 
K.E. Lochbaum and L.A. Streeter. Comparing and combining the effectiveness of latent semantic 
indexing and the ordinary vector space model for information retrieval. Information processing 
and management, 25(6):665-676, 1989. 
