RCC Cannot Compute Certain FSA, 
Even with Arbitrary Transfer Functions 
Mark Ring 
RWCP Theoretical Foundation GMD Laboratory 
GMD -- German National Research Center for Information Technology 
Schloss Birlinghoven 
D-53 754 Sankt Augustin, Germany 
email: Mark.Ring(GMD.de 
Abstract 
Existing proofs demonstrating the computational limitations of Re- 
current Cascade Correlation and similar networks (Fahlman, 1991; 
Bachtach, 1988; Mozer, 1988) explicitly limit their results to units 
having sigmoidal or hard-threshold transfer functions (Giles et al., 
1995; and Kremer, 1996). The proof given here shows that for 
any finite, discrete transfer function used by the units of an RCC 
network, there are finite-state automata (FSA) that the network 
cannot model, no matter how many units are used. The proof also 
applies to continuous transfer functions with a finite number of 
fixed-points, such as sigmoid and radial-basis functions. 
1 Introduction 
The Recurrent Cascade Correlation (RCC) network was proposed by Fahlman 
(1991) to offer a fast and efficient alternative to fully connected recurrent networks. 
The network is arranged such that each unit has only a single recurrent connection: 
the connection that goes from itself to itself. Networks with the same structure 
have been proposed by Mozer (Mozer, 1988) and Bachrach (Bachrach, 1988). This 
structure is intended to allow simplified training of recurrent networks in the hopes 
of making them computationally feasible. However, this increase in efficiency comes 
at the cost of computational power: the networks' computational capabilities are 
limited regardless of the power of their activation functions. The remaining input to 
each unit consists of the input to the network as a whole together with the outputs 
from all units lower in the RCC network. Since it is the structure of the network 
and not the learning algorithm that is of interest here, only the structure will be 
described in detail. 
620 M. Ring 
Figure 1: This finite-state automaton was shown by Giles et al. (1995) to be un- 
representable by an RCC network whose units have hard-threshold or sigmoidal 
transfer functions. The arcs are labeled with transition labels of the FSA which 
are given as input to the RCC network. The nodes are labeled with the output 
values that the network is required to generate. The node with an inner circle is an 
accepting or halting state. 
1 
1 
Figure 2' This finite-state automaton is one of those shown by Kremer (1996) not to 
be representable by an RCC network whose units have a hard-threshold or sigmoidal 
transfer function. This FSA computes the parity of the inputs seen so far. 
The functionality of a network of N RCC units, U0, ..., U2v- can be described in 
the following way: 
Vo(t) = f0('(/), Vo(t- 1)) (1) 
Vx(t) - fx('(t), V(t - 1), V_(t), V_a(t),..., Vo(t)), (2) 
where V(t) is the output value of Ux at time step t, and '(t) is the input to the 
network at time step t. The value of each unit is determined from: (1) the network 
input at the current time step, (2) its own value at the previous time step, and (3) 
the output values of the units lower in the network at the current time step. Since 
learning is not being considered here, the weights are assumed to be constant. 
2 Existing Proofs 
The proof of Giles, et al (1995) showed that an RCC network whose units had a 
hard-threshold or sigmoidal transfer function cannot produce outputs that oscillate 
with a period greater than two when the network input is constant. (An oscillation 
has a period of x if it repeats itself every x steps.) Thus, the FSA shown in Figure 1 
cannot be modeled by such an RCC network, since its output (shown as node labels) 
oscillates at a period greater than two given constant input. Kremer (1996) refined 
the class of FSA representable by an RCC network showing that, if the input to 
the net oscillates with period p, then the output can only oscillate with a period of 
w, where w is one of p's factors (or of 2p's factors if p is odd). An unrepresentable 
example, therefore, is the parity FSA shown in Figure 2, whose output has a period 
of four given the following input (of period two): 0, 1, 0, 1, .... 
Both proofs, that by Giles et al. and that by Kremer, are explicitly designed with 
RCC Cannot Compute Certain FSA, Even with Arbitrary Transfer Functions 621 
:O,k 
$:0,1 
1 
1 2 
k 
k 
/ 
/ 
/ I 
I I 
I / 
\ / 
/ 
2,3 
Figure 3: This finite-state automaton cannot be modeled with any RCC network 
whose units are capable of representing only k discrete outputs. The values within 
the circles are the state names and the output expected from the network. The arcs 
describe transitions from state to state, and their values represent the input given 
to the network when the transition is made. The dashed lines indicate an arbitrary 
number of further states between state 3 and state ]c which are connected in the 
same manner as states 1, 2, and 3. (All states are halting states.) 
hard-threshold and sigmoidal transfer functions in mind, and can say nothing about 
other transfer functions. In other words, these proofs do not demonstrate the lim- 
itations of the RCC-type network structure, but about the use of threshold units 
within this structure. The following proof is the first that actually demonstrates 
the limitations of the single-recurrent-link network structure. 
3 Details of the Proof 
This section proves that RCC networks are incapable even in principle of modeling 
certain kinds of FSA, regardless of the sophistication of each unit's transfer function, 
provided only that the transfer function be discrete and finite, meaning only that 
the units of the RCC network are capable of generating a fixed number, k, of distinct 
output values. (Since all functions implemented on a discrete computer fall into this 
category, this assumption is minor. Furthermore, as will be discussed in Section 4, 
the outputs of most interesting continuous transfer functions reduce to only a small 
number of distinct values.) This generalized RCC network is proven here to be 
incapable of modeling the finite-state automaton shown in Figure 3. 
622 M. Ring 
For ease of exposition, let us call any FSA of the form shown in Figure 3 an RF + 
for Ring FSA with k + 1 states.Further, call a unit whose output can be any of 
k distinct values and whose input includes its own previous output, a DRU  for 
Discrete Recurrent Unit. These units are a generalization of the units used by RCC 
networks in that the specific transfer function is left unspecified. By proving the 
network is limited when its units are DRU 's proves the limitations of the network's 
structure regardless of the transfer function used. 
Clearly, a DRU + with a sufficiently sophisticated transfer function could by itself 
model an RF + by simply allocating one of its k + 1 output values for each of 
the k + 1 states. At each step it would receive as input the last state of the FSA 
and the next transition and could therefore compute the next state. By restricting 
the units in the least conceivable manner, i.e., by reducing the number of distinct 
output values to k, the RCC network becomes incapable of modeling any RF k+ 
regardless of how many DRU 's the network contains. This will now be proven. 
The proof is inductive and begins with the first unit in the network, which, after 
being given certain sequences of inputs, becomes incapable of distinguishing among 
any states of the FSA. The second step, the inductive step, proves that no finite 
number of such units can-assist a unit higher in the RCC network in making a 
distinction between any states of the RF +. 
Lemma 1 No DR U  whose input is the current transition of an RF + can reliably 
distinguish among any states of the RF + More specifically, at least one of the 
DR U  's k output values can be generated in all of the RF + 's k + 1 states. 
Proof.' Let us name the DRU's k distinct output values V ø, V , ..., V -. The 
mapping function implemented by the DRU  can be expressed as follows: 
(V x , i) = V  , 
which indicates that when the unit's last output was V x and its current input is i, 
then its next output is V. 
Since an RF  is cyclical, the arithmetic in the following will also be cyclical (i.e., 
modular): 
x+y ifx+y<k 
x)y --_ 
x+y-k ifx+y>k 
x-y ifx>y 
x©y -- - 
x+k-y ifx<y 
whereO<x<kandO<y<k. 
Since it is impossible for the DRU  to represent each of the RF k+'s k+ 1 states with 
a distinct output value, at least two of these states must be represented ambiguously 
by the same value. That is, there are two RF +l states a and b and one DRU k 
value V a/b such that V a/b can be generated by the unit both when the FSA is in 
state a and when it is in state b. Furthermore, this value will be generated by the 
unit given an appropriate sequence of inputs. (Otherwise the value is unreachable, 
serves no purpose, and can be discarded, reducing the unit to a DRUk-.) 
Once the DRU k has generated V a/, it cannot in the next step distinguish whether 
the FSA's current state is a or b. Since the FSA could be in either state a or b, the 
next state after a b transition could be either a or b  1. That is: 
(v b) v (3) 
XThanks to Mike Mozer for suggesting this catchy name. 
RCC Cannot Compute Certain FSA, Even with Arbitrary Transfer Functions 623 
where a © b >_ b © a and k > 1. This new output value V a/øe can therefore be 
generated when the FSA is in either state a or state b  1. By repeatedly replacing 
b with b ß 1 in Equation 3, all states from b to a © 1 can be shown to share output 
values with state a, i.e., V "/b V "/ V "/2 V "/"ø, V "/"ø all exist 
, , , .'., ß 
Repeatedly substituting a © 1 and a for a and b respectively in the last paragraph 
produces values V :/y Vz, F 6 0, 1, ..., k + 1. There is, therefore, at least one value 
that can be generated by the unit in both states of every possible pair of states. 
(k+l) distinctpairsbutonlykdistinctoutputvalues, andsince 
Since there are 2 
k 
when k > 1, then not all of these pairs can be represented by unique V values. At 
least two of these pairs must share the same output value, and this implies that 
some V "/'/e exists that can be output by the unit in any of the three FSA states 
a, b, and c. 
Starting with 
(¾//c, c)  ¾//, 
and following the same argument given above for V a/, there must be a V x/y/z for 
all triples of states x, y, and . Since there are distinct triples but only k 
distinct output values, and since 
where k  3, some V a/Wc/d must also exist. 
This argument can be followed repeatedly since: 
m >l, 
k 
for all m < k + 1, including when m = k. Therefore, there is at least one 
V ø//2/"//+ that can be output by the unit in all k + 1 states of the RF +. 
Call this value and any other that can be generated in all FSA states V . All 
V 's are reachable (else they could be discarded and the above proof applied for 
DRU t, l < k). When a V  is output by a DRU i, it does not distinguish any states 
of the RF +. 
Lemma 2 Once a DR U  outputs a V , all future outputs will also be V  's. 
Proof: The proof is simply by inspection, and is shown in the following table: 
ActualState Transition NextState 
z z zOl 
x2 x x2 
x3 x x©3 
x02 x x©2 
x©l x x©l 
624 M. Ring 
If the unit's last output value was a V k, then the FSA might be in any of its k + 1 
possible states. As can be seen, if at this point any of the possible transitions is 
given as input, the next state can also be any of the k + 1 possible states. Therefore, 
no future input can ever serve to lessen the unit's ambiguity. 
Theorem I An RCC network composed of any finite number of DRU  's cannot 
model an RF +. 
Proof: Let us describe the transitions of an RCC network of N units by using the 
following notation: 
..., , v' v,' 
where Vr, is the output value of the m'th unit (i.e., Ur,) before the given input, 
i, is seen by the network, and V is Ur,'S value after i has been processed by the 
network. The first unit, U0, receives only i and V0 as input. Every other unit Ux 
rl 
receives as input i and Vx as well as l/y, y < x. 
Lemma 1 shows that the first unit, U0, will eventually generate a value V0 , which 
can be generated in any of the RF/+ states. Froxn Lemma 2, the unit will continue 
to produce V0  values after this point. 
Given any finite number N of DRU/'s, Ur,-,..., U0 that are producing their Vk 
values, V_ , ..., V, the next higher unit, U/v, will be incapable of disambiguating 
all states by itself, i.e., at least two FSA states, a and b, will have overlapping 
output values, V½/. Since none of the units UN-, ..., Uo can distinguish between 
any states (including a and b), 
..., v0), , ..., v?, 
assuming that b©a > a3b and k > 1. The remainder of the proof follows identically 
along the lines developed for Lemmas 1 and 2. The result of this development is 
that UN also has a set of reachable output values V that can be produced in any 
state of the FSA. Once one such value is produced, no less-ambiguous value is ever 
generated. Since no RCC network containing any number of DRU/'s can over time 
distinguish among any states of an RF/+1, no such RCC network can model such 
an FSA. 
4 Continuous Transfer Functions 
Sigmoid functions can generate a theoretically infinite number of output values; 
if represented with 32 bits, they can generate 232 outputs. This hardly means, 
however, that all such values are of use. In fact, as was shown by Giles et al. (1995), 
if the input remains constant for a long enough period of time (as it can in all 
RF+'s), the output of sigmoid units will converge to a constant value (a fixed 
point) or oscillate between two values. This means that a unit with a sigmoid 
transfer function is in principle a DRU 2. Most useful continuous transfer functions 
(radial-basis functions, for example), exhibit the same property, reducing to only a 
small number of distinct output values when given the same input repeatedly. The 
results shown liere are therefore not merely theoretical, but are of real practical 
significance and apply to any network whose recurrent links are restricted to self 
connections. 
5 Conclusion 
No RCC network can model any FSA containing an RF k+ (such as that shown 
in Figure 3), given units limited to generating k possible output values, regardless 
RCC Cannot Compute Certain FSA, Even with Arbitrary Transfer Functions 625 
of the sophistication of the transfer function that generates these values. This 
places an upper bound on the computational capabilities of an RCC network. Less 
sophisticated transfer functions, such as the sigmoid units investigated by Giles et 
al. and Kremer may have even greater limitations. Figure 2, for example, could 
be modeled by a single sufficiently sophisticated DRU 0, but cannot be modeled 
by an RCC network composed of hard-threshold or sigmoidal units (Giles et al., 
1995; Kremer, 1996) because these units cannot exploit all mappings from inputs 
to outputs. By not assuming arbitrary transfer functions, previous proofs could not 
isolate the network's structure as the source of RCC's limitations. 
References 
Bachrach, J. R. (1988). Learning to represent state. Master's thesis, Department 
of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
MA 01003. 
Fahlman, S. E. (1991). The recurrent cascade-correlation architecture. In Lipp- 
mann, R. P., Moody, J. E., and Touretzky, D. S., editors, Advaces in Neural 
Iformatio Processing Systems 3, pages 190-196, San Mateo, California. Mor- 
gan Kaufmann Publishers. 
Giles, C., Chen, D., Sun, G., Chen, H., Lee, Y., and Goudreau, M. (1995). Con- 
structive learning of recurrent neural networks: Problems with recurrent cas- 
cade correlation and a simple solution. Iœœœ Transactions on Neural Networks, 
6(4):829. 
Kremer, S.C. (1996). Finite state automata that recurrent cascade-correlation 
cannot represent. In Touretzky, D. S., Mozer, M. C., and Hasselno, M. E., 
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8, pages 679-686. 
MIT Press. In Press. 
Mozer, M. C. (1988). A focused back-propagation algorithm for temporal pattern 
recognition. Technical Report CRG-TR-88-3, Department of Psychology, Uni- 
versity of Toronto. 
