Mapping a manifold of perceptual observations 
Joshua B. Tenenbaum 
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 
j bt @psyche. mi t. edu 
Abstract 
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction is formulated here as the problem of trying to 
find a Euclidean feature-space embedding of a set of observations that preserves 
as closely as possible their intrinsic metric structure- the distances between points 
on the observation manifold as measured along geodesic paths. Our isometric 
feature mapping procedure, or isomap, is able to reliably recover low-dimensional 
nonlinear structure in realistic perceptual data sets, such as a manifold of face 
images, where conventional global mapping methods find only local minima. 
The recovered map provides a canonical set of globally meaningful features, 
which allows perceptual transformations such as interpolation, extrapolation, and 
analogy - highly nonlinear transformations in the original observation space - to 
be computed with simple linear operations in feature space. 
1 Introduction 
In psychological or computational research on perceptual categorization, it is generally taken 
for granted that the perceiver has a priori access to a representation of stimuli in terms of 
some perceptually meaningful features that can support the relevant classification. However, 
these features will be related to the raw sensory input (e.g. values of retinal activity or image 
pixels) only through a very complex transformation, which must somehow be acquired 
through a combination of evolution, development, and learning. Fig. 1 illustrates the feature- 
discovery problem with an example from visual perception. The set of views of a face from 
all possible viewpoints is an extremely high-dimensional data set when represented as image 
arrays in a computer or on a retina; for example, 32 x 32 pixel grey-scale images can be 
thought of as points in a 1,024-dimensional observation space. The perceptually meaningful 
structure of these images, however, is of much lower dimensionality; all of the images in 
Fig. 1 lie on a two-dimensional manifold parameterized by viewing angle. A perceptual 
system that discovers this manifold structure has learned a model of the appearance of 
this face that will support a wide range of recognition, classification, and imagery tasks 
(some demonstrated in Fig. 1), despite the absence of any prior physical knowledge about 
three-dimensional object geometry, surface texture, or illumination conditions. 
Learning a manifold of perceptual observations is difficult because these observations 
Mapping a Manifold of Perceptual Observations 683 
azimuth 
Figure 1: Isomap recovers a global topographic map of face images varying in two viewing 
angle parameters, azimuth and elevation, Image interpolation (A), extrapolation (B), and 
analogy (C) can then be carried out by linear operations in this feature space. 
usually exhibit significant nonlinear structure. Fig. 2A provides a simplified version of 
this problem. A flat two-dimensional manifold has been nonlinearly embedded in a three- 
dimensional observation space,  and must be "unfolded" by the learner. For linearly 
embedded manifolds, principal component analysis (PCA) is guaranteed to discover the 
dimensionality of the manifold and produce a compact representation in the form of an 
orthonormal basis. However, PCA is completely insensitive to the higher-order, nonlinear 
structure that characterizes the points in Fig. 2A or the images in Fig. 1. 
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction - the search for intrinsically low-dimensional struc- 
tures embedded nonlinearly in high-dimensional observations - has long been a goal of 
computational learning research. The most familiar nonlinear techniques, such as the 
self-organizing map (SOM; Kohonen, 1988), the generative topographic mapping (GTM; 
Bishon, Svensen, & Williams, 1998), or autoencoder neural networks (DeMers & Cottrell, 
1993), try to generalize PCA by discovering a single global low-dimensional nonlinear 
model of the observations. In contrast, local methods (Bregler & Omohundro, 1995; Hin- 
ton, Revow, & Dayan, 1995) seek a set of low-dimensional models, usually linear and 
hence valid only for a limited range of data. When appropriate, a single global model is 
Given by a: = z cos(z), a:2 = z sin(z), 3 = Z2, for z E [3r/2, 9r/2], z2 E [0, 15]. 
684 J. B. Tenenbaum 
lO 
o 
B 
10 
0 
- 0 
C 
0 10  0 ' O' 0'10 
Figure 2: A nonlinearly embedded manifold may create severe local minima for"top-down" 
mapping algorithms. (A) Raw data. (B) Best SOM fit. (C) Best GTM fit. 
more revealing and useful than a set of local models. However, local linear methods are in 
general far more computationally efficient and reliable than global methods. 
For example, despite the visually obvious structure in Fig. 2A, this manifold was not 
successfuly modeled by either of two popular global mapping algorithms, SOM (Fig. 2B) 
and GTM (Fig. 2C), under a wide range of parameter settings. Both of these algorithms 
try to fit a grid of predefined (usually two-dimensional) topology to the data, using greedy 
optimization techniques that first fit the large-scale (linear) structure of the data, before 
making small-scale (nonlinear) refinements. The coarse structure of such "folded" data sets 
as Fig. 2A hides their nonlinear structure from greedy optimizers, virtually ensuring that 
top-down mapping algorithms will become trapped in highly suboptimal solutions. 
Rather than trying to force a predefined map onto the data manifold, this paper shows how a 
perceptual system may map a set of observations in a "bottom-up" fashion, by first learning 
the topological structure of the manifold (as in Fig. 3A) and only then learning a metric map 
of the data (as in Fig. 3C) that respects this topology. The next section describes the goals and 
steps of the mapping procedure, and subsequent sections demonstrate applications to two 
challenging learning tasks: recovering a five-dimensional manifold embedded nonlinearly 
in 50 dimensions, and recovering the manifold of face images depicted in Fig. 1. 
2 Isometric feature mapping 
We assume our data lie on an unknown manifold M embedded in a high-dimensional 
observation space X. Let z © denote the coordinates of the ith observation. We seek a 
mapping f: X  Y from the observation space X to a low-dimensional Euclidean feature 
space Y that preserves as well as possible the intrinsic metric structure of the observations, 
i.e. the distances between observations as measured along geodesic (locally shortest) paths 
of M. The isometric feature mapping, or isomap, procedure presented below generates 
an implicit description of the mapping f, in terms of the corresponding feature points 
t © = f(z ©) for sufficiently many observations z ©. Explicit parametric descriptions 
1 
of f or f- can be found with standard techniques of function approximation (Poggio & 
Girosi, 1990) that interpolate smoothly between the known corresponding pairs {a(i), t(i) }. 
A Euclidean map of the data's intrinsic geometry has several important properties. First, 
intrinsically similar observations should map to nearby points in feature space, support- 
ing efficient similarity-based classification and informative visualization. Moreover, the 
geodesic paths of the manifold, which are highly nonlinear in the original observation space, 
should map onto straight lines in feature space. Then perceptually natural transformations 
along these paths, such as the interpolation, extrapolation and analogy demonstrated in 
Figs. 1A-C, may be computed by trivial linear operations in feature space. 
Mapping a Manifold of Perceptual Observations 685 
A 
10  
o: 
0 10' 0'10 
B 
4 
2 
 ; ' -' ' ' 0 
Manifold Distance 
C 
Figure 3: The results of the three-step isomap procedure. (A) Discrete representation of 
manifold in Fig. 2A. (B) Correlation between measured graph distances and true mani- 
fold distances. (C) Correspondence of recovered two-dimensional feature points {h, 
(circles) with original generating vectors {z, z2} (line ends). 
The isomap procedure consists of three main steps, each of which might be carried out by 
more or less sophisticated techniques. The crux of isomap is finding an efficient way to 
compute the true geodesic distance between observations, given only their Euclidean dis- 
tances in the high-dimensional observation space. Isomap assumes that distance between 
points in observation space is an accurate measure of manifold distance only locally and 
must be integrated over paths on the manifold to obtain global distances. As preparation for 
computing manifold distances, we first construct a discrete representation of the manifold 
in the form of a topology-preserving network (Fig. 3A). Given this network representation, 
we then compute the shortest-path distance between any two points in the network using 
dynamic programming. This polynomial-time computation provides a good approximation 
to the actual manifold distances (Fig. 3B) without having to search over all possible paths in 
the network (let alone the infinitely many paths on the unknown manifold!). Finally, from 
these manifold distances, we construct a global geometry-preserving map of the observa- 
tions in a low-dimensional Euclidean space, using multidimensional scaling (Fig. 3C). The 
implementation of this procedure is detailed below. 
Step 1: Discrete representation of manifold (Fig. 3A). From the input data of n observations 
{z (]), ..., z() }, we randomly select a subset of r points to serve as the nodes {g(0,..., g(,') } of the 
topology-preserving network. We then construct a graph G over these nodes by connecting g(i) and 
g(s) if and only if there exists at least one x (k) whose two closest nodes (in observation space) are g(i) 
and g(J) (Martinetz & Schulten, 1994). The resulting graph for the data in Fig. 2A is shown in Fig. 3A 
(with n = 104, r -- 103). This graph clearly respects the topology of the manifold far better than the 
best fits with SOM (Fig. 2B) or GTM (Fig. 2C). In the limit of infinite data, the graph thus produced 
converges to the Delaunay triangulation of the nodes, restricted to the data manifold (Martinetz & 
Schulten, 1994). In practice, n = 104 data points have proven sufficient for all examples we have 
tried. This number may be reduced significantly if we know the dimensionality d of the manifold, 
but here we assume no a priori information about dimensionality. The choice of r, the number of 
nodes in G, is the only free parameter in isomap. If r is too small, the shortest-path distances between 
nodes in G will give a poor approximation to their true manifold distance. If r is too big (relative to 
n), G will be missing many appropriate links (because each data point x © contributes at most one 
link). In practice, choosing a satisfactory r is not difficult - all three examples presented in this paper 
use r = n/10, the first value tried. I am currently exploring criteria for selecting the optimal value r 
based on statistical arguments and dimensionality considerations. 
Step 2: Manifold distance measure (Fig. 3B). We first assign a weight to each link w,s in the graph 
G, equal to d = IIz © - zO)ll, the Euclidean distance between nodes i and j in the observation 
space X. The length of a path in G is defined to be the sum of link weights along that path. We then 
compute the geodesic distance d (i.e. shortest path length) between all pairs of nodes i and j in G, 
using Floyd's O(r 3) algorithm (Foster, 1995). Initialize d = d if nodes i and j are connected 
686 J. B. Tenenbaum 
o 
z 0 
0 
A 
z 0 
5 10 0 
Dimension 
B 
ß PCA 
x MDS 
X. X '. 
. 
5 10 
Dimension 
Figure 4: Given a 
5-dimensional manifold 
embedded nonlinearly in 
a 50-dimensional space, 
isomap identifies the 
intrinsic dimensionality 
(A), while PCA and 
MDS alone do not (B). 
and oo otherwise. Then for each node k, set each d = min(d, d + d'). Fig. 3B plots the 
distances d computed between nodes i and j in the graph of Fig. 3A versus their actual manifold 
distances d. Note that the correlation is almost perfect (R > .99), but d tends to overestimate d 
by a constant factor due to the discretization introduced by the graph. As the density of observations 
increases, so does the possible graph resolution. Thus, in the limit of infinite data, the graph-based 
approximation to manifold distance may be made arbitrarily accurate. 
Step 3: Isometric Euclidean embedding (Fig. 3C). We use ordinal multidimensional scaling (MDS; 
Cox & Cox, 1994; code provided by Brian Ripley), also called "nonmetric" MDS, to find a k- 
dimensional Euclidean embedding that preserves as closely as possible the graph distances d. In 
contrast to classical "metric" MDS, which explicitly tries to preserve distances, ordinal MDS tries 
to preserve only the rank ordering of distances. MDS finds a configuration of k-dimensional feature 
vectors {y(]),..., y(")}, corresponding to the high-dimensional observations {z(]),..., z(")}, that 
minimizes the stress function, 
/V" tdi./_ 
S = min [Zi<j' Y 
(1) 
Here d -- Ily © - y(J)II, the Euclidean distance between feature vectors i and j, and the d are 
some monotonic transformation of the graph distances d. We use ordinal MDS because it is less 
senstitive to noisy estimates of manifold distance. Moreover, when the number of points scaled is 
large enough (as it is in all our examples), ordinal constraints alone are sufficient to reconstruct a 
precise metric map. Fig. 3C shows the projections of 100 random points on the manifold in Fig. 2A 
onto a two-dimensional feature space computed by MDS from the graph distances output by step 2 
above. These points are in close correspondence (after rescaling) with the original two-dimensional 
vectors used to generate the manifold (see note 1), indicating that isomap has successfully unfolded 
the manifold onto a 2-dimensional Euclidean plane. 
3 Example 1: Five-dimensional manifold 
This section demonstrates isomap's ability to discover and model a noisy five-dimensional 
manifold embedded within a 50-dimensional space. As the dimension of the manifold 
increases beyond two, SOM, GTM, and other constrained clustering approaches become 
impractical due to the exponential proliferation of cluster centers. Isomap, however, is 
quite practical for manifolds of moderate dimensionality, because the estimates of manifold 
distance for a fixed graph size degrade gracefully as dimensionality increases. Moreover, 
isomap is able to automatically discover the intrinsic dimensionality of the data, while 
conventional methods must be initialized with a fixed dimensionality. 
We consider a 5-dimensional manifold parameterized by {z,..., zs}  [0, 4] 5. The first 10 
of 50 observation dimensions were determined by nonlinear functions of these parameters. 2 
2Z = COS(71'Z*I), Z2 sin(rz), Z3 COS('Zl), Z4 sin(-z), :rs cos(z]), 
z6 = sin(z,), 7 --- Z2COS2(2Z,) " zsin2(z,), zs = z2sin2(z,) + z3cos2(2Zl), 9 -- 
Z4 C0S2(2 Z, ) "{- Z5 sin2(z,), a;10 -- Z 4 sin2(z,) + z, cos2(z,). 
Mapping a Manifold of Perceptual Observations 687 
Low-amplitude gaussian noise (4-5% of variance) was added to each of these dimensions, 
and the remaining 40 dimensions were set to pure noise of similar variance. The isomap 
procedure applied to this data (n -- 104, r = 103) correctly recognized its intrinsic five- 
dimensionality, as indicated by the sharp decrease of stress (see Eq. 1) for embedding 
dimensions up to 5 and only gradual decrease thereafter (Fig. 4A). In contrast, both PCA 
and raw MDS (using distances in observation space rather than manifold distances) identify 
the 10-dimensional linear subspace containing the data, but show no sensitivity to the 
underlying five-dimensional manifold (Fig. 4B). 
4 Example 2: Two-dimensional manifold of face images 
This section illustrates the performance of isomap on the two-dimensional manifold of 
face images shown in Fig. 1. To generate this map, 32 x 32-pixel images of a face were 
first rendered in MATLAB in many different poses (azimuth E [-90 ø, 90ø], elevation 
 [-10 ø , 10ø]), using a 3-D range image of an actual head and a combination of lambertian 
and specular reflectance models. To save computation, the data (n = 104 images) were 
first reduced to 60 principal components and then submitted to isomap (v = 103). The 
plot of stress $ vs. dimension indicated a dimensionality of two (even more clearly than 
Fig. 4A). Fig. 1 shows the two-dimensional feature space that results from applying MDS to 
the computed graph distances, with 25 face images placed at their corresponding points in 
feature space. Note the clear topographic representation of similar views at nearby feature 
points. The principal axes of the feature space can be identified as the underlying viewing 
angle parameters used to generate the data. The correlations of the two isomap dimensions 
with the two pose angles are R = .99 and R - .95 respectively. No other global mapping 
procedure tried (PCA, MDS, SOM, GTM) produced interpretable results for these data. 
The human visual system's implicit knowledge of an object's appearance is not limited to 
a representation of view similarity, and neither is isomap's. As mentioned in Section 2, an 
isometric feature map also supports analysis and manipulation of data, as a consequence of 
mapping geodesics of the observation manifold to straight lines in feature space. Having 
found a number of corresponding pairs {z ©, /(i)} of images z © and feature vectors /(i), 
it is easy to learn an explicit inverse mapping f- : Y -- X from low-dimensional feature 
space to high-dimensional observation space, using generic smooth interpolation techniques 
such as generalized radial basis function (GRBF) networks (Poggio & Girosi, 1990). All 
images in Fig. 1 have been synthesized from such a mapping. 3 
Figs. 1A-C show how learning this inverse mapping allows interpolation, extrapolation, 
and analogy to be carried out using only linear operations. We can interpolate between 
two images z() and z (2) by synthesizing a sequence of images along their connecting line 
(/(2) _ /()) in feature space (Fig. 1A). We can extrapolate the transformation from one 
image to another and far beyond, by following the line to the edge of the manifold (Fig. 1B). 
We can map the transformation between two images z0) and z (2) onto an analogous 
transformation of another image z ©, by adding the transformation vector (/(2) - /()) to 
t © and synthesizing a new image at the resulting feature coordinates (Fig. 1C). 
A number of authors (Bregler & Omohundro, 1995; Saul & Jordan, 1997; Beymer & 
Poggio, 1995) have previously shown how learning from examples allows sophisticated 
3The map from feature vectors to images was learned by fitting a GRBF net to 1000 corresponding 
points in both spaces. Each point corresponds to a node in the graph G used to measure manifold 
distance, so the feature-space distances required to fit the GRBF net are given (approximately) by the 
graph distances d computed in step 2 of isomap. A subset C of ra = 300 points were randomly 
chosen as RBF centers, and the standard deviation of the RBFs was set equal to maxi,.ic d 
(as prescribed by Haykin, 1994). 
688 J. B. Tenenbaum 
image manipulations to be carded out efficiently. However, these approaches do not support 
as broad a range of transformations as isomap does, because of their use of only locally 
valid models and/or the need to compute special-purpose image features such as optical 
flow. See Tenenbaum (1997) for further discussion, as well as examples of isomap applied 
to more complex manifolds of visual observations. 
5 Conclusions 
The essence of the isomap approach to nonlinear dimensionality reduction lies in the 
novel problem formulation: to seek a low-dimensional Euclidean embedding of a set of 
observations that captures their intrinsic similarities, as measured along geodesic paths of the 
observation manifold. Here I have presented an efficient algorithm for solving this problem 
and shown that it can discover meaningful feature-space models of manifolds for which 
conventional "top-down" approaches fail. As a direct consequence of mapping geodesics 
to straight lines in feature space, isomap learns a representation of perceptual observations 
in which it is easy to perform interpolation and other complex transformations. A negative 
consequence of this strong problem formulation is that isomap will not be applicable to 
every data manifold. However, as with the classic technique of PCA, we can state clearly 
the general class of data for which isomap is appropriate - manifolds with no "holes" and 
no intrinsic curvature - with a guarantee that isomap will succeed on data sets from this 
class, given enough samples from the manifold. Future work will focus on generalizing 
this domain of applicability to allow for manifolds with more complex topologies and 
significant curvature, as would be necessary to model certain perceptual manifolds such as 
the complete view space of an object. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to M. Bernstein, W. Freeman, S. Gilbert, W. Richards, and Y. Weiss for helpful discussions. 
The author is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Predoctoral Fellow. 
References 
Beymer, D. & Poggio, T. (1995). Representations for visual leaming, Science 272, 1905. 
Bishop, C., Svensen, M., & Williams, C. (1998). GTM: The generafive topographic mapping. Neural 
Computation 10(1). 
Bregler, C. & Omohundro, S. (1995). Nonlinear image interpolation using manifold learning. NIPS 
7. MIT Press. 
Cox, T. & Cox, M. (1994). Multidimensional scaling. Chapman & Hall. 
DeMers, D. & Cottrell, G. (1993). Nonlinear dimensionality reduction. NIPS 5. Morgan Kauffman. 
Foster, I. (1995). Designing and building parallel programs. Addison-Wesley. 
Haykin, S. (1994). Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. Macmillan. 
Hinton, G., Revow, M., & Dayan, P. (1995). Recognizing handwritten digits using mixtures of linear 
models. NIPS 7. MIT Press. 
Kohonen, T (1988). Self-Organization andAssociative Memory. Berlin: Springer. 
Martinetz, T & Schulten, K. (1994). Topology representing networks. Neural Networks 7, 507. 
Poggio, T. & Girosi, F. (1990). Networks for approximation and learning. Proc. IEEE 78, 1481. 
Saul, L. & Jordan, M. (1997). A variational principle for model-based morphing. NIPS 9. MIT Press. 
Tenenbaum, J. (1997). Unsupervised leaming of appearance manifolds. Manuscript submitted. 
