Detection of first and second order motion 
Alexander Gr,mewald 
Division of Biology 
California Institute of Technology 
Mail Code 216-76 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
alex@vis. caltech.edu 
Heiko Nenmann 
Abteilung Neuroinformatik 
Universitt Ulm 
89069 Ulm 
Germany 
hneumann@neuro.informatik.uni-ulm.de 
Abstract 
A model of motion detection is presented. The model contains 
three stages. The first stage is unoriented and is selective for con- 
trast polarities. The next two stages work in parallel. A phase 
insensitive stage pools across different contrast polarities through 
a spatiotemporal filter and thus can detect first and second order 
motion. A phase sensitive stage keeps contrast polarities separate, 
each of which is filtered through a spatiotemporal filter, and thus 
only first order motion can be detected. Differential phase sensitiv- 
ity can therefore account for the detection of first and second order 
motion. Phase insensitive detectors correspond to cortical complex 
cells, and phase sensitive detectors to simple cells. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In our environment objects are constantly in motion, and the visual system faces 
the task of identifying the motion of objects. This task can be subdivided into two 
components: motion detection and motion integration. In this study we will look at 
motion detection. Recent psychophysics has made a useful distinction between first 
and second order motion. In first order motion an absolute image feature is moving. 
For example, a bright bar moving on a dark background is an absolute feature 
because luminance is moving. In second order motion a relative image feature is 
moving, for example a contrast reversing bar. No longer is it possible to identify 
the moving object through its luminance, but only that it has different luminance 
with respect to the background. Humans are very sensitive to first order motion, 
but can they detect second order motion? Chubb & Sperling (1988) showed that 
subjects are in fact able to detect second order motion. These findings have since 
been confirmed in many psychophysical experiments, and it has become clear that 
the parameters that yield detection of first and second order motion are different, 
suggesting that separate motion detection systems exist. 
802 A. Grunewald and H. Neumann 
1.1 Detection of first and second order motion 
First order motion, which is what we encounter in our daily lives, can be easily 
detected by finding the peak in the Fourier energy distribution. The motion energy 
detector developed by Adelson &: Bergen (1985) does this explicitly, and it turns 
out that it is also equivalent to a Reichardt detector (van Santen &: Sperling, 1985). 
However, these detectors cannot adequately detect second order motion, because 
second order motion stimuli often contain the maximum Fourier energy in the op- 
posite direction (possibly at a different velocity) as the actual motion. In other 
words, purely linear filters, should have opposite directional tuning for first and 
second order motion. This is further illustrated in Figure 1. 
Stimulus 
FIRST ORDER MOTION 
Energy Reconstructed 
8O 
ß 60 
E 
=40 
20 
0 
20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
space 
Stimulus 
SECOND ORDER MOTION 
Energy Reconstructed 
8O 
2O 
20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
space 
Figure 1: Schematic of first and second order motion, their peak Fourier energy, 
and the reconstruction. The peak Fourier energy is along the direction of motion 
for first order motion, and in the opposite direction for second order motion. For 
this reason a linear filter cannot detect second order motion. 
One way to account for second order motion detection is to transform the second 
order motion signal into a first order signal. If second order motion is defined by 
contrast reversals, then detecting contrast edges and then rectifying the resulting 
signal of contrast will yield a first order motion signal. Thus this approach includes 
three steps: orientation detection, rectification and finally motion detection (Wilson 
et al., 1992). 
Detection of First and Second Order Motion 803 
1.2 Visual physiology 
Cells in the retina and the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) have concentric (and 
hence unoriented) receptive fields which are organized in an opponent manner. 
While the center of such an ON cell is excited by a light increment, the surround is 
excited by a light decrement, and vice versa for OFF cells. It is only at the cortex 
that direction and orientation selectivity arise. Cortical simple cells are sensitive to 
the phase of the stimulus, while complex cells are not (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962). 
Most motion models take at least partial inspiration from known physiology and 
anatomy, by relating the kernels of the motion detectors to the physiology of corti- 
cal cells. The motion energy model in particular detects orientation and first order 
motion at the same time. Curiously, all motion models essentially ignore the concen- 
tric opponency of receptive fields in the LGN. This is usually justified by pointing 
to the linearity of simple cells with respect to stimulus parameters. However, it 
has been shown that simple cells in fact exhibit strong nonlinearities (Hammond 
& MacKay, 1983). Moreover, motion detection does require at least one stage of 
nonlinearity (Poggio & Reichardt, 1973). The present study develops a model of 
first and second order motion detection which explicitly includes an unoriented pro- 
cessing stage, and phase sensitive and phase insensitive motion detectors are built 
from these unoriented signals. The former set of detectors only responds to first 
order motion, while the second set of detectors responds to both types of motion. 
We further show the analogies that can be drawn between these detector types and 
simple and complex cells in cat visual cortex. 
2 MODEL DESCRIPTION 
The model is two-dimensional, one dimension is space, which means that space has 
been collapsed onto a line, and the other dimension is time. The input image to 
the model is a space-time matrix of luminances, as shown in figure 1. At each 
processing stage essentially the same operations are performed. First the input 
signal is convolved with the appropriate kernel. At each stage there are multiple 
kernels, to generate the different signal types at that stage. For example, there 
are ON and OFF signals at the unoriented stage. Next the convolved responses 
are subtracted from each other. At the unoriented stage this means ON-OFF and 
OFF-ON. In the final step these results are half-wave rectified to only yield positive 
silthalS. 
Unoriented 
Phase insensitive Phase sensitive 
space 
Figure 2: The kernels in the model. For the unoriented (left plot) and phase sensitive 
(right plot) kernel plots black indicates OFF regions, white ON regions, and grey 
zero input. For the phase insensitive plot (middle) grey denotes ON and OFF input, 
and black denotes zero input. 
804 A. Grunewald and H. Neumann 
At the unoriented stage the input pattern is convolved with a difference of Gaus- 
sians kernel. This kernel has only a spatial dimension, no temporal dimension (see 
figure 2). As described earlier, competition is between ON and OFF signals, fol- 
lowed by half-wave rectification. This ensures that at each location only one set of 
unoriented signals is present. A simulation of the signals at the unoriented stage is 
shown in figure 3. For first order motion, ON signals are at locations corresponding 
to the inside of the moving bar. With each shift of the bar the signals also move. 
Similarly, the OFF signals correspond to the outside of the bar, and also move with 
the bar. For second order motion the contrast polarity reverses. Thus ON signals 
correspond to the inside when the bar is bright, and to the outside when the bar is 
dark, and vice versa for OFF signals. Thus any ON or OFF signals to the leading 
edge of the bar will remain active after the bar moves. 
Unoriented 
Stimulus ON OFF 
8O 
e60 
2O 
20 40 60 80 100 
space 
Stimulus 
20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
ON OFF 
8O 
e60 
E 
-' 40 
2O 
20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
space 
Figure 3: Unoriented signals to first and second order motion. ON signals are at 
the bright side of any contrast transition, while OFF signals are at the dark side. 
In first order motion ON and OFF move synchronously to the moving stimulus. In 
second order motion ON and OFF signals persist, since the leading edge becomes 
the trailing edge, and at the same time the contrast reverses, which means that at 
a particular spatial location the contrast remains constant. 
At the phase insensitive stage the unoriented ON and OFF signals are added, and 
then the result is convolved with an energy detection filter.- The pooling of ON 
and OFF signals means that the contrast transitions in the image are essentially 
full-wave rectified. This causes phase insensitivity. These pooled signals are then 
convolved with a space-time oriented filter (see figure 2). Competition between op- 
posite directions of motion ensures that only one direction is active. A consequence 
of the pooling of unoriented ON and OFF signals at this stage is that the result- 
ing signals are invariant to first or second order motion. Thus phase insensitivity 
Detection of First and Seco nd 0 rder Motion 805 
makes this stage able to detect both first and second order motion. These signals 
are shown in figure 4. In a two-dimensional extension of this model these detectors 
would also be orientation selective. The simplest way to obtain this would be via 
elongation along the preferred orientation. 
Phase insensitive 
Stimulus left right 
8O 
 6O 
=4O 
20 
0 
20 40 60 80 
space 
Stimulus 
100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
left right 
e6o 
E 
= 40 
2O 
20 40 60 80 lOO 20 40 60 80 10o 20 40 60 80 lOO 
space 
Figure 4: Phase insensitive signals to first and second order motion. For both 
stimuli there are no leftwards signals, and robust rightwards signals. 
At the phase sensitive stage unoriented ON and OFF signals are separately con- 
volved with space-time oriented kernels which are offset with respect to each other 
(see figure 2). The separate treatment of ON and OFF signals yields phase sensi- 
tivity. At each location there are four kernels: two for the two directions of motion, 
and two for the two phases. Competition occurs between signals of opposite di- 
rection tuning, and opposite phase preference. To avoid activation in the opposite 
direction of motion slightly removed from the location of the edge spatially broadly 
tuned inhibition is necessary. This is provided by the phase insensitive signals, thus 
avoiding feedback loops among phase sensitive detectors. First order signals from 
the unoriented stage match the spatiotemporal filters in the preferred direction, and 
thus phase sensitive signals arise. However, due to their phase reversal, second or- 
der motion input, provides poor motion signals, which are quenched through phase 
insensitive inhibition. These signals are shown in figure 5. 
These simulations show that first and second order motion are detected differently. 
First order motion is detected by phase sensitive and phase insensitive motion de- 
tectors, while second order motion is only detected by the latter. From this we 
conclude that first order motion is a more potent stimulus, and that the detection 
of second order is more restricted, since it depends on a single type of detector. In 
particular, the size of the stimulus and its velocity have to be matched to the energy 
806 A. Grunewald and H. Neumann 
Stimulus 
Phase sensitive 
DL left 
DL right 
8O 
= 40 
20 
0 
20 40 60 80 
space 
Stimulus 
100 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
DL left DL right 
e60 
E 
=40 
20 
0 
20 40 60 80 100 
space 
20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 
Figure 5: Phase sensitive signals to first and second order motion. Only the dark- 
light signals are shown. First order motion causes a consistent rightward motion 
signal, while second order motion does not. 
filters for motion signals to arise. 
3 RELATION TO PHYSIOLOGY 
The relationship between the model and physiology is straightforward. Unoriented 
signals correspond to LGN responses, phase insensitive signals to complex cell re- 
sponses, and phase sensitive signals to simple cell responses. Thus the model sug- 
gests that both simple and some complex cells receive direct LGN input. Moreover 
these complex cells inhibit simple cells. With an additional threshold in simple 
cells this inhibition could also be obtained via complex to simple cell excitation. 
We stress that we are not ruling out that many complex cells receive only simple 
cell input. Rather, the present research shows that if all complex cells receive only 
simple cell input, second order motion cannot be detected. Hence at least some 
complex cell responses need to be built up directly from LGN responses. Several 
lines of evidence from cat physiology support this suggestion. First, the mean laten- 
cies of simple and complex cells are about equal (Bullier  Henry, 1979), suggesting 
that at least some complex cells receive direct LGN input. Second, noise stimuli 
can selectively activate complex cells, without activation of simple cells (Hammond, 
1991). Third, cross-correlation analyses show that complex cells do receive simple 
cell input (Ghose et al., 1994). 
The present model predicts that some cortical complex cells should respond to 
Detection of First and Second Order Motion 807 
second order motion. Zhou & Baker (1993) investigated this, and found that some 
complex cells in area 17 respond to second order motion. Moreover, they found 
that simple cells of a particular first order motion preference did not reverse their 
motion preference when stimulated with second order motion, which would occur 
if simple cells were just linear filters. We interpret this as further evidence that 
complex cells provide inhibitory input to simple cells. If complex cells are built up 
from LGN input, then orientation selectivity in two-dimensional space cannot be 
obtained based on simple cell input, but rather requires complex cells with elongated 
receptive fields. Thus we predict that there ought to be a correlation in complex 
cells between elongated receptive fields and dependence on direct LGN input. 
In conclusion we have shown how the phase sensitivity of motion detectors can be 
mapped onto the ability to detect only first order motion, or both first and second 
order motion. This suggests that it is not necessary to introduce a orientation 
detection stage before motion detection can take place, thus simplifying the model 
of motion detection. Furthermore we have shown that the proposed model is in 
accord with known physiology. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the McDonnell-Pew program in Cognitive Neuro- 
science. 
References 
Adelson, E. & Bergen (1985). Spatiotemporal energy models for the perception of 
motion. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2,284-299. 
Bullier, J. & Henry, G. H. (1979). Ordinal position of neurons in cat striate cortex. 
J. Neurophys., 42, 1251-1263. 
Chubb, C. & Sperling, G. (1988). Drift-balanced random stimuli: a general basis 
for studying non-Fourier motion perception. J. Opt. $oc. Am. A, 5, 1986-2007. 
Ghose, G. M., Freeman, R. D. & Ohzawa, I. (1994). Local intracortical connections 
in the cat's visual cortex: postnatal development and plasticity. J. Neurophys., 72, 
1290-1303. 
Hammond, P. (1991). On the response of simple and complex cells to random dot 
patterns. Vis. Res., 31, 47-50. 
Hammond, P. & MacKay, D. (1983). Influence of luminance gradient reversal on 
simple cells in feline striate cortex. J. Physiol., 337, 69-87. 
Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction and 
functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex. J. Physiol., 160, 106-154. 
Poggio, T. & Reichardt, W. (1973). Considerations on models of movement detec- 
tion. Kybernetik, 12,223-227. 
van Santen & Sperling, G. (1985). Elaborated Reichardt detectors. J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. A, 2,300-321. 
Wilson, H. R., Ferrera, V. P. & Yo, C. (1992). A psychophysically motivated model 
for two-dimensional motion perception. Vis. Neurosci., 9, 79-97. 
Zhou, Y.X. & Baker, C. L. (1993). A processing stream in mammalian visual cortex 
neurons for non-Fourier responses. Science, 261, 98-101. 
