A General Purpose Image Processing Chip: 
Orientation Detection 
Ralph Etienne-Cummings and Donghui Cai 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Southern Illinois University 
Carbondale, IL 62901-6603 
Abstract 
A 80 x 78 pixel general purpose vision chip for spatial focal plane 
processing is presented. The size and configuration of the processing 
receptive field are programmable. The chip's architecture allows the 
photoreceptor cells to be small and densely packed by performing all 
computation on the read-out, away from the array. In addition to the 
raw intensity image, the chip outputs four processed images in parallel. 
Also presented is an application of the chip to line segment orientation 
detection, as found in the retinal receptive fields of toads. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The front-end of the biological vision system is the retina, which is a layered structure 
responsible for image acquisition and pre-processing. The early processing is used to 
extract spatiotemporal information which helps perception and survival. This is 
accomplished with cells having feature detecting receptive fields, such as the edge 
detecting center-surround spatial receptive fields of the primate and cat bipolar cells 
[Spillmann, 1990]. In toads, the receptive fields of the retinal cells are even more 
specialized for survival by detecting "prey" and "predator" (from size and orientation 
filters) at this very early stage [Spillmann, 1990]. 
The receptive of the retinal cells performs a convolution with the incident image in 
parallel and continuous time. This has inspired many engineers to develop retinomorphic 
vision systems which also imitate these parallel processing capabilities [Mead, 1989; 
Camp, 1994]. While this approach is ideal for fast early processing, it is not space 
efficient. That is, in realizing the receptive field within each pixel, considerable die area 
is required to implement the convolution kernel. In addition, should programmability be 
required, the complexity of each pixel increases drastically. The space constraints are 
eliminated if the processing is performed serially during read-out. The benefits of this 
approach are 1) each pixel can be as small as possible to allow high resolution imaging, 
2) a single processor unit is used for the entire retina thus reducing mis-match problems, 
3) programmability can be obtained with no impact on the density of imaging array, and 
874 tL Etienne-Cummings and D. Cai 
4) compact general purpose focal plane visual processing is realizable. The space 
constrains are then transformed into temporal restrictions since the scanning clock speed 
and response time of the processing circuits must scale with the size of the array. 
Dividing the army into sub-arrays which are scanned in parallel can help this problem. 
Clearly this approach departs from the architecture of its biological counterpart, however, 
this method capitalizes on the main advantage of silicon which is its speed. This is an 
example of mixed signal neuromorphic engineering, where biological ideas are mapped 
onto silicon not using direct imitation (which has been the preferred approach in the past) 
but rather by realizing their essence with the best silicon architecture and computational 
circuits. 
This paper presents a general purpose vision chip for spatial focal plane processing. Its 
architecture allows the photoreceptor cells to be small and densely packed by performing 
all computation on the read-out, away from the array. Performing computation during 
read-out is ideal for silicon implementation since no additional temporal over-head is 
required, provided that the processing circuits are fast enough. The chip uses a single 
convolution kernel, per parallel sub-array, and the scanning bit pattern to realize various 
receptive fields. This is different from other focal plane image processors which and 
usually restricted to hardwired convolution kernels, such as oriented 2D Gabor filters 
[Camp, 1994]. In addition to the raw intensity image, the chip outputs four processed 
versions per sub-array. Also presented is an application of the chip to line segment 
orientation detection, as found in the retinal receptive fields of toads [Spillmann, 1990]. 
2 THE GENERAL PURPOSE IMAGE PROCESSING CHIP 
2.1 System Overview 
This chip has an 80 row by 78 column photocell army partitioned into four independent 
sub-arrays, which are scanned and output in parallel, (see figure 1). Each block is 40 row 
by 39 column, and has its own convolution kernel and output circuit. The scanning 
circuit includes three parts: virtual ground, control signal generator (CSG), and scanning 
output transformer. Each block has its own virtual ground and scanning output 
transformer in both x direction (horizontal) and y direction (vertical). The control signal 
generator is shared among blocks. 
2.2 Hardware Implementation 
The photocell is composed of phototransistor, photo current amplifier, and output 
control. The phototransistor performance light transduction, while the amplifier 
magnifies the photocurrent by three orders of magnitude. The output control provides 
multiple copies of the amplified photocunent which is subsequently used for focal plane 
image processing. 
The phototransistor is a parasitic PNP transistor in an Nwell CMOS process. The 
current amplifier uses a pair of diode connected pmosfets to obtain a logarithmic 
relationship between light intensity and output current. This circuit also amplifies the 
photocurrent from nanoamperes to microamperes. The photocell sends three copies of the 
output currents into three independent buses. The connections from the photocell to the 
buses are controlled by pass transistors, as shown in Fig. 2. The three current outputs 
allow the image to be processed using multiple receptive field organization (convolution 
kernels), while the raw image is also output. The row (column) buses provides currents 
for extracting horizontally (vertically) oriented image features, while the original bus 
provides the logarithmically compressed intensity image. 
The scanning circuit addresses the photocell array by selecting groups of cells at one time. 
Since the output of the cells are currents, virtual ground circuits are used on each bus to 
mask the > I pF capacitance of the buses. The CSG, implemented with shift registers 
A General Purpose Image Processing Chip: Orientation Detection 875 
v 
, 
I 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the chip. 
produces signals which select photocells and control th6 scanning output transformer. 
The scanning output transformer converts currents from all row buses into Ivrx and Ice,x, 
and converts currents from all row buses into Ivory and Ice,y. This transformation is 
required to implement the various convolution kernels discussed later. 
The output transformer circuits are controlled by a central CSG and a peripheral CSG. 
These two generators have identical structures but different initial values. It consists of 
an n-bit shift register in x direction (horizontally) and an m-bit shift register in y direction 
(vertically). A feedback circuit is used to restore the scanning pattern into the x shift 
register after each row scan is completed. This is repeated until all the row in each block 
are scanned. 
The control signals from the peripheral and central CSGs select all the cells covered by a 
2D convolution mask (receptive field). The selected cells send Ixy to the original bus, 
to the row bus, and Iyp to the column bus. The function of the scanning output 
transformer is to identify which rows (columns) are considered as the center (Ice, or Iceny ) 
or periphery (I or Irony) of the convolution kernel, respectively. Figure 3 shows how a 
3x3 convolution kernel can be constructed. 
Figure 4 shows how the output transformer works for a 3x3 mask. Only row bus 
transformation is shown in this example, but the same mechanism applies to the column 
bus as well. The photocell array is m row by n column, and the size is 3x3. The XC (x 
center) and YC (y center) come from the central CSG; while XP (x peripheral) and YP (y 
peripheral) come from the peripheral CSG. After loading the CSG, the initial values of 
XP and YP are both 00011...1. The initial values of XC and YC are both 10111... 1. 
This identifies the central cell as location (2, 2). The currents from the central row 
(column) are summed to form Ic, and Iceny, while all the peripheral cells are summed to 
form Iperx and Ipy. This is achieved by activating the switches labeled XC, YC, XP and 
YP in figure 2. XPi (YP,) {i=l, 2 .... , n} controls whether the output current of one cell 
876 R. Etienne-Cummings and D. Cai 
vc c 
xc  
Ixy 
Original Bus < 
Column Bus < 
Row Bus < 
lphoto  
Amplifier and Mirror 
lyp 
-YP 
XP 
Figure 2: Connections between a photo- 
cell and the current buses. 
(1,1) (1,2) (1,3 
(2,1) (2,2)  
(3,1) (3,2) (3,3} 
Figure 3: 
field. 
' Iori 
(1j) (1 
Iperx (2J) (2,2) (23)- -lcenx 
(3,1) (3,2) (33) 
(2,1) (2,2) (2,3) 
I ceny 
-- Ipery  
Constructing a 3x3 receptive 
goes to the row (column) bus. Since XPi (YP) is connected to the gate of a pmos 
switch, a 0 in XPi (YP0 it turns on. YC (XCi) {i=l, 2 ..... n} controls whether a row 
(column) bus connects to Ice,x bus in the same way. On the other hand, the connection 
from a row (column) bus to Ipcrx bus is controlled by an nmos and a pmos switch. The 
connection is made if and only if YC, (XCi), an nmos switch, is 1 and YPi (XPi), a pmos 
switches, is 0. The intensity image is obtained directly when XCi and YC are both 0. 
Hence, Ior i = I(2,2), Icenx = Irow2 = 1(2,1) + 1(2,2) + 1(2,3) and Iper = Irowt + Irow3 = I(1,1) + 
I(1,2) + I(1,3) + I(3,1) + I(3,2) + I(3,3). 
The convolution kernel can be programmed to perform many image processing tasks by 
loading the scanning circuit with the appropriate bit pattern. This is illustrated by 
configuring the chip to perform image smoothing and edge extraction (x edge, y edge, and 
2D edge), which are all computed simultaneously on read-out. It receives five inputs 
Icenx , I, Iceny , Ipery ) from the scanning circuit and produces five outputs (Iori, Iedgex, Iedgey, 
Ism,loth, Iedge2d). The kernel (receptive field) size is programmable from 3x3, 5x5, 7x7, 9x9 
and 1 lxl 1. Fig. 5 shows the 3x3 masks for this processing. Repeating the above steps 
for 5x5, 7x7, 9x9, and 1 lxl 1 masks, we can get similar results. 
YPI 
YCI 
YP2 
YC2 
YP3 
YC3 
YPM 
YCM 
xP 
xc 
]rlRef UAL (]ROUND 
Vl RUAIJ OROUND 
It{ RTUAL (]ROUND 
VIRTUAl. (]ROUND 
Figure 4: Scanning output transformer for an m row by n column photo cell array. 
A General Purpose Image Processing Chip: Orientation Detection 877 
Ismooth=lenx+Iperx -- * 
Icagex-2 Icenx-Iperx 
Ieogey -2 Iceny-Ipery Iedge2D--6 Iori-Icen-Iceny 
1 I 1 
I I l 
I l I 
I 
(a) smooth 
Figure 5: 
-i -1 -1 
2 2 2 
-1 -1 -1 
-1 2 -1 
-1 2 -1 
-I 2 -1 
0 -1 0 
-1 4 
0 -1 0 
(b) edge_x (c) edge_y (d) edge_2D 
3x3 convolution masks for various image processing. 
In general, the convolution results under different mask sizes can be expressed as follows: 
Ismooth=lxen+Ipcrx Ieage=Kta*Ic½.-Irrx Icdgey=KId* Iccny- Ipery Iedge2D=K2d* Iori- Icen- Iceny 
Where Kd and K:d are the programmable coefficients (from 2-6 and 6-14, respectively) for 
ID edge extraction and 2D edge extraction, respectively. By varying the locations of the 
O's in the scanning circuits, different types of receptive fields (convolution kernels) can be 
realized. 
2.3 Results 
The chip contains 65K transistors in a footprint of 4.6 mm x 4.7 mm. There are 80 x 78 
photocells in the chip, each of which is 45.6 m x 45 m and a fill factor of 15%. The 
convolution kernel occupies 690.6 m x 102.6 m. The power consumption of the chip 
for a 3x3 (1 lxl 1) receptive field, indoor light, and 5V power supply is < 2 mW (8 mW). 
To capitalize on the programmability of this chip, an A/D card in a Pentium 133MHz PC 
is used to load the scanning circuit and to collect data. The card, which has a maximum 
analog throughput of 100 KHz limits the frame rate of the chip to 12 frames per second. 
At this rate, five processed versions of the image is collected and displayed. The scanning 
and processing circuits can operate at 10 MHz (6250 fps), however, the phototransistors 
have much slower dynamics. Temporal smoothing (smear) can be observed on the scope 
when the frame rate exceeds 100 fps. 
The chip displays a logarithmic relationship between light intensity and output current 
(unprocessed imaged) from 0.1 lux (100 nA) to 6000 lux (10 A). The fixed pattern 
noise, defined as standard-deviation/mean, decreases abruptly from 25% in the dark to 2% 
at room light (800 lux). This behavior is expected since the variation of individual pixel 
current is large compared to the mean output when the mean is small. The logarithmic 
response of the photocell results in high sensitivity at low light, thus increasing the 
mean value sharply. Little variation is observed between chips. 
The contrast sensitivity of the edge detection masks is also measured for the 3x3 and 5x5 
receptive fields. Here contrast is defined as (Ima  - Imin)/(Ima + Imin) and sensitivity is given 
as a percentage of the maximum output. The measurements are performed for normal 
room and bright lighting conditions. Since the two conditions corresponded to the 
saturated part of the logarithmic transfer function of the photocells, then a linear 
relationship between output response and contrast is expected. Figure 6 shows contrast 
sensitivity plot. Figure 7 shows examples of chip's outputs. The top two images are the 
raw and smoothed (5x5) images. The bottom two are the 1D edge_x (left) and 2D edge 
(right) images. The pixels with positive values have been thresholded to white. The 
vertical black line in the image is not visible in the edge_x image, but can be clearly seen 
in the edge_2D image. 
878 R. Etienne-Cummings and D. Cai 
1oo 
 60 
 40 
. --- --3x3 Brigh 
= 3x3 Nodal 
0 20 0  80 100 
Controt [%] 
Figure 6: Controt sensitivity function of 
the x edge detection mask. 
3 APPLICATION: 
Figure 7: (Clockwise) Raw image, 5x5 
smoothed image, edge_2D and edge_x. 
ORIENTATION DETECTION 
3.1 Algorithm Overview 
This vision chip can be elegantly used to measure the orientation of line segments which 
fall across the receptive field of each pixel. The output of the 1D Laplacian operators, 
edge_x and edge_y, shown in figure 5, can be used to determine the orientation of edge 
segments. Consider a continuous line through the origin, represented by a delta function 
in 2D space by 6(y-xtanO). If the origin is the center of the receptive field, the response 
of the edge_x kernel can be computed by evaluating the convolution equation (1), where 
W(x) = u(x+m)-u(x-m) is the x window over which smoothing is performed, 2m+l is the 
width of the window and 2n+l is the number of coefficients realizing the discrete 
Laplacian operator. In our case, n = m. Evaluating this equation and substituting the 
origin for the pixel location yields equation (2), which indicates that the output of the 1D 
edge_x (edge_y) detectors have a discretized linear relationship to orientation from 0" to 
45 ø (45 ø to 90ø). At 0 ø, the second term in equation (2) is zero. As 0 increase, more 
terms are subtracted until all terms are subtracted at 45 ø. Above 45 ø (below 45ø), the 
edge_x (edge_y) detectors output zero since equal numbers of positive and negative 
coefficients are summed. Provided that contrast can be normalized, the output of the 
detectors can be used to extract the orientation of the line. Clearly these responses are 
even about the x- and y-axis, respectively. Hence, a second pair of edge detectors, oriented 
at 45 ø , is required to uniquely extract the angle of the line segment. 
1o 
 o 370 Lux 
8 ' oX -- - '260 Lux 
 a[ X -"'"'125 Lux 
0 20 40 6o 8o 
Angle F] 
Figure 8: Measured orientation transfer function of edge_x detectors. 
A General Purpose Image Processing Chip: Orientation Detection 879 
' W(x _+ m)8(y __+ i)l * 8(y - xtanO) 
Oedg e_ x(X, y) = [ 2nW(x _+ m)tS(y) - (1) 
i=l 
II ß 
Oedge_x(O,O)=2n-[(W(tao)+W(t-ntO )] (2) 
i=l 
3.2 Results 
Figure 8 shows the measured output of the edge_x detectors for various lighting 
conditions as a line is rotated. The average positive outputs are plotted. As expected, the 
output is maximum for bright ambients when the line is horizontal. As the line is 
rotated, the output current decreases linearly and levels off at approximately 45". On the 
other hand, the edge_y (not shown) begins its linear increase at 45" and maximizes at 90 ø. 
After normalizing for brightness, the four curves are very similar (not shown). 
To further demonstrate orientation detection with this chip, a character consisting of a 
circle and some straight lines is presented. The intensity image of the character is shown 
in figure 9(a). Figures 9(b) and 9(c) show the outputs of the edge_x and edge_y 
detectors, respectively. Since a 7x7 receptive field is used in this experiment, some outer 
pixels of each block are lost. The orientation selectivity of the 1D edge detectors are 
clearly visible in the figures, where edge_x highlights horizontal edges and edge_y vertical 
edges. Figure 9(d) shows the reported angles. A program is written which takes the two 
1D edge images, finds the location of the edges from the edge_2D image, the intensity at 
the edges (positive lobe) and then computes the angle of the edge segment. In figure 9(d), 
the black background is chosen for locations where no edges are detected, white is used for 
0 ø and gray for 90 ø . 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Figure 9: Orientation detection using 1D Laplacian Operators. 
4 CONCLUSION 
A 80x78 pixel general purpose vision chip for spatial focal plane processing has been 
presented. The size and configuration of the processing receptive field are programmable. 
In addition to the raw intensity image, the chip outputs four processed images in parallel. 
The chip has been successfully used for compact line segment orientation detection, 
which can be used in character recognition. The programmability and relatively low 
power consumption makes it ideal for many visual processing tasks. 
References 
Camp W. and J. Van der Spiegel, "A Silicon VLSI Optical Sensor for Pattern 
Recognition, "Sensors and Actuators A, Vol. 43, No. 1-3, pp. 188-195, 1994. 
Mead C. and M. Ismail (Eds.), Analog VLSI Implementation of Neural Networks, 
Kluwer Academic Press, Newell, MA, 1989. 
Spillmann L. and J. Werner (Eds.), Visual Perception: The Neurophysiological 
Foundations, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1990. 
