A Neural Network Based 
Head Tracking System 
D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung 
Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies 
700 Mountain Ave. 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974 
{ddlee [ seung}bell-labs. com 
Abstract 
We have constructed an inexpensive, video-based, motorized track- 
ing system that learns to track a head. It uses real time graphical 
user inputs or an auxiliary infrared detector as supervisory signals 
to train a convolutional neural network. The inputs to the neural 
network consist of normalized luminance and chrominance images 
and motion information from frame differences. Subsampled im- 
ages are also used to provide scale invariance. During the online 
training phase, the neural network rapidly adjusts the input weights 
depending upon the reliability of the different channels in the sur- 
rounding environment. This quick adaptation allows the system to 
robustly track a head even when other objects are moving within 
a cluttered background. 
I Introduction 
With the proliferation of inexpensive multimedia computers and peripheral equip- 
ment, video conferencing finally appears ready to enter the mainstream. But per- 
sonal video conferencing systems typically use a stationary camera, tying the user 
to a fixed location much as a corded telephone tethers one to the telephone jack. A 
simple solution to this problem is to use a motorized video camera that can track 
a specific person as he or she moves about. However, this presents the difficulty of 
having to continually control the movements of the camera while one is communi- 
cating. In this paper, we present a prototype, neural network based system that 
learns the characteristics of a person's head in real time and automatically tracks 
it around the room, thus alleviating the user of much of this burden. 
The camera movements in this video conferencing system closely resemble the move- 
ments of human eyes. The task of the biological oculomotor system is to direct 
A Neural Network Based Head Tracking System 909 
Color 
CCD Camera 
(Eye) 
Directional 
Microphones 
(Ears) 
Sound 
PC 
Sedal 
Servo Motors. 
(Oculomotor 
Muscles) 
Reinforcement 
Signals 
IR Detector 
GUI Mouse 
Figure 1: Schematic hardware diagram of Marvin, our head tracking system. 
"interesting" parts of the visual world onto the small, high resolution areas of the 
retinas. For this task, complex neural circuits have evolved in order to control the 
eye movements. Some examples include the saccadic and smooth pursuit systems 
that allow the eyes to rapidly acquire and track moving objects [1, 2]. Similarly, 
an active video conferencing system also needs to determine the appropriate face 
or feature to follow in the video stream. Then the camera must track that person's 
movements over time and transmit the image to the other party. 
In the past few years, the problem of face detection in images and video has attracted 
considerable attention [3, 4, 5]. Rule-based methods have concentrated on looking 
for generic characteristics of faces such as oval shapes or skin hue. Since these types 
of algorithms are fairly simple to implement, they are commonly found in real-time 
systems [6, 7]. But because other objects have similar shapes and colors as faces, 
these systems can also be easily fooled. A potentially more robust approach is to 
use a convolutional neural network to learn the appropriate features of a face [8, 9]. 
Because most such implementations learn in batch mode, they are beset by the 
difficulty of constructing a large enough training set of labelled images with and 
without faces. In this paper, we present a video based system that uses online 
supervisory signals to train a convolutional neural network. Fast online adaptation 
of the network's weights allows the neural network to learn how to discriminate an 
individual head at the beginning of a session. This enables the system to robustly 
track the head even in the presence of other moving objects. 
2 Hardware Implementation 
Figure i shows a schematic of the tracking system we have constructed and have 
named "Marvin" because of an early version's similarity to a cartoon character. 
Marvin's eye consists of a small CCD camera with a 65 ø field of view that is attached 
to a motorized platform. Two RC servo motors give Marvin the ability to rapidly 
pan and tilt over a wide range of viewing angles, with a typical maximum velocity of 
300 deg/sec. The system also includes two microphones or ears that give Marvin the 
ability to locate auditory cues. Integrating auditory information with visual inputs 
allows the system to find salient objects better than with either sound or video 
alone. But these proceedings will focus exclusively on how a visual representation 
is learned. 
910 D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung 
RGB Images 
U 
V 
Figure 2: Preprocessing of the video stream. Luminance, chromatic and motion 
information are separately represented in the Y, U, V, D channels at multiple res- 
olutions. 
Marvin is able to learn to track a visual target using two different sources of su- 
pervisory signals. One method of training uses a small 38 KHz modulated infrared 
light emitter (A  900nm) attached to the object that needs to be tracked. A 
heat filter renders the infrared light invisible to Marvin's video camera so that the 
system does not merely learn to follow this signal. But mounted next to the CCD 
camera and moving with it is a small infrared detector with a collimating lens that 
signals when the object is located within a narrow angular cone in the direction 
that the camera is pointing. This reinforcement signal can then be used to train 
the weights of the neural network. Another more natural way for the system to 
learn occurs in an actual video conferencing scenario. In this situation, a user who 
is actively watching the video stream has manual override control of the camera 
using graphical user interface inputs. Whenever the user repositions the camera to 
a new location, the neural network would then adjust its weights to track whatever 
is in the center portion of the image. 
Since Marvin was built from readily available commercial components, the cost of 
the system not including the PC was under $500. The input devices and motors 
are all controlled by the computer using custom-written Matlab drivers that are 
available for both Microsoft Windows and the Linux operating system. The image 
processing computations as well as the graphical user interface are then easily im- 
plemented as simple Matlab operations and function calls. The following section 
describes the head tracking neural network in more detail. 
3 Neural Network Architecture 
Marvin uses a convolutional neural network architecture to detect a head within its 
field of view. The video stream from the CCD camera is first digitized with a video 
capture board into a series of raw 120 x 160 RGB images as shown in Figure 2. Each 
RGB color image is then converted into its YUV representation, and a difference (D) 
A Neural Network Based Head Tracla'ng System 911 
Hidden 
Y Units 
U 
Wy 
W U 
Saliency 
Map 
V 
D 
W D 
Winner Take All 
Figure 3: Neural network uses a convolutional architecture to integrate the different 
sources of information and determine the maximally salient object. 
image is also computed as the absolute value of the difference from the preceding 
frame. Of the four resulting images, the Y component represents the luminance or 
grayscale information while the U and V channels contain the chromatic or color 
information. Motion information in the video stream is captured by the D image 
where moving objects appear highlighted. 
The four YUVD channels are then subsampled successively to yield representations 
at lower and lower resolutions. The resulting "image pyramids" allow the network 
to achieve recognition invariance across many different scales without having to 
train separate neural networks for each resolution. Instead, a single neural network 
with the same set weights is run with the different resolutions as inputs, and the 
maximally active resolution and position is selected. 
Marvin uses the convolutional neural network architecture shown in Figure 3 to 
locate salient objects at the different resolutions. The YUVD input images are fil- 
tered with separate 16 x 16 kernels, denoted by Wr', Wv, Wv, and WD respectively. 
This results in the filtered images s, fs, 7s,/s: 
.s(i,j) - WA o A s -- E WA(i',j') AS(i + i',j + j') 
(1) 
where s denotes the scale resolution of the inputs, and A is any of the Y, U, V, 
or D channels. These filtered images represent a single layer of hidden units in the 
neural network. These hidden units are then combined to form the saliency map 
X s in the following manner: 
XS(i,j) - cy g["s(i,j)] -F cv g[OS(i,j)] -F Cv g[S(i,j)] -F CD g[bS(i,j)] -F Co. (2) 
912 D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung 
Since g(x) = tanh(x) is sigmoidal, the saliency X 8 is computed as a nonlinear, 
pixel-by-pixel combination of the hidden units. The scalar variables cv, cv, cv, 
and cD represent the relative importance of the different luminance, chromatic, and 
motion channels in the overall saliency of an object. 
With the bias term co, the function g[XS(i,j)] may then be thought of as the 
relative probability that a head exists at location (i, j) at input resolution s. The 
final output of the neural network is then determined in a competitive manner by 
finding the location (im,jm) and scale sm of the best possible match: 
g[Xm] = g[XS"(im,jm)] = m.axg[XS(i,j)]. (3) 
After processing the visual inputs in this manner, saccadic camera movements are 
generated in order to keep the maximally salient object located near the center of 
the field of view. 
4 Training and Results 
Either GUI user inputs or the infrared detector may be used as a supervisory signal 
to train the kernels WA and scalar weights cA of the neural network. The neu- 
ral network is updated when the maximally salient location of the neural network 
(i,,jm) does not correspond to the desired object's true position (i,,, j,,) as iden- 
tified by the external supervisory signal. A cost function proportional to the sum 
squared error terms at the maximal location and new desired location is used for 
training: 
2 = [gra g[X.(ira,j)]2 
er a - , (4) 
2 _ min}g g[X(i,,j,d] 2. (5) 
$ 
In the following examples, the constants gra = 0 and g, = 1 are used. The gradients 
to Eqs. 4-5 are then backpropagated through the convolutional network [8, 10], 
resulting in the following update rules: 
ACA = rlerag'(Xra)g[(i,jra)] + rle,g'(X,)g[(i,,j,)], (6) 
AWA = rleg'(Xra)g'(ra)cAAra + rleg'(X)g'()cAA. (7) 
In typical batch learning applications of neural networks, the learning rate r/is set 
to be some small positive number. However in this case, it is desirable for Marvin 
to learn to track a head in a new environment as quickly as possible. Thus, rapid 
adaptation of the weights during even a single training example is needed. A natural 
way of doing this is to use a fairly large learning rate (r/= 0.1), and to repeatedly 
apply the update rules in Eqs. 6-7 until the calculated maximally salient location 
is very close to the actual desired position. 
An example of how quickly Marvin is able to learn to track one of the authors 
as he moved around his office is given by the learning curve in Figure 4. The 
weights were first initialized to small random values, and Marvin was corrected in 
an online fashion using mouse inputs to look at the author's head. After only a few 
seconds of training with a processing time loop of around 200 ms, the system was 
able to locate the head to within four pixels of accuracy, as determined by hand 
labelling the video data afterwards. As saccadic eye movements were initiated at 
A Neural Network Based Head Tracking System 913 
20 
18 
16 
14 
- 8 
6 
0 
10 20 30 40 50 
Frame Number 
Figure 4: Fast online adaptation of the neural network. The head location error in 
pixels in a 120 x 160 image is plotted as a function of frame number (5 frames/sec). 
the times indicated by the arrows in Fig. 4, new environments of the office were 
sampled and an occasional large error is seen. However, over time as these errors 
are corrected, the neural network learns to robustly discriminate the head from the 
office surroundings. 
5 Discussion 
Figure 5 shows the inputs and weights of the network after a minute of training as 
the author walked around his office. The kernels necessarily appear a little smeared 
because they are invariant to slight changes in head position, rotation, and scale. 
But they clearly depict the dark hair, facial features, and skin color of the head. The 
relative weighting (cy, cu, cv > CD) of the different input channels shows that the 
luminance and color information are the most reliable for tracking the head. This 
is probably because it is relatively difficult to distinguish in the frame difference 
images the head from other moving body parts. 
We are currently considering more complicated neural network architectures for 
combining the different input streams to give better tracking performance. How- 
ever, this example shows how a simple convolutional architecture can be used to 
automatically integrate different visual cues to robustly track a head. Moreover, by 
using fast online adaptation of the neural network weights, the system is able to 
learn without needing large hand-labelled training sets and is also able to rapidly 
accomodate changing environments. Future improvements in hardware and neu- 
ral network architectures and algorithms are still necessary, however, in order to 
approach human speeds and performance in this type of sensory processing and 
recognition task. 
We acknowledge the support of Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies. We also 
thank M. Fee, A. Jacquin, S. Levinson, E. Petajan, G. Pingali, and E. Rietman for 
helpful discussions. 
914 D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung 
Y u v D 
Cy=O. 15 Cu=O. 12 Cv=O. 11 %=0.08 
Figure 5: Example showing the inputs and weights used in tracking a head. The 
head position as calculated by the neural network is marked with a box. 
References 
[71 
[8] 
[9] 
[10] 
[1] Horiuchi, TK, Bishofberger, B & Koch, C (1994). An analog VLSI saccadic 
eye movement system. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6, 
582-589. 
[2] Rao, RPN, Zelinsky, G J, Hayhoe, MM & Ballard, DH (1996). Modeling sac- 
cadic targeting in visual search. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 8, 830-836. 
[3] Sung, KK & Poggio, T (1994). Example-based learning for view-based human 
face detection. Proc. 23rd Image Understanding Workshop, 843-850. 
[4] Eleftheriadis, A & Jacquin, A (1995). Automatic face location detection and 
tracking for model-assisted coding of video teleconferencing sequences at low 
bit-rates. Signal Processing: Image Communication 7, 231. 
[5] Petajan, E & Graf, HP (1996). Robust face feature analysis for automatic 
speechreading and character animation. Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Automatic Face 
and Gesture Recognition, 357-362. 
[6] Darrell, T, Maes, P, Blumberg, B, & Pentland, AP (1994). A novel environment 
for situated vision and behavior. Proc. IEEE Workshop for Visual Behaviors, 
68-72. 
Yang, J & Waibel, A (1996). A real-time face tracker. Proc. 3rd IEEE Workshop 
on Application of Computer Vision, 142-147. 
Nowlan, SJ & Platt, JC (1995). A convolutional neural network hand tracker. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 7, 901-908. 
Rowley, HA, Baluja, S & Kanade, T (1996). Human face detection in visual 
scenes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8, 875-881. 
Le Cun, Y, et al. (1990). Handwritten digit recognition with a back propagation 
network. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems œ, 396-404. 
