Use of a Multi-Layer Perceptron to 
Predict Malignancy in Ovarian Tumors 
Herman ¾errelst, 
Yves Moreau and Joos Vandewalle 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 
Kard. Mercierlaan 94 
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium 
Dirk Timmerman 
Dept. of Obst. and Gynaec. 
University Hospitals Leuven 
Herestraat 49 
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium 
Abstract 
We discuss the development of a Multi-Layer Perceptron neural 
network classifier for use in preoperative differentiation between 
benign and malignemt ovarian tumors. As the Mean Squared clas- 
siftcation Error is not sufficient to make correct and objective as- 
sessments about the performance of the neural classifier, the con- 
cepts of sensitivity and specificity are introduced and combined 
in Receiver Operating Characteristic curves. Based on objective 
observations such as sonomorphologic criteria, color Doppler imag- 
ing and results from serum tumor markers, the neural network is 
able to make reliable predictions with a discriminating performemce 
comparable to that of experienced gynecologists. 
i Introduction 
A reliable test for preoperative discrimination between benign and malignant ovar- 
ian tumors would be of considerable help to clinicians. It would assist them to select 
patients for whom minimally invasive surgery or conservative management suffices 
versus those for whom urgent referral to a gynecologic oncologist is needed. 
We discuss the development of a neural network classifier/diagnostic tool. The neu- 
ral network was trained by supervised learning, based on data from 191 thoroughly 
examined patients presenting with ovarian tumors of which 140 were benign and 51 
malignant. As inputs to the network we chose indicators that in recent studies have 
proven their high predictive value [1, 2, 3]. Moreover, we gave preference to those 
indicators that can be obtained in an objective way by any gynecologist. Some of 
these indicators have already been used in attempts to make one single protocol or 
decision algorithm [3, 4]. 
Use of a MLP to Predict Malignancy in Ovarian Tumors 979 
In order to make reliable assessments on the practical performance of the classifier, 
it is necessary to work with other concepts than Mean Squared classification Error 
(MSE), which is traditionally used as a measure of goodness in the training of a 
neural network. We will introduce notions as specificity and sensitivity and combine 
them into Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves. The use of ROC-curves 
is motivated by the fact that they are independent of the relative proportion of the 
various output classes in the sample population. This enables an objective validation 
of the performance of the classifier. We will also show how, in the training of the 
neural network, MSE optimization with gradient methods can be refined and/or 
replaced with the help of ROC-curves and simulated annealing techniques. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give a brief description of the 
selected input features. In Section 3 we state some drawbacks to the MSE criterion 
and introduce the concepts of sensitivity, specificity and ROC-curves. Section 4 
then deals with the technicalities of training the neural network. In Section 5 we 
show the results and compare them to human performance. 
2 Data acquisition and feature selection 
The data were derived from a study group of 191 consecutive patients who were 
referred to a single institution (University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium) from August 
1994 to August 1996. Table 1 lists the different indicators which were considered, 
together with their mean value and standard deviations or together with the relative 
presence in cases of benign and malignant tumors. 
Table 1 Indicator Benign Malignant 
Demographic Age 49.3 + 16.0 58.3 + 14.3 
Postmenopausal 40% 70.6% 
Serum marker CA 125 (log) 2.8 + 1.1 5.2 + 1.9 
CDI Blood flow present 72.9% 100% 
Morphologic Abdominal fluid 12.1% 52.9% 
Bilateral mass 11.4% 35.3% 
Uniloculax cyst 42.1% 5.9% 
Multiloc/solid cyst 16.4% 49.0% 
Smooth wall 58.6% 2.0% 
Irregular wall 32.1% 76.5% 
Papillations 7.9% 74.5% 
Table 1: Demographic, serum marker, color Doppler imaging and morphologic indicators. 
For the continuous valued features the mean and standard deviation for each class are 
reported. For binary valued indicators, the last two columns give the presence of the 
feature in both classes e.g. only 2% of malignant tumors had smooth walls. 
First, all patients were scanned with ultrasonography to obtain detailed gray-scale 
images of the tumors. Every tumor was extensively examined for its morphologic 
characteristics. Table 1 lists the selected morphologic features: presence of ab- 
dominal fluid collection, papillary structures (> 3mm), smooth internal walls, wall 
irregularities, whether the cysts were unilocular, multilocular-solid and/or present 
on both pelvic sides. All outcomes are binary valued: every observation relates to 
the presence (1) or absence (0) of these characteristics. 
Secondly, all tumors were entirely surveyed by color Doppler imaging to detect 
presence or absence of blood flow within the septa, cyst walls, solid tumor areas or 
ovarian tissue. The outcome is also binary valued (1/0). 
980 H. Verrelst, Y. Moteau, J. Vandewalle and D. Timmerman 
Thirdly, in 173 out of the total of 191 patients, serum CA 125 levels were measured, 
using CA 125 II immunoradiometric assays (Centocor, Malvern, PA). The CA 125 
antigen is a glycoprotein that is expressed by most epithelial ovarian cancers. The 
numerical value gives the concentration in U/ml. Because almost all values were 
situated in a small interval between 0 and 100, and because a small portion took 
values up to 30,000, this variable was rescaled by taking its logarithm. 
Since age and menopausal status of the patient are considered to be highly relevant, 
these are also included. The menopausal score is -1 for premenopausal, +1 for 
postmenopausal. A third class of patients were assigned a 0 value. These patients 
had had an hysterectomy, so no menopausal status could be appointed to them. 
It is beyond the scope of this paper to give a complete account of the meaning of 
the different features that are used or the way in which the data were acquired. 
We will limit ourselves to this short description and refer the reader to [2, 3] and 
gynecological textbooks for a more detailed explanation. 
3 Receiver Operating Characteristics 
3.1 Drawbacks to Mean Squared classification Error 
Let us assume that we use a one-hidden-layer feed-forward NN with m inputs x, 
nn hidden neurons with the tanh(.) as activation function, and one output , 
nh 
Y() - E wj tanh(E vijx +/3j), (1) 
j=l i----1 
parameterized by the vector 0 consisting of the network's weights wj and vii and 
bias terms j. The cost function is often chosen to be the squared difference between 
the desired d and the actual response y, averaged over all N samples [12], 
N 
- 2. (2) 
J(0) = 
k----1 
This type of cost function is continuous and differentiable, so it can be used in 
gradient based optimization techniques such as steepest descent (back-propagation), 
quasi-Newton or Levenberg-Marquardt methods [8, 9, 11, 12]. However there are 
some drawbacks to the use of this type of cost function. 
First of all, the MSE is heavily dependent on the relative proportion of 
the different output classes in the training set. In our dichotomic case this 
can easily be demonstrated by writing the cost function, with superscripts b and m 
respectively meaning benign and malignant, as 
Nb i N Nm 1 X -'N'*, {tlm 
= fb + Nb + + 
ß ß 
X (1 
If the relative proportion in the sample population is not representative for reality, 
the A parameter should be adjusted accordingly. In practice this real proportion is 
often not known accurately or one simply ignores the meaning of A and uses it as a 
design parameter in order to bias the accuracy towards one of the output classes. 
A second drawback of the MSE cost function is that it is not very in- 
formative towards practical usage of the classification tool. A clinician is 
not interested in the averaged deviation from desired numbers, but thinks in terms 
of percentages found, missed or misclassified. In the next section we will introduce 
the concepts of sensitivity and specificity to express these more practical measures. 
Use of a MLP to Predict Malignancy in Ovarian Tumors 981 
3.2 Sensitivity, specificity and ROC-curves 
If we take the desired response to be 0 for benign and 1 for malignant cases, the 
way to make clearcut (dichotomic) decisions is to compare the numerical outcome 
of the neural network to a certain threshold value T between 0 and 1. When the 
outcome is above the threshold T, the prediction is said to be positive. Otherwise the 
prediction is said to be negative. With this convention, we say that the prediction 
was 
True Positive (TP) 
True Negative (TN) 
False Positive (FP) 
False Negative (FN) 
if the prediction was positive when the sample was malignant. 
if the prediction was negative when the sample was benign. 
if the prediction was positive when the sample was benign. 
if the prediction was negative when the sample was malignant. 
To every of the just defined terms TP, TN, FP and FN, a certain subregion of the 
total sample space can be associated, as depicted in Figure 1. In the same sense, 
we can associate to them a certain number counting the samples in each subregion. 
'P the proportion of malignant cases that 
We can then define sensitivity as TP+Fv, 
Total population 
ant  
[ :FN.." __ ,, '-.. TN 
',,, i... TP,,, FP.... 
Figure 1' The concepts of true and false positive and negative illustrated. The dashed 
area indicates the malignant cases in the total sample population. The positive prediction 
of an imperfect classification (dotted area) does not fully coincide with this sub area. 
TN the proportion of benign 
are predicted to be malignant and specificity as FP+TN' 
cases that are predicted to be benign. The false positive rate is 1-specificity. 
When varying the threshold T, the values of TP, TN, FP, FN and therefore 
also sensitivity and specificity, will change. A low threshold will detect almost all 
malignant cases at the cost of many false positives. A high threshold will give 
less false positives, but will also detect less malignant cases. Receiver Operating 
Characteristic (ROC) curves are a way to visualize this relationship. The plot gives 
the sensitivity versus false positive rate for varying thresholds T (e.g. Figure 2). 
The ROC-curve is useful and widely used device for assessing and comparing the 
value of tests [5, 7]. The proportion of the whole area of the graph which lies below 
the ROC-curve is a one-value measure of the accuracy of a test [6]. The higher 
this proportion, the better the test. Figure 2 shows the ROC-curves for two simple 
classifiers that use only one single indicator. (Which means that we classify a tumor 
being malignant when the value of the indicator rises above a certain value.) It is 
seen that the CA 125 level has high predictive power as its ROC-curve spans 87.5% 
of the total area (left Figure 2). For the age parameter, the ROC-curve spans 
only 65.6% (right Figure 2). As indicated by the horizontal line in the plot, a CA 
125 level classification will only misclassify 15% of all benign cases to reach a 80% 
sensitivity, whereas using only age, one would then misclassify up to 50% of them. 
982 H. Verrelst, Y. Moteau, J. Vandewalle and D. Timmerman 
Figure 2: The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is the plot of the sensi- 
tivity versus the false positive rate of a classifier for varying thresholds used. Only single 
indicators (left: CA 125, right: age) are used for these ROC-curves. The horizontal line 
marks the 80% specificity level. 
Since for every set of parameters of the neural network the area under the ROC- 
curve can be calculated numerically, this one-value measure can also be used for 
supervised training, as will be shown in the next Section. 
4 Simulation results 
4.1 Inputs and architecture 
The continuous inputs were standardized by subtracting their mean and dividing 
by their standard deviation (both calculated over the entire population). Binary 
valued inputs were left unchanged. The desired outputs were labeled 0 for benign 
examples, I for malignant cases. The data set was split up: 2/3 of both benign ad 
malignant samples were randomly selected to form the training set. The remaining 
examples formed the test set. The ratio of benign to all examples is A  - 
3' 
Since the training set is not large, there is a risk of overtraining when too many 
parameters are used. We will limit the number of hidden neurons to nh -- 3 or 5. 
As the CA 125 level measurement is more expensive and time consuming, we will 
investigate two different classifiers: one which does use the CA 125 level ad one 
which does not. The one-hidden-layer MLP architectures that are used, are 11-3-1 
and 10-5-1. A tanh(.) is taken for the activation function in the hidden layer. 
4.2 Training 
A first way of training was MSE optimization using the cost function (3). By taking 
A =  in this expression, the role of malignant examples is more heavily weighted. 
The parameter vector  was randomly initialized (zero mean Gaussian distribution, 
standard deviation a = 0.01). Training was done using a quasi-Newton method with 
BFGS-update of the Hessian (fminu in Matlab) [8, 9]. To prevent overtraining, 
the training was stopped before the MSE on the test set started to rise. Only few 
iterations ( 100) were needed. 
A second way of training was through the use of the area spanned by the ROC-curve 
of the classifier and simulated annealing techniques [10]. The area-measure A Røc 
was numerically calculated for every set of trial parameters: first the sensitivity 
and false positive rate were calculated for 1000 increasing values of the threshold 
T between 0 and 1, which gave the ROC-curve; secondly the area A RøC under the 
curve was numerically calculated with the trapezoidal integration rule. 
Use of a MLP to Predict Malignancy in Ovarian Tumors 983 
We used Boltzmann Simulated Annealing to maximize the ROC-area. At time 
k a trial parameter set of the neural network /+1 is randomly generated in the 
neighborhood of the present set t9/ (Gaussian distribution, er = 0.001). The trial 
set 0k+l is always accepted if the area Ai c _> A øc. If A+ø1 c < A øc, 0k+l is 
accepted if 
AROC ROC 
( oc )/T 
with e a uniformly distributed random variable E [0, 1] and Te the temperature. As 
cooling schedule we took 
Te = 1/(100+ 10k), 
so that the annealing was low-temperature and fast-cooling. The optimization was 
stopped before the ROC-area calculated for the test set started to decrease. Only 
a few hundred annealing epochs were allowed. 
4.3 Results 
Table 2 states the results for the different approaches. One can see that adding the 
CA 125 serum level clearly improves the classifier's performance. Without it, the 
ROC-curve spans about 96.5% of the total square area of the plot, whereas with 
the CA 125 indicator it spans almost 98%. Also, the two training methods are seen 
to give comparable results. Figure 3 shows the ROC-curve calculated for the total 
population for the 11-3-1 MLP case, trained with simulated annealing 
Table 2 Training set Test set' 'Total population 
10-5-1 MLP, MSE 96.7% 96.4% 96.5% 
10-5-1 MLP, SA 96.6% 96.2% 96.4% 
11-3-1 MLP, MSE 97.9% 97.4% 97.7% 
11-3-1 MLP, SA 97.9% 97.5% 97.8% 
Table 2: For the two architectures (10-5-1 and 11-3-1) of the MLP and for the gradient 
(MSE) and the simulated annealing (SA) optimization techniques, this table gives the 
resulting areas under the ROC-curves. 
O9 
O7 
O4 
0.1 
0 
Figure 3: ROC-curves of 11-3-1 MLP (with CA 125 level indicator), trained with simulated 
annealing. The curve, calculated for the total population, spans 97.8% of the total region. 
All patients were examined by two gynecologists, who gave their subjective impres- 
sions and also classified the ovarian tumors into (probably) benign and malignant. 
Histopathological examinations of the tumors afterwards showed these gynecologists 
984 H. Verrelst, Y. Moreau, J. Vandewalle and D. Timmerman 
to have a sensitivity up to 98% and a false positive rate of 13% and 12% respec- 
tively. As can be seen in Figure 3, the 11-3-1 MLP has a similar performance. For 
a sensitivity of 98%, its false positive rate is between 10% and 15%. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we have discussed the development of a Multi-Layer Perceptron neural 
network classifier for use in preoperative differentiation between benign and malig- 
nant ovarian tumors. To assess the performance and for training the classifiers, the 
concepts of sensitivity and specificity were introduced and combined in Receiver 
Operating Characteristic curves. Based on objective observations available to ev- 
ery gynecologist, the neural network is able to make reliable predictions with a 
discriminating performance comparable to that of experienced gynecologists. 
Acknowledgments 
This research work was carried out at the ESAT laboratory and the Interdisciplinary Center of Neural Networks 
ICNN of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, in the following frameworks: the Belgian Programme on Interuni- 
versity Poles of Attraction, initiated by the Belgian State, Prime Minister's Office for Science, Technology and 
Culture (IUAP P4-02 and IUAP P4-24), a Concerted Action Project MIPS (Modelbased Information Processing 
Systems) of the Flemish Community and the FWO (Fund for Scientific Research - Flanders) project G.0262.97: 
Learning and Optimization: an Interdisciplinary Approach. The scientific responsibility rests with its authors. 
References 
[1] 
[4] 
[5] 
[9] 
[lO] 
[11] 
[12] 
Bast R. C., Jr., Klug T.L. St. John E., et al, "A radioimmunoassay using a monoclonal 
antibody to monitor the course of epithelial ovarian cancer," N. Engl. J. Med., Vol. 
309, pp. 883-888, 1983 
Timmerman D., Bourne T., Tailor A., Van Assche F.A., Vergote I., "Preoperative 
differentiation between benign and malignant adnexal masses," submitted 
Tailor A., Jurkovic D., Bourne T.H., Collins W.P., Campbell S., "Sohographic predic- 
'tion of malignancy in adnexal masses using multivaxiate logistic regression analysis," 
Ultrasound Obstet. Gynaecol. in press, 1997 
Jacobs I., Oram D., Fairbanks J., et al., "A risk of malignancy index incorporating 
CA 125, ultrasound and menopausal status for the accurate preoperative diagnosis 
of ovarian cancer," Br. J. Obstet. Gynaecol., Vol. 97, pp. 922-929, 1990 
Hanley J.A., McNeil B., "A method of comparing the areas under the receiver op- 
erating characteristics curves derived from the same cases," Radiology, Vol. 148, pp. 
839-843, 1983 
Swets J.A., "Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems," Science, Vol. 240, pp. 
1285-1293, 1988 
Galen R.S., Gambino S., Beyond normality: the predictive value and efficiency of 
medical diagnosis, John Wiley, New York, 1975. 
Gill P., Murray W., Wright M., Practical Optimization, Acad. Press, New York, 1981 
Fletcher R., Practical methods of optimization, 2nd ed., John Wiley, New York, 1987. 
Kirkpatrick S., Gelatt C.D., Vecchi M., "Optimization by simulated annealing," Sci- 
ence, Vol. 220, pp. 621-680, 1983. 
Rumelhart D.E., Hinton G.E., Williams R.J., "Learning representations by back- 
propagating errors," Nature, Vol. 323, pp. 533-536, 1986. 
Bishop C., Artificial Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, OUP, Oxford, 1996 
