Reinforcement Learning with 
Hierarchies of Machines * 
Ronald Parr and Stuart Russell 
Computer Science Division, UC Berkeley, CA 94720 
{parr,russell} @cs.berkeley.edu 
Abstract 
We present a new approach to reinforcement learning in which the poli- 
cies considered by the learning process are constrained by hierarchies of 
partially specified machines. This allows for the use of prior knowledge 
to reduce the search space and provides a framework in which knowledge 
can be transferred across problems and in which component solutions 
can be recombined to solve larger and more complicated problems. Our 
approach can be seen as providing a link between reinforcement learn- 
ing and "behavior-based" or "teleo-reactive" approaches to control. We 
present provably convergent algorithms for problem-solving and learn- 
ing with hierarchical machines and demonstrate their effectiveness on a 
problem with several thousand states. 
1 Introduction 
Optimal decision making in virtually all spheres of human activity is rendered intractable 
by the complexity of the task environment. Generally speaking, the only way around in- 
tractability has been to provide a hierarchical organization for complex activities. Although 
it can yield suboptimal policies, top-down hierarchical control often reduces the complexity 
of decision making from exponential to linear in the size of the problem. For example, hier- 
archical task network (HTN) planners can generate solutions containing tens of thousands 
of steps [5], whereas "flat" planners can manage only tens of steps. 
HTN planners are successful because they use aplan library that describes the decomposition 
of high-level activities into lower-level activities. This paper describes an approach to 
learning and decision making in uncertain environments (Markov decision processes) that 
uses a roughly analogous form of prior knowledge. We use hierarchical abstract machines 
(HAMs), which impose constraints on the policies considered by our learning algorithms. 
HAMs consist of nondeterministic finite state machines whose transitions may invoke 
lower-level machines. Nondeterminism is represented by choice states where the optimal 
action is yet to be decided or learned. The language allows a variety of prior constraints 
to be expressed, ranging from no constraint all the way to a fully specified solution. One 
*This research was supported in part by ARO under the MURI program "Integrated Approach to 
Intelligent Systems," grant number DAAH04-96-1-0341. 
1044 R. Parr and S. Russell 
Obstacle 
Obstacle 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 1- (a) An MDP with m 3600 states. The initial state is in the top left. (b) Close- 
up showing a typical obstacle. (c) Nondeterministic finite-state controller for negotiating 
obstacles. 
useful intermediate point is the specification of just the general organization of behavior 
into a layered hierarchy, leaving it up to the learning algorithm to discover exactly which 
lower-level activities should be invoked by higher levels at each point. 
The paper begins with a brief review of Markov decision processes (MDPs) and a descrip- 
tion of hierarchical abstract machines. We then present, in abbreviated form, the following 
results: 1) Given any HAM and any MDP, there exists a new MDP such that the optimal 
policy in the new MDP is optimal in the original MDP among those policies that satisfy the 
constraints specified by the HAM. This means that even with complex machine specifica- 
tions we can still apply standard decision-making and learning methods. 2) An algorithm 
exists that determines this optimal policy, given an MDP and a HAM. 3) On an illustrative 
problem with 3600 states, this algorithm yields dramatic performance improvements over 
standard algorithms applied to the original MDP. 4) A reinforcement learning algorithm 
exists that converges to the optimal policy, subject to the HAM constraints, with no need 
to construct explicitly a new MDP. 5) On the sample problem, this algorithm learns dra- 
matically faster than standard RL algorithms. We conclude with a discussion of related 
approaches and ongoing work. 
2 Markov Decision Processes 
We assume the reader is familiar with the basic concepts of MDPs. To review, an MDP is 
a 4-tuple, ($, .A, T,/) where $ is a set of states, 4 is a set of actions, T is a transition 
model mapping $ x .A x $ into probabilities in [0, 1], and/ is a reward function mapping 
,S x M x $ into real-valued rewards. Algorithms for solving MDPs can return apolicy 7r that 
maps from $ to .A, a real-valued value function V on states, or a real-valued Q-function on 
state-action pairs. In this paper, we focus on infinite-horizon MDPs with a discount factor 
/3. The aim is to find an optimal policy r* (or, equivalently, V* or Q*) that maximizes the 
expected discounted total reward of the agent. 
Throughout the paper, we will use as an example the MDP shown in Figure 1 (a). Here .A 
contains four primitive actions (up, down, left, right). The transition model, T, specifies that 
each action succeeds 80% of time, while 20% of the time the agent moves in an unintended 
perpendicular direction. The agent begins in a start state in the upper left comer. A reward 
of 5.0 is given for reaching the goal state and the discount factor/3 is 0.999. 
3 Hierarchical abstract machines 
A HAM is a program which, when executed by an agent in an environment, constrains the 
actions that the agent can take in each state. For example, a very simple machine might 
dictate, "repeatedly choose right or down," which would eliminate from consideration all 
policies that go up or left. HAMs extend this simple idea of constraining policies by 
providing a hierarchical means of expressing constraints at varying levels of detail and 
Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchies of Machines 1045 
specificity. Machines for HAMs are defined by a set of states, a transition function, and a 
start function that determines the initial state of the machine. Machine states are of four 
types: Action states execute an action in the environment. Call states execute another 
machine as a subroutine. Choice states nondeterministically select a next machine state. 
Stop states halt execution of the machine and return control to the previous call state. 
The transition function determines the next machine state after an action or call state 
as a stochastic function of the current machine state and some features of the resulting 
environment state. Machines will typically use a partial description of the environment to 
determine the next state. Although machines can function in partially observable domains, 
for the purposes of this paper we make the standard assumption that the agent has access to 
a complete description as well. 
A HAM is defined by an initial machine in which execution begins and the closure of all 
machines reachable from the initial machine. Figure 1 (c) shows a simplified version of 
one element of the HAM we used for the MDP in Figure 1. This element is used for 
traversing a hallway while negotiating obstacles of the kind shown in Figure 1 (b). It runs 
until the end of the hallway or an intersection is reached. When it encounters an obstacle, a 
choice point is created to choose between two possible next machine states. One calls the 
backof machine to back away from the obstacle and then move forward until the next one. 
The other calls the follow-wall machine to try to get around the obstacle. The follow-wall 
machine is very simple and will be tricked by obstacles that are concave in the direction of 
intended movement; the backof machine, on the other hand, can move around any obstacle 
in this world but could waste time backing away from some obstacles unnecessarily and 
should be used sparingly. 
Our complete "navigation HAM" involves a three-level hierarchy, somewhat reminiscent 
of a Brooks-style architecture but with hard-wired decisions replaced by choice states. The 
top level of the hierarchy is basically just a choice state for choosing a hallway navigation 
direction from the four coordinate directions. This machine has control initially and regains 
control at intersections or corners. The second level of the hierarchy contains four machines 
for moving along hallways, one for each direction. Each machine at this level has a choice 
state with four basic strategies for handling obstacles. Two back away from obstacles 
and two attempt to follow walls to get around obstacles. The third level of the hierarchy 
implements these strategies using the primitive actions. 
The transition function for this HAM assumes that an agent executing the HAM has access 
to a short-range, low-directed sonar that detects obstacles in any of the four axis-parallel 
adjacent squares and a long-range, high-directed sonar that detects larger objects such as 
the intersections and the ends of hallways. The HAM uses these partial state descriptions 
to identify feasible choices. For example, the machine to traverse a hallway northwards 
would not be called from the start state because the high-directed sonar would detect a wall 
to the north. 
Our navigation HAM represents an abstract plan to move about the environment by re- 
peatedly selecting a direction and pursuing this direction until an intersection is reached. 
Each machine for navigating in the chosen direction represents an abstract plan for moving 
in a particular direction while avoiding obstacles. The next section defines how a HAM 
interacts with a specific MDP and how to find an optimal policy that respects the HAM 
constraints. 
4 Defining and solving the HAM-induced MDP 
A policy for a model, M, that is HAM-consistent with HAM H is a scheme for making 
choices whenever an agent executing H in M, enters a choice state. To find the optimal 
HAM-consistent policy we apply H to M to yield an induced MDP, H o M. A somewhat 
simplified description of the construction of H o 3//is as follows: 1) The set of states in 
H o M is the cross-product of the states of H with the states of 3//. 2) For each state in 
H o M where the machine component is an action state, the model and machine transition 
1046 R. Parr and S. Russell 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
Wilhout HAM 
With HAM -+-'- 
500 1000 1500 20 2fO 300O 3560 40O0 4500 5O0O 
Rumime 
Wthout HAM  
Wt HAM -*-- 
25 
2O 
0 50O30 le+O6 1.5e-+O6 2e+06 2.5e+06 3e+06 3 5e+06 4e+06 4 5e+06 5e+06 
Number of 1 
Figure 2: Experimental results showing policy value (at the initial state) as a function of 
runtime on the domain shown in Figure 1. (a) Policy iteration with and without the HAM. 
(b) Q-learning with and without the HAM (averaged over 10 runs). 
functions are combined. 3) For each state where the machine component is a choice state, 
actions that change only the machine component of the state are introduced. 4) The reward 
is taken from M for primitive actions, otherwise it is zero. With this construction, we have 
the following (proof omitted): 
Lemma 1 For any Markov decision process M and any 1 HAM H, the induced process 
H o M is a Markov decision process. 
Lemma 2 If r is an optimal policy for H o M, then the primitive actions specified by r 
constitute the optimal policy for M that is HAM-consistent with H. 
Of course, H o M may be quite large. Fortunately, there are two things that will make 
the problem much easier in most cases. The first is that not all pairs of HAM states and 
environment states will be possible, i.e., reachable from an initial state. The second is that 
the actual complexity of the induced MDP is determined by the number of choice points, 
i.e., states of H o M in which the HAM component is a choice state. This leads to the 
following: 
Theorem 1 For any MDP, M, and HAM, H, let ½ be the set of choice points in H o M. 
There exists a decision process, reduce(H o M), with states ½ such that the optimal policy 
for reduce(H o M) corresponds to the optimal policy for M that is HAM-consistent with 
H. 
Proof sketch We begin by applying Lemma 1 and then observing that in states of H o M 
where the HAM component is not a choice state, only one action is permitted. These 
states can be removed to produce an equivalent Semi-Markov decision process (SMDP). 
(SMDPs are a generalization of Markov decision processes that permit different discount 
rates for different transitions.) The optimal policy for this SMDP will be the same as the 
optimal policy for H o M and by Lemma 2, this will be the optimal policy for M that is 
HAM-consistent with H. [] 
This theorem formally establishes the mechanism by which the constraints embodied in a 
HAM can be used to simplify an MDP. As an example of the power of this theorem, and 
to demonstrate that this transformation can be done efficiently, we applied our navigation 
HAM to the problem described in the previous section. Figure 2(a) shows the results of 
applying policy iteration to the original model and to the transformed model. Even when 
we add in the cost of transformation (which, with our rather underoptimized code, takes 
tTo preserve the Markov property, we require that if a machine has more than one possible caller 
in the hierarchy, that each appearance is treated as a distinct machine. This is equivalent to requiring 
that the call graph for the HAM is a tree. It follows from this that circular calling sequences are also 
forbidden. 
Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchies of Machines 1047 
866 seconds), the HAM method produces a good policy in less than a quarter of the time 
required to find the optimal policy in the original model. The actual solution time is 185 
seconds versus 4544 seconds. 
An important property of the HAM approach is that model transformation produces an 
MDP that is an accurate model of the application of the HAM to the original MDP. Unlike 
typical approximation methods for MDPs, the HAM method can give strict performance 
guarantees. The solution to the transformed model reduce(H o M) is the optimal solution 
from within a well-defined class of policies and the value assigned to this solution is the 
true expected value of applying the concrete HAM policy to the original MDP. 
5 Reinforcement learning with HAMs 
HAMs can be of even greater advantage in a reinforcement learning context, where the 
effort required to obtain a solution typically scales very badly with the size of the problem. 
HAM contraints can focus exploration of the state space, reducing the "blind search" phase 
that reinforcement learning agents must endure while learning about a new environment. 
Learning will also be faster for the same reason policy iteration is faster in the HAM-induced 
model; the agent is effectively operating in a reduced state space. 
We now introduce a variation of Q-learning called HAMQ-learning that learns directly 
in the reduced state space without performing the model transformation described in the 
previous section. This is significant because the the environment model is not usually 
known a priori in reinforcement learning contexts. 
A HAMQ-leaming agent keeps track of the following quantities: t, the current environment 
state; n, the current machine state; sc and me, the environment state and machine state at 
the previous choice point; a, the choice made at the previous choice point; and re and/3e, 
the total accumulated reward and discount since the previous choice point. It also maintains 
an extended Q-table, Q (Is, m], a), which is indexed by an environment-state/machine-state 
pair and by an action taken at a choice point. 
For every environment transition from state s to state t with observed reward r and discount 
/3, the HAMQ-learning agent updates: rc *- re +/3or and/3c -/3/c. For each transition 
to a choice point, the agent does 
and then re  0,/3e *- 1. 
Theorem 2 For any finite-state MDP, M, and any HAM, H, HAMQ-learning will converge 
to the optimal choice for every choice point in reduce(H o M) with probability 1. 
Proof sketch We note that the expected reinforcement signal in HAMQ-learning is the 
same as the expected reinforcement signal that would be received if the agent were acting 
directly in the transformed model of Theorem 1 above. Thus, Theorem 1 of [11] can be 
applied to prove the convergence of the HAMQ-learning agent, provided that we enforce 
suitable constraints on the exploration strategy and the update parameter decay rate. [] 
We ran some experiments to measure the performance of HAMQ-learning on our sample 
problem. Exploration was achieved by selecting actions according to the Boltzman distri- 
bution with a temperature parameter for each state. We also used an inverse decay for the 
update parameter c. Figure 2(b) compares the learning curves for Q-learning and HAMQ- 
learning. HAMQ-leaming appears to learn much faster: Q-learning required 9,000,000 
iterations to reach the level achieved by HAMQ-learning after 270,000 iterations. Even 
after 20,000,000 iterations, Q-learning did not do as well as HAMQ-learning. 2 
2Speedup techniques such as eligibility traces could be applied to get better Q-learning results; 
such methods apply equally well to HAMQ-leaming. 
1048 R. Parr and S. Russell 
6 Related work 
State aggregation (see, e.g., [ 18] and [7]) clusters "similar" states together and assigns them 
the same value, effectively reducing the state space. This is orthogonal to our approach 
and could be combined with HAMs. However, aggregation should be used with caution 
as it treats distinct states as a single state and can violate the Markov property leading to 
the loss of performance guarantees and oscillation or divergence in reinforcement learning. 
Moreover, state aggregation may be hard to apply effectively in many cases. 
Dean and Lin [8] and Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [2], showed that some MDPs are loosely 
coupled and hence amenable to divide-and-conquer algorithms. A machine-like language 
was used in [13] to partition an MDP into decoupled subproblems. In problems that are 
amenable to decoupling, this could approaches could be used in combinated with HAMs. 
Dayan and Hinton [6] have proposed feudal RL which specifies an explicit subgoal structure, 
with fixed values for each subgoal achieved, in order to achieve a hierarchical decomposition 
of the state space. Dietterich extends and generalizes this approach in [9]. Singh has 
investigated a number of approaches to subgoal based decomposition in reinforcement 
learning (e.g. [17] and [16]). Subgoals seem natural in some domains, but they may 
require a significant amount of outside knowledge about the domain and establishing the 
relationship between the value of subgoals with respect to the overall problem can be 
difficult. 
Bradtke and Duff [3] proposed an RL algorithm for SMDPs. Sutton [19] proposes temporal 
abstractions, which concatenate sequences of state transitions together to permit reasoning 
about temporally extended events, and which can thereby form a behavioral hierarchy as 
in [14] and [15]. Lin's somewhat informal scheme [12] also allows agents to treat entire 
policies as single actions. These approaches can be emcompassed within our framework 
by encoding the events or behaviors as machines. 
The design ofhierarchically organized, "layered" controllers was popularized by Brooks [4]. 
His designs use a somewhat different means of passing control, but our analysis and theorems 
apply equally well to his machine description language. The "teleo-reactive" agent designs 
of Benson and Nilsson [ 1] are even closer to our HAM language. Both of these approaches 
assume that the agent is completely specified, albeit self-modifiable. The idea of partial 
behavior descriptions can be traced at least to Hsu's partial programs [ 10], which were 
used with a deterministic logical planner. 
7 Conclusions and future work 
We have presented HAMs as a principled means of constraining the set of policies that are 
considered for a Markov decision process and we have demonstrated the efficacy of this 
approach in a simple example for both policy iteration and reinforcement learning. Our 
results show very significant speedup for decision-making and learning--but of course, this 
reflects the provision of knowledge in the form of the HAM. The HAM language provides 
a very general method of transferring knowledge to an agent and we only have scratched 
the surface of what can be done with this approach. 
We believe that if desired, subgoal information can be incorporated into the HAM structure, 
unifying subgoal-based approaches with the HAM approach. Moreover, the HAM structure 
provides a natural decomposition of the HAM-induced model, making it amenable to the 
divide-and-conquer approaches of [8] and [2]. 
There are opportunities for generalization across all levels of the HAM paradigm. Value 
function approximation can be used for the HAM induced model and inductive learning 
methods can be used to produce HAMs or to generalize their effects upon different regions 
of the state space. Gradient-following methods also can be used to adjust the transition 
probabilities of a stochastic HAM. 
HAMs also lend themselves naturally to partially observable domains. They can be applied 
directly when the choice points induced by the HAM are states where no confusion about 
Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchies of Machines 1049 
the true state of the environment is possible. The application of HAMs to more general 
partially observable domains is more complicated and is a topic of ongoing research. We 
also believe that the HAM approach can be extended to cover the average-reward optimality 
criterion. 
We expect that successful pursuit of these lines of research will provide a formal basis for 
understanding and unifying several seemingly disparate approaches to control, including 
behavior-based methods. It should also enable the use of the MDP framework in real-world 
applications of much greater complexity than hitherto attacked, much as HTN planning has 
extended the reach of classical planning methods. 
References 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[41 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[lO1 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[14] 
[151 
[16] 
[17] 
[18] 
[19] 
S. Benson and N. Nilsson. Reacting, planning and learning in an autonomous agent. In 
K. Furukawa, D. Michie, and S. Muggleton, editors, Machine Intelligence 14. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1995. 
D.C. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis. Parallel and Distributed Computation: Numerical Methods. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1989. 
S. J. Bradtke and M. O. Duff. Reinforcement learning methods for continuous-time Markov 
decision problems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 7: Proc. of the 1994 
Conference, Denver, Colorado, December 1995. MIT Press. 
R. A. Brooks. A robust layered control system for a mobile robot. IEEE Journal of Robotics 
and Automation, 2, 1986. 
K. W. Currie and A. Tate. O-Plan: the Open Planning Architecture. Artificial Intelligence, 
52(1), November 1991. 
P. Dayan and G. E. Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In Stephen Jose Hanson, Jack D. 
Cowan, and C. Lee Giles, editors, Neural Information Processing Systems 5, San Mateo, 
California, 1993. Morgan Kaufman. 
T Dean, R. Givan, and S. Leach. Model reduction techniques for computing approximately 
optimal solutions for markov decision processes. In Proc. of the Thirteenth Conference on Un- 
certainty in Artificial Intelligence, Providence, Rhode Island, August 1997. Morgan Kaufmann. 
T. Dean and S.-H. Lin. Decomposition techniques for planning in stochastic domains. In Proc. 
of the Fourteenth lnt. Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Montreal, Canada, August 
1995. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Thomas G. Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the MAXQ value function 
decomposition. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, Oregon, 1997. 
Y.-J. Hsu. Synthesizing efficient agents from partial programs. In Methodologies for Intelligent 
Systems: 6th lnt. Symposium, ISMIS '91, Proc., Charlotte, North Carolina, October 1991. 
Springer-Verlag. 
T Jaakkola, M.I. Jordan, and S.P. Singh. On the convergence of stochastic iterative dynamic 
programming algorithms. Neural Computation, 6(6), 1994. 
L.-J. Lin. Reinforcement Learning for Robots Using Neural Networks. PhD thesis, Computer 
Science Department, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1993. 
Shieu-Hong Lin. Exploiting Structure for Planning and Control. PhD thesis, Computer Science 
Department, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, 1997. 
A. McGovern, R. S. Sutton, and A. H. Fagg. Roles of macro-actions in accelerating reinforcement 
learning. In 1997 Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing, 1997. 
D. Precup and R. S. Sutton. Multi-time models for temporally abstract planning. In This Volume. 
S. P. Singh. Scaling reinforcement leaming algorithms by learning variable temporal resolution 
models. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Machine Learning, Aberdeen, 
July 1992. Morgan Kaufmann. 
S. P. Singh. Transfer of learning by composing solutions of elemental sequential tasks. Machine 
Learning, 8(3), May 1992. 
S. P. Singh, T. Jaakola, and M. I. Jordan. Reinforcement learning with soft state aggregation. In 
G. Tesauro, D. S. Touretzky, and T. K. Leen, editors, Neural Information Processing Systems 7, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1995. MIT Press. 
R. S. Sutton. Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. In Proc. of the Twelfth lnt. 
Conference on Machine Learning, Tahoe City, CA, July 1995. Morgan Kaufmann. 
