387 
Neural Net and Traditional Classifiers  
William Y. Huang and Richard P. Lippmann 
MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
Lexington, MA 02173, USA 
Abstract
Previous work on nets with continuous-valued inputs led to generative 
procedures to construct convex decision regions with two-layer percepttons (one hidden 
layer) and arbitrary decision regions with three-layer percepttons (two hidden layers). 
Here we demonstrate that two-layer perceptton classifiers trained with back propagation 
can form both convex and disjoint decision regions. Such classifiers are robust, train 
rapidly, and provide good performance with simple decision regions. When complex 
decision regions are required, however, convergence time can be excessively long and 
performance is often no better than that of k-nearest neighbor classifiers. Three neural 
net classifiers are presented that provide more rapid training under such situations. 
Two use fixed weights in the first one or two layers and are similar to classifiers that 
estimate probability density functions using histograms. A third "feature map classifier" 
uses both unsupervised and supervised training. It provides good performance with 
little supervised training in situations such as speech recognition where much unlabeled 
training data is available. The architecture of this classifier can be used to implement 
a neural net k-nearest neighbor classifier. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Neural net architectures can be used to construct many different types of classi- 
tiers [7]. In particular, multi-layer perceptron classifiers with continuous valued in- 
puts trained with back propagation are robust, often train rapidly, and provide perfor- 
mance similar to that provided by Gaussian classifiers when decision regions are convex 
[12,7,5,8]. Generative procedures demonstrate that such classifiers can form convex deci- 
sion regions with two-layer perceptrons (one hidden layer) and arbitrary decision regions 
with three-layer perceptrons (two hidden layers) [7,2,9]. More recent work has demon- 
strated that two-layer perceptrons can form non-convex and disjoint decision regions. 
Examples of hand crafted two-layer networks which generate such decision regions are 
presented in this paper along with Monte Carlo simulations where complex decision 
regions were generated using back propagation training. These and previous simula- 
tions [5,8] demonstrate that convergence time with back propagation can be excessive 
when complex decision regions are desired and performance is often no better than that 
obtained with k-nearest neighbor classifiers [4]. These results led us to explore other 
neural net classifiers that might provide faster convergence. Three classifiers called, 
"fixed weight," "hypercube," and "feature map" classifiers, were developed and eval- 
uated. All classifiers were tested on illustrative problems with two continuous-valued 
inputs and two classes (A and B). A more restricted set of classifiers was tested with 
vowel formant data. 
2. CAPABILITIES OF TWO LAYER PERCEPTRONS 
Multi-layer perceptron classifiers with hard-limiting nonlinearities (node outputs 
of 0 or 1) and continuous-valued inputs can form complex decision regions. Simple 
constructive proofs demonstrate that a three-layer perceptron (two hidden layers) can 
 This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Department 
of the Air Force. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the policy or position 
of the U.S. Government. 
American Institute of Physics 1988 
388 
b I b2 
Xl x 2 
DECISION REGION FOR CLASS A 
x I bl b2 
 b6 ........ 
-2 
I I 
I 
 I 
I 
o I 2 
3 4 
Xl 
FIG. 1. A two-layer perceptton that forms disjoint decision re9ions for class A (shaded areas). Connec- 
tion weights and node offsets are shown in the left. Hyperplanes formed by all hidden nodes are drawn 
as dashed lines with node labels. Arrows on these lines point to the half plane where the hidden node 
output is "high" 
form arbitrary decision regions and a two-layer perceptron (one hidden layer) can form 
single convex decision regions [7,2,9]. Recently, however, it has been demonstrated that 
two-layer perceptrons can form decision regions that are not simply convex [14]. Fig. 1, 
for example, shows how disjoint decision regions can be generated using a two-layer 
perceptron. The two disjoint shaded areas in this Fig. represent the decision region 
for class A (output node has a "high" output, y = 1). The remaining area represents 
the decision region for class B (output node has a "low" output, y = 0). Nodes in 
this Fig. contain hard-limiting nonlinearities. Connection weights and node offsets are 
indicated in the left diagram. Ten other complex decision regions formed using two-layer 
perceptrons are presented in Fig. 2. 
The above examples suggest that two-layer perceptrons can form decision regions 
with arbitrary shapes. We, however, know of no general proof of this capability. A 
1965 book by Nilson discusses this issue and contains a proof that two-layer nets can 
divide a finite number of points into two arbitrary sets ([10] page 89). This proof 
involves separating M points using at most M - 1 parallel hyperplanes formed by first- 
layer nodes where no hyperplane intersects two or more points. Proving that a given 
decision region can be formed in a two-layer net involves testing to determine whether 
the Boolean representations at the output of the first layer for all points within the 
decision region for class A are linearly separable from the Boolean representations for 
class B. One test for linear separability was presented in 1962 [13]. 
A problem with forming complex decision regions with two-layer percepttons is that 
weights and offsets must be adjusted carefully because they interact extensively to form 
decision regions. Fig. 1 illustrates this sensitivity problem. Here it can be seen that 
weights to one hidden node form a hyperplane which influences decision regions in 
an entire halLplane. For example, small errors in first layer weights that results in a 
change in the slopes of hyperplanes b$ and b6 might only slightly extend the A region 
but completely eliminate the A2 region. This interdependence can be eliminated in 
three layer perceptrons. 
It is possible to train two-layer percepttons to form complex decision regions using 
back propagation and sigmoidal nonlinearities despite weight interactions. Fig. 3, for 
example, shows disjoint decision regions formed using back propagation for the problem 
of Fig. 1. In this and all other simulations, inputs were presented alternately from 
classes A and B and selected from a uniform distribution covering the desired decision 
region. In addition, the back propagation rate of descent term, r/, was set equal to the 
momentum gain term, a and r/= a = .01. Small values for r/and a were necessary to 
guarantee convergence for the difficult problems in Fig. 2. Other simulation details are 
389 
I) ) s) ) I 
FIG. 2. Ten complex decision regions formed by two-layer perceptrons. The numbers assigned to each 
case are the acase"numbers used in the rest of this paper. 
as in [5,8]. Also shown in Fig. 3 are hyperplanes formed by those first-layer nodes with 
the strongest connection weights to the output node. These hyperplanes and weights 
are similar to those in the networks created by hand except for sign inversions, the 
occurrence of multiple similar hyperplanes formed by two nodes, and the use of node 
offsets with values near zero. 
3. COMPARATIVE RESULTS OF TwO-LAYERS VS. THREE-LAYERS 
Previous results [5,8], as well as the weight interactions mentioned above, suggest 
that three-layer percepttons may be able to form complex decision regions faster with 
back propagation than two-layer percepttons. This was explored using Monte Carlo 
simulations for the first nine cases of Fig. 2. All networks have 32 nodes in the first 
hidden layer. The number of nodes in the second hidden layer was twice the number 
of convex regions needed to form the decision region (2, 4, 6, 4, 6, 6, 8, 6 and 6 for 
Cases I through 9 respectively). Ten runs were typically averaged together to obtain 
a smooth curve of percentage error vs. time (number of training trials) and enough 
trials were run (to a limit of 250,000) until the curve appeared to fiatten out with little 
improvement over time. The error curve was then low-pass filtered to determine the 
convergence time. Convergence time was defined as the time when the curve crossed a 
value 5 percentage points above the final percentage error. This definition provides a 
framework for comparing the convergence time of the different classifiers. It, however, is 
not the time after which error rates do not improve. Fig. 4 summarizes results in terms 
of convergence time and final percentage error. In those cases with disjoint decision 
regions, back propagation sometimes failed to form separate regions after 250,000 trials. 
For example, the two disjoint regions required in Case 2 were never fully separated with 
390 
FIG. 3. Decision regions formed using back propagation for Cases  of Fig. . Thick solid lines represent 
decision boundaries. Dashed lines and arrows have the same meaning as in Fig. 1. Only hyperplanes 
for hidden nodes with large weights to the output node are shown. Over 300,000 training trials were 
required to form separate regions. 
a two-layer perceptron but were separated with a three-layer perceptron. This is noted 
by the use of filled symbols in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4 shows that there is no significant performance difference between two and 
three layer perceptrons when forming complex decision regions using back propagation 
training. Both types of classifiers take an excessively long time (> 100,000 trials) to 
form complex decision regions. A minor difference is that in Cases 2 and 7 the two-layer 
network failed to separate disjoint regions after 250,000 trials whereas the three-layer 
network was able to do so. This, however, is not significant in terms of convergence time 
and error rate. Problems that are difficult for the two-layer networks are also difficult 
for the three-layer networks, and vice versa. 
4. ALTERNATIVE CLASSIFIERS 
Results presented above and previous results [5,8] demonstrate that multi-layer per- 
ceptron classifiers can take very long to converge for complex decision regions. Three 
alternative classifiers were studied to determine whether other types of neural net clas- 
sifiers could provide faster convergence. 
4.1. FIXED WEIGHT CLASSIFIERS 
Fixed weight classifiers attempt to reduce training time by adapting only weights 
between upper layers of multi-layer perceptrons. Weights to the first layer are fixed 
before training and remain unchanged. These weights form fixed hyperplanes which 
can be used by upper layers to form decision regions. Performance will be good if the 
fixed hyperplanes are near the decision region boundaries that are required in a specific 
problem. Weights between upper layers are trained using back propagation as described 
above. Two methods were used to adjust weights to the first layer. Weights were 
adjusted to place hyperplanes randomly or in a grid in the region (-1 < x,x2 < 10). 
All decision regions in Fig. 2 fall within this region. Hyperplanes formed by first layer 
nodes for "fixed random" and "fixed grid" classifiers for Case 2 of Fig. 2 are shown as 
dashed lines in Fig. 5. Also shown in this Fig. are decision regions (shaded areas) formed 
391 
% 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
O 
I I I I i i I i 
[2] 2- layers ERROR KATE 
O 3- layers 
I I I J I I I J 
200000 I I I I I / I I I 
CONVERGENCE TIME 
1OOOOO 
50000 
0 I I I I I I I 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Case Numbers (see Fig. 2) 
Fro. 4. Perce.taae error (top) a.d co-oer9e.ce time (bottom) for Cases I throu9h 9 of Fi9.  for 
ttvo-and three.layer perceptton classifiers trained usin 9 back propa9ation, Filled syrabois indicate that 
separate disjoint re9ions tvere not formed after 50,000 trials. 
using back propagation to train only the upper network layers. These regions illustrate 
how fixed hyperplanes are combined to form decision regions. It can be seen that decision 
boundaries form along the available hyperplanes. A good solution is possible for the 
fixed grid classifier where desired decision region boundaries are near hyperplanes. The 
random grid classifier provides a poor solution because hyperplanes are not near desired 
decision boundaries. The performance of a fixed weight classifier depends both on the 
placement of hyperplanes and on the number of hyperplanes provided. 
4.2. HYPERCUBE CLASSIFIER 
Many traditional cidsifters estimate probability density functions of input variables 
for different classes using histogram techniques [4]. Hypercube cidsifters use this tech- 
nique by fixing weights in the first two layers to break the input space into hypercubes 
(squares in the case of two inputs). Hypercube classifiers are similar to fixed weight 
classifiers, except weights to the first two layers are fixed, and only weights to output 
nodes are trained. Hypercube classifiers are also similar in structure to the CMAC 
model described by Albus [1]. The output of a second layer node is "high" only if the 
input is in the hypercube corresponding to that node. This is illustrated in Fig. 6 for a 
network with two inputs. 
The top layer of a hypercube classifier can be trained using back propagation. A 
maximum likelihood approach, however, suggests a simpler training algorithm which 
consists of counting. The output of second layer node Hi is connected to the output 
node corresponding to that class with greatest frequency of occurrence of training inputs 
in hypercube Hi. That is, if a sample falls in hypercube Hi, then it is classified as class 
O* where 
Ni,o. > Ni,o for all 0  0'. (1) 
In this equation, Ni,o is the number of training tokens in hypercube Hi which belong to 
class O. This will be called maximum likelihood (ML) training. It can be implemented 
by connection second-layer node Hi only to that output node corresponding to class O* 
in Eq. (1). In all simulations hypercubes covered the area (-1 < x, x2 < 10). 
392 
RANDOM 
k r_, ,..W - 4',,;-,- 
/; /l. C'( /it %. 
J ; /  ', b t :' 
,,,.,., ,,? . 
oP,',"' '"  
0 I 2 3 
GRID 
0 1 2 3 4 
Fla. 5. Decision regions formed with 'xed random" and 'xed grid" classifiers for Case $ from Fig. 
$ using back propagation training. Lines shown are hIperplanes formed by the first layer nodes. Shaded 
areas represent the decision region for class A. 
A 
I B -1 H2' 1.6 H 
TRAINED 
LAYER 
FIXED 
LAYERS 
FOUR BINS CREATED 
BY FIXED LAYERS 
x 2 
3 
2 
1 
b3 
 jb6 
m j bE 
2 3 
xl x2 
INPUT 
FIG. 6. A hlpercube classifier (left) is a three-lager perceptton with fixed weights to the first two layers, 
and trainable weights to output nodes. Weights are initialized such that outputs of nodes Hi through H4 
(left) are "high" onil when the input is in the corresponding hIpercube (right). 
393 
SELECT 
CLASS 
WITH MAJORITY 
IN TOP k 
SELECT TOP 
k EXEMPLARS 
CALCULATE 
CORRELATION 
TO STORED 
EXEMPLARS 
OUTPUT (Only One High) 
Yl 
INPUT 
SUPERVISED 
ASSOCIATIVE 
LEARNING 
UNSUPERVISED 
KOHONEN 
FEATURE MAP 
LEARNING 
x N 
FIG. 7. Feature map classifier. 
4.3. FEATURE MAP CLASSIFIER 
In many speech and image classification problems a large quantity of unlabeled 
training data can be obtained, but little labeled data is available. In such situations 
unsupervised training with unlabeled training data can substantially reduce the amount 
of supervised training required [3]. The feature map classifier shown in Fig. 7 uses com- 
bined supervised/unsupervised training, and is designed for such problems. It is similar 
to histogram classifiers used in discrete observation hidden Markov models [11] and the 
classifier used in [6]. The first layer of this classifier forms a feature map using a self 
organizing clustering algorithm described by Kohonen [6]. In all simulations reported in 
this paper 10,000 trials of unsupervised training were used. After unsupervised train- 
ing, first-layer feature nodes sample the input space with node density proportional to 
the combined probability density of all classes. First layer feature map nodes perform a 
function similar to that of second layer hypercube nodes except each node has maximum 
output for input regions that are more general than hypercubes and only the output of 
the node with a maximum output is fed to the output nodes. Weights to output nodes 
are trained with supervision after the first layer has been trained. Back propag.tion, or 
maximum likelihood training can be used. Maximum likelihood training reqmres Ni,e 
(Eq. 1) to be the number of times first layer node i has maximum output for inputs 
from class 0. In addition, during classification, the outputs of nodes with Ni,e = 0 for 
all 0 (untrained nodes) are not considered when the first-layer node with the maximum 
output is selected. The network architecture of a feature map classifier can be used 
to implement a k-nearest neighbor classifier. In this case, the feedback connections in 
Fig. 7 (large circular summing nodes and triangular integrators) used to select those 
k nodes with the maximum outputs must be slightly modified. K is I for a feature 
map classifier and must be adjusted to the desired value of k for a k-nearest neighbor 
classifier. 
5. COMPARISON BETWEEN CLASSIFIERS 
The results of Monte Carlo simulations using all classifiers for Case 2 are shown in 
Fig. 8. Error rates and convergence times were determined as in Section 3. All alter- 
394 
12 
0 
Trials 
25OO 
2O00 
1500 
1000 
5OO 
0 
Conventional 
I 
GAUSS 
KNN 
Back-Prop 
3- lay 
Percent Correct 
Flxed Welght 
I 
I 
Hypercube 
! ! 
Feature Map 
I I 
! I 
I 
2-lay 
i I I 
KNN GAUSS 32 
Convergence Time 
' ndom 
64K 
3-lay ra 
grid 
I I I I 
36 40 120 440 1680 
Number of Hidden Nodes 
I I 
I I I 
B/4.51 
100 1600 
FIG. 8. Comparative performance of classifiers for Case œ. Trainin 9 time of the feature map classifiers 
does not include the 10,000 unsupervised trainin9 trials. 
native classifiers had shorter convergence times than multi-layer perceptron classifiers 
trained with back propagation. The feature map classifier provided best performance. 
With 1,600 nodes, its error rate was similar to that of the k-nearest neighbor classifiers 
but it required fewer than 100 supervised training tokens. The larger fixed weight and 
hypercube classifiers performed well but required more supervised training than the 
feature map classifiers. These classifiers will work well when the combined probability 
density function of all classes varies smoothly and the domain where this function is 
non-zero is known. In this case weights and offsets can be set such that hyperplanes and 
hypercubes cover the domain and provide good performance. The feature map classifier 
automatically covers the domain. Fixed weight "random" classifiers performed substan- 
tially worse than fixed weight "grid" classifiers. Back propagation training (BP) was 
generally much slower than maximum likelihood training (ML). 
6. VOWEL CLASSIFICATION 
Multi layer perceptron, feature map, and traditional classifiers were tested with 
vowel formant data from Peterson and Barney [11]. These data had been obtained 
by spectrographic analysis of vowels in /hVd/ context spoken by 67 men, women and 
children. First and second formant data of ten vowels was split into two sets, resulting 
in a total of 338 training tokens and 333 testing tokens. Fig. 9 shows the test data 
and the decision regions formed by a two-layer perceptton classifier trained with back 
propagation. The performance of classifiers is presented in Table I. All classifiers had 
similar error rates. The feature map classifier with only 100 nodes required less than 50 
supervised training tokens (5 samples per vowel class) for convergence. The perceptton 
classifier trained with back propagation required more than 50,000 training tokens. The 
first stage of the feature map classifier and the multi-layer perceptton classifier were 
trained by randomly selecting entries from the 338 training tokens after labels had been 
removed and using tokens repetitively. 
395 
4OOO 
2000 
F () 
lOOC 
5oo 
o head 
ß hid 
ß hod 
 had 
o hawed 
ß heard 
o heed 
 hud 
) who'd 
^ hood 
FIG. 9. Decision regions formed by a two-layer network usin9 BP after œ00,000 trainin9 tokens from 
Petersoh's steady state vowel data [Peterson, 195œ]. Also shown are samples of the testin9 set. Le9end 
show example of the pronunciation of the 10 vowels and the error within each vowel. 
ALGORITHM TRAINING TOKENS-'[ % ERROR 
KNN :338 18.0 
Gaussian " 338 " 20.4 
2-L.ayer Pe..r'eptron ,,, 50,000 19.8 
Feature. Map < 50 ..... 22.8 
TABLE I 
Performance of classifiers on steady state vowel data. 
396 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
Neural net architectures form a flexible framework that can be used to construct 
many different types of classifiers. These include Gaussian, k-nearest neighbor, and 
multi-layer perceptton classifiers as well as classifiers such as the feature map classifier 
which use unsupervised training. Here we first demonstrated that two-layer percepttons 
(one hidden layer) can form non-convex and disjoint decision regions. Back propagation 
training, however, can be extremely slow when forming complex decision regions with 
multi-layer perceptrons. Alternative classifiers were thus developed and tested. All 
provided faster training and many provided improved performance. Two were similar to 
traditional classifiers. One (hypercube classifier) can be used to implement a histogram 
classifier, and another (feature map classifier) can be used to implement a k-nearest 
neighbor classifier. The feature map classifier provided best overall performance. It 
used combined supervised/unsupervised training and attained the same error rate as a 
k-nearest neighbor classifier, but with fewer supervised training tokens. Furthermore, 
it required fewer nodes then a k-nearest neighbor classifier. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. 
[2] D. 
[3] v. 
S. Albus, Brains, Behavior, and Robotics. McGraw-Hill, Petersborough, N.H., 1981. 
J. Burr, "A neural network digit recognizer," in Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, IEEE, 1986. 
B. Cooper and J. H. Freeman, "On the asymptotic improvement in the outcome of supervised 
learning provided by aAditional nonsupervised learning," IEEE Transactions on Computers, 
vol. C-19, pp. 1055-63, November 1970. 
[4] R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis. John-Wiley & Sons, New 
York, 1973. 
[5] W.Y. Huang and R. P. Lippmann, "Comparisons between conventional and neural net classifiers," 
in 1st International Conference on Neural Network, IEEE, June 1987. 
[6] T. 
Kohonen, K. Makisara, and T. Saramaki, "Phonotopic maps -- insightful representation of 
phonological features for speech recognition," in Proceedings of the 7th International Confer- 
ence on Pattern Recognition, IEEE, August 1984. 
[7] R. P. Lippmann, "An introduction to computing with neural nets," IEEE ASSP Magazine, vol. 4, 
pp. 4-22, April 1987. 
[8] R. P. Lippmann and B. Gold, "Neural classifiers useful for speech recognition," in 1st International 
Conference on Neural Network, IEEE, June 1987. 
[g] I.D. Longstaff and J. F. Cross, "A pattern recognition approach to understanding the multi-layer 
perceptton," Mem. 3936, Royal Signals and Radar Establishment, July 1986. 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] r. 
[131 R. 
[14] A. 
N.J. Nilsson, Learning Machines. McGraw Hill, N.Y., 1965. 
T. Paxsons, Voice and Speech Processing. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986. 
Rosenblurt, Percepttons and the Theory of Brain Mechanisms. Spartan Books, 1962. 
C. Singleton, "A test for linear separability as applied to self-organizing machines," in Self- 
Organization Systems, 196œ, (M. C. Yovits, G. T. Jacobi, and G. D. Goldstein, eds.), pp. 503- 
524, Spartan Books, Washington, 1962. 
Wieland and R. Leighton, "Geometric analysis of neural network capabilities," in Ist Interna- 
tional Conference on Neural Networks, IEEE, June 1987. 
