544 
MURPHY: A Pobot that Learns by Doing 
Bartlett W. Mel 
Center for Complex Systems Research 
University of Illinois 
508 South Sixth Street 
Champaign, IL 61820 
January 2, 1988 
Abstract 
MURPHY consists of a camera looking at a robot arm, with a connectionist network 
architecture situated in between. By moving its arm through a small, representative 
sample of the 1 billion possible joint configurations, MURPHY learns the relationships, 
backwards and forwards, between the positions of its joints and the state of its visual field. 
MURPHY can use its internal model in the forward direction to "envision" sequences 
of actions for planning purposes, such as in grabbing a visually presented object, or in 
the reverse direction to 'qmitate", with its arm, autonomous activity in its visual field. 
Furthermore, by taking explicit advantage of continuity in the mappings between visual 
space and joint space, MURPHY is able to learn non-linear mappings with only a single 
layer of modifiable weights. 
Background 
Current Focus Of Learning Research 
Most connectionist learning algorithms may be grouped into three general catagories, 
commonly referred to as supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. Supervised 
learning requires the explicit participation of an intelligent teacher, usually to provide the 
learning system with task-relevant input-output pairs (for two recent examples, see [1,2]). 
Unsupervised learning, exemplified by "clustering" algorithms, are generally concerned 
with detecting structure in a stream of input patterns [3,4,5,6,7]. In its final state, an 
unsupervised learning system will typically represent the discovered structure as a set of 
categories representing regions of the input space, or, more generally, as a mapping from 
the input space into a space of lower dimension that is somehow better suited to the task at 
hand. In reinforcement learning, a "critic" rewards or penalizes the learning system, until 
the system ultimately produces the correct output in response to a given input pattern 
[8]. 
It has seemed an inevitable tradeoff that systems needing to rapidly learn specific, 
behaviorally useful input-output mappings must necessarily do so under the auspices of 
an intelligent teacher with a ready supply of task-relevant training examples. This state of 
affairs has seemed somewhat paradoxical, since the processes of gerceptual and cognitive 
development in human infants, for example, do not depend on the moment by moment 
intervention of a teacher of any sort. 
Learning by Doing 
The current work has been focused on a fourth type of learning algorithm, i.e. learning-b.y- 
doing, an approach that has been very little studied from either a connectionist perspective 
American Institute of Physics 1988 
545 
or in the context of more traditional work in machine learning. In its basic form, the 
learning agent 
begins with a repertoire of actions and some form of perceptual input, 
exercises its repertoire of actions, learning to predict i) the detailed sensory conse- 
quences of its actions, and, in the other direction, it) its actions that are associated 
with incoming sensory patterns, and 
runs its internal model (in one or both directions) in a variety of behaviorally-relevant 
tasks, e.g. to "envision" sequences of actions for planning purposes, or to internally 
"imitate", via its internal action representation, an autonomously generated pattern 
of perceptual activity. 
In comparison to standard supervised learning algorithms, the crucial property of 
learning-by-doing is that no intelligent teacher is needed to provide inpl-otpt pairs 
for learning. Laws of physics simply translate actions into their resulting percepts, both 
of which are represented internally. The learning agent need only notice and record this 
relationship for later use. In contrast to traditional unsupervised learning approaches, 
learning-by-doing allows the acquisition of specific, task-relevant mappings, such as the 
relationship between a simultaneously represented visual and joint state. Learning-by- 
doing differs as well from reinforcement paradigms in that it can operate in the absence of 
a critic, i.e. in situations where reward or penalty for a particular training instance may 
be inappropriate. 
Learning by doing may therefore by described as an ansapervised associative algorithm, 
capable of acquiring rich, task-relevant associations, but without an intelligent teacher or 
critic. 
Abridged History of the Approach 
The general concept of leaning by doing may be attributed at least to Piaget from the 
1940's (see [9] for review). Piaget, the founder of the "constructivist" school of cognitive 
development, argued that knowledge is not given to a child as a passive observer, but 
is rather discovered and constructed by the child, through active manipulation of the 
environment. A handful of workers in artificial intelligence have addressed the issue of 
learning-by-doing, though only in highly schematized, simulated domains, where actions 
and sensory states are represented as logical predicates [10,11,12,13]. 
Barto & Sutton [14] discuss learning-by-doing in the context of system identification 
and motor control. They demonstrated how a simple simulated automaton with two ac- 
tions and three sensory states can build a model of its environment through exploration, 
and subsequently use it to choose among behavioral alternatives. In a similar vein, Rumel- 
hart [15] has suggested this same approach could be used to learn the behavior of a robot 
arm or a set of speech articulators. Furthermore, the forward-going "mental model", once 
learned, could be used internally to train an inverse model using back-propagation. 
In previous work, this author [16] described a connectionist model (VIPS) that learned 
to perform 3-D visual transformations on simulated wire-frame objects. Since in complex 
sensory-motor environments it is not possible, in general, to learn a direct relationship 
between an outgoing command state and an incoming sensory state, VIPS was designed 
to predict changes in the state of its visual field as a function of its outgoing motor com- 
mand. VIPS could then use its generic knowledge of motor-driven visual transformations 
to "mentally rotate" objects through a series of steps. 
546 
Rednomp/c Value-Coded 
Visua/Repmmtafi(m $oim Repre. senmi(m 
Figure 1: MURPHY's Connectionist Architecture. 4096 coarsely-tuned visual 
units are organized in a square, retinotopic grid. These units are bi-directionlly 
interconnected with a population of 273 joint units. The joint population is subdi- 
vided into 3 subpopulations, each one a vaJue-coded representation of joint angle 
for one of the three joints. During training, activity in the joint unit population 
determines the physica arm configuration. 
Inside MURPY 
The current work has sought to further explore the process of learning-by-doing in a 
complex sensory-motor domain, extending previous work in three ways. First, the learning 
of mappings between sensory and command (e.g. motor) representations should be allowed 
to proceed in both directions simultaneousll during exploratory behavior, where each 
mapping may ultimately subserve a very different behavioral goal. Secondly, MURPHY 
has been implemented with a real camera and robot arm in order to insure representational 
realism to the greatest degree possible. Third, while the specifics of MURPHY's internal 
structures are not intended as a model of a specific neural system, a serious attempt has 
been made to adhere to architectural components and operations that have either been 
directly suggested by nervous system structures, or are at least compatible with what is 
currently known. Detailed biological justification on this point awaits further work. 
MURPHY's Body 
MURPHY consists of a 512 x 512 JVC color video camera pointed at a Rhino XR-3 robotic 
arm. Only the shoulder, elbow, and wrist joints are used, such that the arm can move 
only in the image plane of the camera. (A fourth, waist joint is not used). White spots are 
stuck to the arm in convenient places; when the image is thresholded, only the white spots 
appear in the image. This arrangement allows continuous control over the complexity of 
the visual image of the arm, which in turn affects time spent both in computing visual 
features and processing weights during learning. A Datacube image processing system is 
used for the thresholding operation and to "blur" the image in real time with a gaussian 
mask. The degree of blur is variable and can be used to control the degree of coarse-coding 
(i.e. receptive field overlap) in the camera-topic array of visual units. The arm is software 
controllable, with a stepper motor for each joint. Arm dynamics are not considered in this 
work. 
547 
MURPHY's Mind 
MURPHY is currently based on two interconnected populations of neuron-like units. The 
first is organized as a rectangular, visuotopically-mapped 64 x 64 grid of coarsely-tuned 
visual units that each responds when a visual feature (such as a white spot on the arm) 
falls into its receptive field (fig. 1). Coarse coding insures that a single visual feature will 
activate a small population of units whose receptive fields overlap the center of stimulation. 
The upper trace in figure 2 shows the unprocessed camera view, and the center trace depicts 
the resulting pattern of activation over the grid of visual units. 
The second population of 273 units consists of three subpopulations, representing the 
angles of each of the three joints. The angle of each joint is value-coded in a line of 
units dedicated to that joint (fig. 1). Each unit in the population is "centered" at a 
some joint angle, and is maximally activated when the joint is to be sent to that angle. 
Neighboring joint units within a joint subpopulation have overlapping "projective fields" 
and progressively increasing joint-angle centers. 
It may be noticed that both populations of units are coarsely tuned, that is, the units 
have overlapping receptive fields whose centers vary in an orderly fashion from unit to 
neighboring unit. This style of representation is extremely common in biological sensory 
systems [17,18,19], and has been attributed a number of representational advantages (e.g. 
fewer units needed to encode range of stimuli, increased immunity to noise and unit mal- 
function, and finer stimulus discriminations). A number of additional advantages of this 
type of encoding scheme are discussed in section , in relation to ease of learning, speed of 
learning, and efficacy of generalization. 
MURPHY's Education 
By moving its arm through a small, representative sample (approximately 4000) of the 
I billion possible joint configurations, MURPHY learns the relationships, backwards and 
forwards, between the positions of its joints and the state of its visual field. During train- 
ing, the physical environment to which MURPHY's visual and joint representations are 
wired enforces a particular mapping between the states of these two representations. The 
mapping comprises both the kinematics of the arm as well as the optical parameters and 
global geometry of the camera/imaging system. It is incrementally learned as each unit in 
population B comes to "recognize", through a process of weight modification, the states of 
population A in which it has been strongly activated. After sufficient training experience 
therefore, the state of population A is sufficient to generate a "mental image" on popula- 
tion B, that is, to predictively activate the units in B via the weighted interconnections 
developed during training. 
In its current configuration, MURPHY steps through its entire joint space in around 
i hour, developing a total of approximately 500,000 weights between the two populations. 
The Learning Rule 
Tradeoffs in Learning and Representation 
It is well known in the folklore of connectionist network design that a tradeoff exists 
between the choice of representation (i.e. the "semantics") at the single unit level and the 
consequent ease or difficulty of learning within that representational scheme. 
At one extreme, the single-unit representation might be completely decoded, calling for 
a separate unit for each possible input pattern. While this scheme requires a combinato- 
rially explosive number of units, and the system must "see" every possible input pattern 
during training, the actual weight modification rule is rendered very simple. At another 
extreme, the single unit representation might be chosen in a highly encoded fashion with 
complex interactions among input units. In this case, the activation of an output unit 
548 
may be a highly non-linear or discontinuous function of the input pattern, and must be 
learned and represented in multiple layers of weights. 
Research in connectionism has often focused on Boolean functions [20,21,1,22,23], typ- 
ified by the encoder problem [20], the shifter problem [21] and n-bit parity [22]. Since 
Boolean functions are in general discontinuous, such that two input patterns that are close 
in the sense of Hamming distance do not in general result in similar outputs, much effort 
has been directed toward the development of sophisticated, multilayer weight-modification 
rules (e.g. back-propagation) capable of learning arbitrary discontinuous functions. The 
complexity of such learning procedures has raised troubling questions of scaling behavior 
and biological plausibility. 
The assumption of continuity in the mappings to be learned, however, can act to 
significationly simplify the learning problem while still allowing for full generalization to 
novel input patterns. Thus, by relying on the continuity assumption, MURPHY's is able 
to learn continuous non-linear functions using a weight modification procedure that is 
simple, locally computable, and confined to a single layer of modifiable weights. 
How MURPHY learns 
For sake of concrete illustration, MURPHY's representation and learning scheme will be 
described in terms of the mapping learned from joint units to visual units during training. 
The output activity of a given visual unit may be described as a function over the 3- 
dimensional joint space, whose shape is determined by the kinematics of the arm, the 
location of visual features (i.e. white spots) on the arm, the global properties of the 
camera/imaging system, and the location of the visual unit's receptive field. In order for 
the function to be learned, a visual unit must learn to "recognize" the regions of joint 
space in which it has been visually activated during training. In effect, each visual unit 
learns to recognize the global arm configurations that happen to put a white spot in its 
receptive field. 
It may be recalled that MURPHY's joint unit population is value-coded by dimension, 
such that each unit is centered on a range of joint angles (overlapping with neighboring 
units) for one of the 3 joints. In this representation, a global arm configuration can 
be represented as the conjunctive activity of the k (where k = 3) most active joint units. 
MURPHY's visual units can therefore learn to recognize the regions of joint space in which 
they are strongly activated by simply 'Tnemorizing" the relevant global joint configurations 
as conjunctive clusters of input connections from the value-coded joint unit population. 
To realize this conjunctive learning scheme, MURPHY's uses sigma-pt units (see [24]), 
as described below. At training step S, the set of k most active joint units are first 
identified. Some subset of visual units is also strongly activated in state S, each one 
signalling the presence of a visual feature (such as a white spot) in its receptive fields. 
At the input to each active visual unit, connections from the k most highly active joint 
units are formed as a multiplicative k-tuple of synaptic weights. The weights wi on these 
connections are initially chosen to be of unit strength. The output cj of a given synaptic 
conjunction is computed by multiplying the k joint unit activation values xl together with 
their weights: 
Cj -- --I Wi2i. 
i 
The output y of the entire unit is computed as a weighted sum of the outputs of each 
conjunction and then applying a sigmoidal nonlinearity: 
Sigma-pt units of this kind may be thought of as a generalization of a logical disjunction of 
conjunctions (OR of AND's). The multiplicative nature of the conjunctive clusters insures 
549 
that every input to the conjunct is active in order for the conjunct to have an effect on 
the unit as a whole. If only a single input to a conjunct is inactive, the effect of the 
conjunction is nullified. 
Specific-Instance Learning in Continuous Domains 
MURPHY's learning scheme is directly reminiscent of specific-instance learning as dis- 
cussed by Hampson & Volper [23] in their excellent review of Boolean learning and repre- 
senrational schemes. Specific-instance learning requires that each unit simply 'nemorize" 
all relevant input states, i.e. those states in which the unit is intended to fire. Unfor- 
tunately, simple specific-instance learning allows for no generalization to novel inputs, 
implying that each desired system responses will have to have been explicitly seen dur- 
ing training. Such a state of affairs is clearly impractical in natural learning contexts. 
Hampson & Volper [23] have further shown that random Boolean functions will require 
an exponential number of weights in this scheme. 
For continous functions on the other hand, two kinds of generalization are possible 
within this type of specific-instance learning scheme. We consider each in turn, once again 
from the perspective of MURPHY's visual units learning to recognize the regions in joint 
space in which they are activated. 
Generalization by Coarse-Coding 
When a visual unit is activated in a given joint configuration, and acquires an appropriate 
conjunct of weights from the set of highly active units in the joint population, by conti- 
nuity the unit may assume that it should be at least partially activated in nearby joint 
configurations as well. Since MURPHY's joint units are coarse-coded in joint angle, this 
will happen automatically: as the joints are moved a small distance away from the specific 
training configuration, the output of the conjunct encoding that training configuration 
will decay smoothly from its maximum. Thus, a visual unit can "fire" predictively in joint 
configurations that it has never specifically seen during training, by interpolating among 
conjuncts that encode nearby joint configurations. 
This scheme suggests that training must be sufficiently dense in joint space to have 
seen configurations 'Rearby" to all points in the space by some criterion. In practice, the 
training step size is related to the degree of coarse-coding in the joint population, which is 
chosen in turn such that a joint pertubation equal to the radius of a joint unit's projective 
field (i.e. the range of joint angles over which the unit is active) should on average push 
a feature in the visual field a distance of about one visual receptive field radius. As a rule 
of thumb, the visual receptive field radius is chosen small enough so as to contain only a 
single feature on average. 
Generalization by Extrapolation 
The second type of generalization is based on a heuristic principle, again illustrated in 
terms of learning in the visual population. If a visual unit has during training been 
very often activated over a large, easy-to-specify region of joint space, such as a hyper- 
rectangular region, then it may be assumed that the unit is activated over the entire region 
of joint space, i.e. even at points not yet seen. At the synaptic level, "large regions" can be 
represented as conjuncts with fewer terms. In its simplest form, this kind of generalization 
amounts to simply throwing out one or more joints as irrelevant to the activation of a 
given visual unit. What synaptic mechanism can achieve this effect? Competition among 
joint unit afferents can be used to drive irrelevant variables from the sigma-pi conjuncts. 
Thus, if a visual unit is activated repeatedly during training, and the elbow and shoulder 
angle units are constantly active while the most active wrist unit varies from step to step, 
then the weighted connections from the repeatedly activated elbow and shoulder units 
55O 
Figure 2: Three Visual Traces. The top trace shows the unprocessed camera view 
of MURPHY's arm. White spots have been stuck to the arm at various places, such 
that a thresholded image contains only the white spots. This aJlows continuous 
control over the visual complexity of the image. The center trace represents the 
resulting pattern of activation over the 64 x 64 grid of coarsely-tuned visual units. 
The bottom trace depicts an internally-produced "mental" image of the arm in the 
same configuration as driven by weighted connections from the joint population. 
Note that the "mentaJ" trace is a sloppy, but highly recognizable approximation 
to the camera-driven trace. 
will become progressively and mutually reinforced at the expense of the set of wrist unit 
connections, each of which was only activated a single time. 
This form of generalization is similar in function to a number of "covering" algorithms 
designed to discover optimal hyper-rectangular decompositions (with possible overlap) of 
a set of points in a multi-dimensional space (e.g. [25,26]). The competitive feature has 
not yet been implemented explicitly at the synaptic level, rather, the full set of conjuncts 
acquired during training are currently collapsed en masse into a more compact set of con- 
juncts, according to the above heuristics. In a typical run, MURPHY is able to eliminate 
between 30% and 70% of its conjuncts in this way. 
What MURPHY Does 
Grabbing A Visually Presented Target 
Once MURPHY has learned to image its arm in an arbitrary joint configuration, it can 
use heuristic search to guide its arm "mentally" to a visually specified goal. Figure 3(a) 
depicts a hand trajectory from an initial position to the location of a visually presented 
target. Each step in the trajectory represents the position of the hand (large blob) at an 
intermediate joint configuration. MURPHY can visually evaluate the remaining distance 
to the goal at each position and use best-first search to reduce the distance. Once a 
complete trajectory has been found, MURPHY can move its arm to the goal in a single 
physical step, dispensing with all backtracking dead-ends, and other wasted operations (fig. 
3(b)). It would also be possible to use the inverse model, i.e. the map from a desired visual 
into an internal joint image, to send the arm directly to its final position. Unfortunately, 
MURPHY has no means in its current early state of development to generate a full-blown 
551 
l,qIY*5 4mta]. TraJ:tory 
Figure 3: Grabbing an Object. (a) Irregular trajectory represents sequence of 
"mental" steps taken by MURPHY in attempting to "grab" a visually-presented 
target (shown in (b) as white cross). Mental image depicts MURPHY's arm in its 
final goM configuration, i.e. with hand on top of object. Coarse-coded joint activity 
is shown at right. (b) Having mentally searched and found the target through a 
series of steps, MURPHY moves its arm physically in a single step to the target, 
discarding the intermediate states of the trajectory that are not relevant in this 
simple problem. 
visual image of its arm in one of the final goal positions, of which there are many possible. 
Sending the tip of a robot arm to a given point in space is a classic task in robotics. 
The traditional approach involves first writing explicit kinematic equations for the arm 
based on the specific geometric details of the given arm. These equations take joint angles 
as inputs and produce manipulator coordinates as outputs. In general, however, it is 
most often useful to specify the coordinates of the manipulator tip (i.e. its desired final 
position), and compute the joint angles necessary to achieve this goal. This involves the 
solution of the kinematic equations to generate an inverse kinematic model. Deriving such 
expressions has been called "the most difficult problem we will encounter" in vision-based 
robotics [27]. For this reason, it is highly desirable for a mobile agent to learn a model 
of its sensory-motor environment from scratch, in a way that depends little or not at all 
on the specific parameters of the motor apparatus, the sensory apparatus, or their mutual 
interactions. It is interesting to note that in this reaching task, MURPHY appears from 
the outside to be driven by an inverse kinematic model of its arm, since its first official 
act after training is to reach directly for a visually-presented object. 
While it is clear that best-first search is a weak method whose utility is limited in com- 
plex problem solving domains, it may be speculated that given the ability to rapidly image 
arm configurations, combined with a set of simple visual heuristics and various mechanism 
for escaping local minima (e.g. send the arm home), a number of more interesting visual 
planning problems may be within MURPHY's grasp, such as grabbing an object in the 
presence of obstacles. Indeed, for problems that are either difficult to invert, or for which 
the goal state is not fully known a priori, the technique of iterating a forward-going model 
has a long history (e.g. Newton's Method). 
552 
Imitating Autonomous Arm Activity 
A particularly interesting feature of 'qearning-by-doing" is that for every pair of unit 
populations present in the learning system, a mapping can be learned between them both 
backwards and forwards. Each such mapping may enable a unique and interesting kind of 
behavior. In MURPHY's case, we have seen that the mapping from a joint state to a visual 
image is useful for planning arm trajectories. The reverse mapping from a visual state to 
a joint image has an altogether different use, i.e. that of "imitation". Thus, if MURPHY's 
arm is moved passively, the model can be used to 'qollow" the motion with an internal 
command (i.e. joint) trace. Or, ff a substitute arm is positioned in MURPHY's visual 
field, MURPHY can "assume the position", i.e. imitate the model arm configuration by 
mapping the afferent visual state into a joint image, and using the joint image to move the 
arm. As of this writing, the implementation of this behavior is still somewhat unreliable. 
Discussion and Future Work 
In short, this work has been concerned with learning-by-doing in the domain of vision- 
based robotics. A number of features differentiate MURPHY from most other learning 
systems, and from other approaches to vision-based robotics: 
No intelligent teacher is needed to provide input-ouput pairs. MURPHY learns by 
exercising its repertoire of actions and learning the relationship between these actions 
and the sensory images that result. 
Mappings between populations of units, regardless of modality, can be learned in 
both directions simultaneously during exploratory behavior. Each mapping learned 
can support a distinct class of behaviorally useful functions. 
ß MURPHY uses its internal models to first solve problems "mentally". Plans can 
therefore be developed and refined before they are actually executed. 
By taking explicit advantage of continuity in the mappings between visual and joint 
spaces, and by using a variant of specific-instance learning in such a way as to allow 
generalization to novel inputs, MURHPY can learn "difficult" non-linear mappings 
with only a single layer of modifiable weights. 
Two future steps in this endeavor are as follows: 
Provide MURPHY with direction-selective visual and joint units both, so that it 
may learn to predict relationships between rates of change in the visual and joint 
domains. In this way, MURPHY can learn how to perturb its joints in order to send 
its hand in a particular direction, greatly reducing the current need to search for 
hand trajectories. 
Challenge MURPHY to grab actual objects, possibly in the presence of obstacles, 
where path of approach is crucial. The ability to readily envision intermediate arm 
configurations will become critical for such tasks. 
Acknowledgements 
Particular thanks are due to Stephen Omohundro for his unrelenting scientific and moral 
support, and for suggesting vision and robotic kinematics as ideal domains for experimen- 
tation. 
553 
References 
[1] T.J. Sejnowski & C.R. Rosenberg, Complex Systems, 1, 145, (1969). 
[2] G.J. Tesauro & T.J. Sejnowskl. A parallel network that learns to play backgammon. Submitted for 
publication. 
[3] S. Grossberg, Biol. Cybern., 3, 187, (1976). 
[4] T. Kohonen, Self organization and associative memory., (Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1984). 
[5] D.E. Rumelkart & D. Zlpser. In Parallel distrlbted processing: explorations in the mlcrostrctre 
of cognition, vol. 1, D.E. Rumelhart, J.L. McClelland, Eds., (Bradford: Cambridge, MA, 1986), p. 
151. 
[6] R. Linsker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 83, 8779, (1986). 
[7] G.E. Hinton & J.L. McClelland. Learning representations by recirculation. Oral presentation, IEEE 
conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Denver, 1987. 
[8] A.G. Barto, R.S. Sutton, & C.W. Anderson, IEEE Trans. on Sys., Man, Cybern., smc-13, 834, (1983). 
[9] H. Ginsburg & S. Opper, Piaget's theory of intellectual development., (Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
199). 
[10] J.D. Becker. In Computer models for thought and language., R. Schank & K.M. Colby, Eds., (Free- 
man, San Francisco, 1973). 
[11] R.L. RJvest & R.]. Schaplre. In Proc. of the 4th int. workshop on machine learning, 364-375, (1987). 
[12] J.G. Carbonell & Y. Gi1. In Proc. of the 4th int. workshop on machine learning, 256-266, (1987). 
[13] K. Chen, Tech Report, Dept. of Computer Sdence, University of Illinois, 1987. 
[14] A.G. Barto & R.S. Sutton, AFWAL-TR-81-1070, Avionics Laboratory, Air Force Wright Aeronautical 
Laboratories, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433, 1981. 
[15] D.E. Rumelhart, "On learning to do what you want". Talk given at CMU Connectionist Summer 
School, 1986a. 
[16] B.W. Mel In Pmc. of 8th Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Soc., 562-571, (1986). 
[17] D.H. B,!l,rd, G.E. Hinton, & T.J Sejnowskl, Nature, 306, 21, (1983). 
[18] R.P. Erikson, American Scientist, May-June 1984, p. 233. 
[19] G.E. Hinton, J.L. McClelland, & D.E. Rumelhart. In Parallel distributed processing: explorations 
in the mlcrostr*cture of cognition, vol. 1, D.E. Rumelhart, J.L. McClelland, Eds., (Bradford, Cam- 
bridge, 1986), p. 77. 
[20] D.H. Acldey, G.E. Hinton, & T.J. Sejnowskl, Cognitive Science, 9, 147, (1985). 
[21] G.E. Hinton & T.J. Sejnowski. In Parallel dlstrlbted processing: explorations in the microstrctrc 
of cognition, vol. 1, D.E. Rumelhart, J.L. McClelland, Eds., (Bradford, Cambridge, 1986), p. 282. 
[22] G.J. Tesauro, Complex Systems, 1,367, (1987). 
[23] S.E. Hampson & D.J. Volper, Biological Cybernetics, 56, 121, (1987). 
[24] D.E. Rumelhart, G.E. Hinton, & J.L. McClelland. In Parallel distrlbted processing: explorations 
in the microstrcture of cognition, vol. 1, D.E. Rumelhart, J.L. McClelland, Eds., (Bradford, Cam- 
bridge, 1986), p. 3. 
[25] R.S. Michalski, J.G. Carbonell, & T.M. Mitchell, Eds., Machine learning: an artificial intelligence 
approach, Vols. I and II, (Morgan Kaufman, Los Altos, 1986). 
[26] S. Omohundro, Complex Systems, 1,273, (1987). 
[27] Paul, R. Robot manipalators: mathematics, programming, and control., (MIT Press, Cambridge, 
19Sl). 
