564 
PROGRAMMABLE SYNAPTIC CHIP FOR 
ELECTRONIC NEURAL NETWORKS 
A. Moopenn, H. Langenbacher, A.P. Thakoor, and S.K. Khanna 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91009 
ABSTRACT 
A binary synaptic matrix chip has been developed for electronic 
neural networks. The matrix chip contains a programmable 32X32 
array of "long channel" NMOSFET binary connection elements imple- 
mented in a 3-um bulk CMOS process. Since the neurons are kept off- 
chip, the synaptic chip serves as a "cascadable" building block for 
a multi-chip synaptic network as large as 512X512 in size. As an 
alternative to the programmable NMOSFET {long channel) connection 
elements, tailored thin film resistors are deposited, in series with 
FET switches, on some CMOS test chips, to obtain the weak synaptic 
connections. Although deposition and patterning of the resistors 
require additional processing steps, they promise substantial 
savings in silcon area. The performance of a synaptic chip in a 32- 
neuron breadboard system in an associative memory test application 
is discussed. 
INTRODUCTION 
The highly parallel and distributive architecture of neural 
networks offers potential advantages in fault-tolerant and high 
speed associative information processing. For the past few years, 
there has been a growing interest in developing electronic hardware 
to investigate the computational capabilities and application 
potential of neural networks as well as their dynamics and 
collective properties -5 . In an electronic hardware implementation 
of neural networks s,? , the neurons (analog processing units) are 
represented by threshold amplifiers and the synapses linking the 
neurons by a resistive connection network. The synaptic strengths 
between neurons (the electrical resistance of the connections) 
represent the stored information or the computing function of the 
neural network. 
Because of the massive interconectivity of the neurons and the 
large number of the interconnects required with the increasing 
number of neurons, implementation of a synaptic network using 
current LSI/VLSI technology can become very difficult. A synaptic 
network based on a multi-chip architecture would lessen this 
difficulty. We have designed, fabricated, and successfully tested 
CMOS-based programmable synaptic chips which could serve as basic 
"cascadable" building blocks for a multi-chip electronic neural 
network. The synaptic chips feature complete programmability of 
1024, (32X32) binary synapses. Since the neurons are kept off- 
chip, the synaptic chips can be connected in parallel, to obtain 
multiple grey levels of the connection strengths, as well as 
@ American Institute of Physics 1988 
565 
"cascaded" to form larger synaptic arrays for an expansion to a 512- 
neuron system in a feedback or feed-forward architecture. As a 
research tool, such a system would offer a significant speed 
improvement over conventional software-based neural network 
simulations since convergence times for the parallel hardware system 
would be significantly smaller. 
In this paper, we describe the basic design and operation of 
synaptic CMOS chips incorporating MOSFET's as binary connection 
elements. The design and fabrication of synaptic test chips with 
tailored thin film resistors as ballast resistors for controlling 
power dissipation are also described. Finally, we describe a 
synaptic chip-based 32-neuron breadboard system in a feedback 
configuration and discuss its performance in an associative memory 
test application. 
BINARY SYNAPTIC CMOS CHIP WITH MOSFET CONNECTION ELEMENTS 
There are two important design requirements for a binary 
connection element in a high density synaptic chip. The first 
requirement is that the connection in the ON state should be "weak" 
to ensure low overall power dissipation. The required degree of 
"weakness" of the ON connection largely depends on the synapse 
density of the chip. If, for example, a synapse density larger than 
1000 per chip is desired, a dynamic resistance of the ON connection 
should be greater than ~100 K-ohms. The second requirement is that 
to obtain grey scale synapses with up to four bits of precision from 
binary connections, the consistency of the ON state connection 
resistance must be better than +/-5 percent, to ensure proper 
threshold operation of the neurons. Both of the requirements are 
generally difficult to satisfy simultaneously in conventional VLSI 
CMOS technology. For example, doped-polysilicon resistors could be 
used to provide the weak connections, but they are difficult to 
fabricate with a resistance uniformity of better than 5 percent. 
We have used NMOSFET's as connection elements in a multi-chip 
synaptic network. By designing the NMOSFET's with long channel, 
both the required high uniformity and high ON state resistance have 
been obtained. A block diagram of a binary synaptic test chip 
incorporating NMOSFET's as programmable connection elements is shown 
in Fig. 1. A photomicrograph of the chip is shown in Fig. 2. The 
synaptic chip was fabricated through MOSIS (MOS Implementation 
Service) in a 3-micron, bulk CMOS, two-level metal, P-well 
technology. The chip contains 1024 synaptic cells arranged in a 
32X32 matrix configuration. Each cell consists of a long channel 
NMOSFET connected in series with another NMOSFET serving as a simple 
ON/OFF switch. The state of the FET switch is controlled by the 
output of a latch which can be externally addressed via the ROW/COL 
address decoders. The 32 analog input lines {from the neuron 
outputs) and 32 analog output lines {to the neuron inputs} allow a 
number of such chips to be connected together to form larger 
connection matrices with up to 4-bit planes. 
The long channel NMOSFET can function as either a purely 
resistive or a constant current source connection element, depending 
566 
 -A9 
VGC 
i : 
i ﬂ 
RSTa 
FROM NEURON OUTPUTS 
)NEURON 
v' INPUTS 
Figure 1. Block diagram of a 32X32 binary synnaptic chip with long 
channel NMOSFETs as connection elements. 
Figure 2. Photomicrographs of a 32X32 binary connection CMOS chip. 
The blowup on the right shows several synaptic cells; the "S"-shape 
structures are the long-channel NMOSFETs. 
on whether analog or binary output neurons are used. As a resistive 
connection, the NMOSFET's must operate in the linear region of the 
transistor's drain I-V characteristics. In the linear region, the 
channel resistance is approximately given by 8 
Ro = (l/K) (L/W) (VG - 
567 
Here, K is a proportionality constant which depends on process 
parameters, L and W are the channel length and width respectively, 
Vc is the gate voltage, and VT, is the threshold voltage. The 
transistor acts as a linear resistor provided the voltage across the 
channel is much less than the difference of the gate and threshold 
voltages, and thus dictates the operating voltage range of the 
connection. The NMOSFET's presently used in our synaptic chip 
design have a channel length of 244 microns and width of 12 microns. 
At a gate voltage of 5 volts, a channel resistance of about 200 K- 
ohms was obtained over an operating voltage range of 1.5 volts. The 
consistency of the transistor I-V characteristics has been verified 
to be within +/-3 percent in a single chip and +/-5 percent for 
chips from different fabrication runs. In the latter case, the 
transistor characteristics in the linear region can be further 
matched to within +/-3% by the fine adjustment of their common gate 
bias. 
With two-state neurons, current source connections may be used 
by operating the transistor in the saturation mode. Provided the 
voltage across the channel is greater than (Vc - VT,], the 
transistor behaves almost as a constant current source with the 
saturation current given approximately by  
Io = K {W/L) {Vc - VT.)  
With the appropriate selection of L, W, and W, it is possible to 
obtain ON-state currents which vary by two orders of magnitude in 
values. Figure 3 shows a set of measured I-V curves for a NMOSFET 
with the channel dimensions, L= 244 microns and W=12 microns and 
applied gate voltages from 2 to 4.5 volts. To ensure constant 
current source operation, the neuron's ON-state output should be 
greater than 3.5 volts. A consistency of the ON-state currents to 
within +/-5 percent has similarly been observed in a set of chip 
samples. With current source connections therefore, quantized grey 
scale synapses with up to 16 grey levels (4 bits) can be realized 
using a network of binary weighted current sources. 
Figure 3. I-V characteristics of 
an NMOSFET connection element. 
Channel dimension: L=244 um, 
W=12um 
For proper operation of the NMOSFET connections, the analog 
output lines (to neuron inputs} should always be held close to 
ground potential. Moreover, the voltages at the analog input lines 
must be at or above ground potential. Since the current normally 
568 
flows from the analog input to the output, the NMOSFET's may be used 
as either all excitatory or inhibitory type connections. However, 
the complementary connection function can be realized using long 
channel PMOSFET's in series with PMOSFET switches. For a PMOSFET 
connection, the voltage of an analog input line would be at or below 
ground. Furthermore, due to the difference in the mobilires of 
electrons and holes in the channel, a PMOSFET used as a resistive 
connection has a channel resistance about twice as large as an 
NMOSFET with the same channel dimension. This fact results in a 
subtantial reduction in the size of PMOSFET needed. 
THIN FILM RESISTOR CONNECTIONS 
The use of MOSFET's as connection elements in a CMOS synaptic 
matrix chip has the major advantage that the complete device can be 
readily fabricated in a conventional CMOS production run. However, 
the main disadvantages are the large area (required for the long 
channel] for the MOSFET's connections and their non-symmetrical 
inhibitory/excitatory functional characteristics. The large overall 
gate area not only substantially limits the number of synapses that 
can be fabricated on a single chip, but the transistors are more 
susceptible to processing defects which can lead to excessive gate 
leakage and thus reduce chip yield considerably. An alternate 
approach is simply to use resistors in place of MOSFET's. We have 
investigated one such approach where thin film resistors are 
deposited on top of the passivation layer of CMOS-processed chips as 
an additional special processing step to the normal CMOS fabrication 
run. With an appropriate choice of resistive materials, a dense 
array of resistive connections with highly uniform resistance of up 
to 10 M-ohms appears feasible. 
Several candidate materials, including a cermet based on 
platinum/aluminum oxide, and amorphous semiconductor/metal alloys 
such as a-Ge:Cu and a-Ge:A1, have been examined for their applica- 
bility as thin film resistor connections. These materials are of 
particular interest since their resistivity can easily be tailored 
in the desired semiconducting range of 1-10 ohm-cm by controlling 
the metal content s . The a-Ge/metal films are deposited by thermal 
evaporation of presynthesized alloys of the desired composition in 
high vacuum, whereas platinum/aluminum oxide films are deposited by 
co-sputtering from platinum and aluminum oxide targets in a high 
purity argon and oxygen gas mixture. Room temperature resistivities 
in the 0.1 to 100 ohm-cm range have been obtained by varying the 
metal content in these materials. Other factors which would also 
determine their suitability include their device processing and 
material compatibilities and their stability with time, temperat- 
ure, and extended application of normal operating electric current. 
The temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR] of these materials 
at room temperature has been measured to be in the 2000 to 6000 ppm 
range. Because of their relatively high TCR's, the need for weak 
connections to reduce the effect of localized heating is especially 
important here. The a-Ge/metal alloy films are observed to be 
relatively stable with exposure to air for temperatures below 130oC. 
569 
The platinum/aluminum oxide film stabilize with time after annealing 
in air for several hours at 130¯C. 
Sample test arrays of thin film resistors based on the 
described materials have been fabricated to test their consistency. 
The resistors, with a nominal resistance of 1 M-ohm, were deposited 
on a glass substrate in a 40X40 array over a 0.4cm by 0.4cm area. 
Variation in the measured resistance in these test arrays has been 
found to be from +/- 2-5 percent for all three materials. Smaller 
test arrays of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors on CMOS test chips have 
also been fabricated. A photo-micrograph of a CMOS synaptic test 
chip containing a 4X4 array of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors is shown 
in Fig. 4. Windows in the passivation layer of silicon nitride 
{SIN] were opened in the final processing step of a normal CMOS 
fabrication run to provide access to the aluminum metal for 
electrical contacts. A layer of resistive material was deposited 
and patterned by lift-off. A layer of buffer metal of platinum or 
nickel was then deposited by RF sputtering and also patterned by 
lift-off. The buffer metal pads serve as a conducting bridges for 
connecting the aluminum electrodes to the thin film resistors. In 
addition to providing a reliable ohmic contact to the aluminum and 
resistor, it also provides conformal step coverage over the silicon 
nitride window edge. The resistor elements on the test chip are 100 
micron long, 10 micron wide with a thickness of about 1500 angsttoms 
and a nominal resistance of 250 K-ohms. Resistance variations from 
10-20 percent have been observed in several such test arrays. The 
unusually large variation is largely due to the surface roughness of 
the chip passivation layer. As one possible solution, a thin spin- 
Figure 4. Photomicrographs of.a CMOS synaptic test chip with a 4X4 
array of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors. The nominal resistance was 
250 K-ohms. 
57O 
on coating of an insulating material such as polyimide to smooth out 
the surface of the passivation layer prior to depositing the 
resistors is under investigation. 
SYNAPTIC CHIP-BASED 32-NEURON BREADBOARD SYSTEM 
A 32-neuron breadboard system utilizing an array of discrete 
neuron electronics has been fabricated to evaluate the operation of 
32X32 binary synaptic CMOS chips with NMOSFET connection elements. 
Each neuron consists of an operational amplifier configured as a 
current to voltage converter (with virtual ground input) followed by 
a fixed-gain voltage difference amplifier. The overall time 
constant of the neurons is approximately 10 microseconds. The 
neuron array is interfaced directly to the synaptic chip in a full 
feedback configuration. The system also contains prompt electronics 
consisting of a programmable array of RC discharging circuits with a 
relaxation time of approximately 5 microseconds. The prompt 
hardware allows the neuron states to be initialized by precharging 
the selected capacitors in the RC circuits. A microcomputer 
interfaced to the breadboard system is used for programming the 
synaptic matrix chip, controlling the prompt electronics, and 
reading the neuron outputs. 
The stability of the breadboard .system is tested in an 
associative memory feedback configuration e. A dozen random dilute- 
coded binary vectors are stored using the following simplified 
outer-product storage scheme: 
T =. $ 
0 otherwise. 
In this scheme, the feedback matrix consists of only inhibitory (- 
1)or open (0) connections. The neurons are set to be normally ON 
and are driven OFF when inhibited by another neuron via the feedback 
matrix. The system exhibits excellent stability and associative 
recall performance. Convergence to a nearest stored memory in 
Hamming distance is always observed for any given input cue. Figure 
5 shows some typical neuron output traces for a given test prompt 
and a set of stored memories. The top traces show the response of 
two neurons that are initially set ON; the bottom traces for two 
other neurons initially set OFF. Convergence times of 10-50 
microseconds have been observed, depending on the prompt 
conditions, but are primarily governed by the speed of the neurons. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Synaptic CMOS chips containing 1024 programmable binary 
synapses in a 32X32 array have been designed, fabricated, and 
tested. These synaptic chips are designed to serve as basic 
building blocks for large multi-chip synaptic networks. The use of 
long channel MOSFET's as either resistive or current source 
connection elements meets the "weak" connection and consistency 
571 
Figure 5. Typical neuron response curves for a test prompt inputﬂ 
(Horiz scale: 10 microseconds per div} 
requirements. Alternately, CMOS-based synaptic test chips with 
specially deposited thin film high-valued resistors, in series with 
FET switches, offer an attractive approach to high density 
programmable synaptic chips. A 32-neuron breadboard system 
incorporating a 32X32 NMOSFET synaptic chip and a feedback 
configuration exhibits excellent stability and associative recall 
performance as an associative memoryﬂ Using discrete neuron array, 
convergence times of 10-50 microseconds have been demonstrated. 
With optimization of the input/output wiring layout and the use of 
high speed neuron electronics, convergence times can certainly be 
reduced to less than a microsecond. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was performed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, and was sponsored by the Joint 
Tactical Fusion Program Office, through an agreement with the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The authors would 
like to thank John Lambe for his invaluable suggestions, T. Duong 
for his assistance in the breadboard hardware development, J. Lamb 
and S. Thakoor for their help in the thin film resistor deposition, 
and R. Nixon and S. Chang for their assistance in the chip layout 
design. 
REFERENCES 
J. Lambe, A. Moopenn, and A.P. Thakoor, Proc. AIAA/ACM/NASA/- 
IEEE Computers in Aerospace V, 160 (1985) 
A.P. Thakoor, J.L. Lamb, A. Moopenn, and S.K. Khanna, MRS 
Proc. 95, 627 {1987) 
W. Hubbard, D. Schwartz, J. Denker, 
Jackel, B. Straughn, and D. Termant, 
(1986} 
M.A. Sivilotti, M.R. Emerling, and 
151, 408 (1986} 
J.P. Sage, K. Thompson, and R.S. 
H.P. Graf, R. Howard, L. 
AIP Conf. Proc. 151, 227 
C. Mead, AIP Conf. Proc. 
Withers, AIP Conf. Proc. 151, 
572 
6. J.J. Hopfield, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 81, 3088 (1984) 
7. $.$. Hopfield, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 79, 2554 (1982) 
8, S.M. Sze, "Semiconductor Devices-Physics and Technology," (Wi- 
ley, New York, 1985) p.205 
9, J.L. Lamb, A.P. Thakoor, A. Moopenn, and S.K. Khanna, J. Vac. 
' Sci. Tech., A 5(4), 1407 (1987) 
