783 
USING NEURAL NETWORKS TO IMPROVE 
COCHLEAR IMPLANT SPEECH PERCEPTION 
Manoel F. Tenorio 
School of Electrical Engineering 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47907 
ABSTRACT 
An increasing number of pr(foundly deaf patients suffering from sen- 
sorineural deafness are using cooblear implants as prostheses. After the 
implant, sound can be detected through the electrical stimulation of the 
remaining peripheral auditory nervous system. Although great progress has 
been achieved in this area, no useful speech recognition has been attained 
with either single or multiple channel cooblear implants. 
Coding evidence suggests that it is necessary for any implant which 
would effectively couple with the natural speech perception system to simu- 
late the temporal dispersion and other phenomena found in the natural 
receptors, and currently not implemented in any cooblear implants. To this 
end, it is presented here a computational model using artificial neural net- 
works (ANN) to incorporate the natural phenomena in the artificial 
cochlear. 
The ANN model presents a series of advantages to the implementation 
of such systems. First, the hardware requirements, with constraints on 
power, size, and processing speeds, can be taken into account together with 
the development of the underlining software, before the actual neural struc- 
tures are totally defined. Second, the ANN model, since it is an abstraction 
of natural neurons, carries the necessary ingredients and is a close mapping 
for implementing the necessary functions. Third, some of the processing, 
like sorting and majority functions, could be implemented more efficiently, 
requiring only local decisions. Fourth, the ANN model allows function 
modifications through parametric modification (no software recoding), which 
permits a variety of fine-tuning experiments, with the opinion of the 
patients, to be conceived. Some of those will permit the user some freedom 
in system modification at real-time, allowing finer and more subjective 
adjustments to fit differences on the condition and operation of individual's 
remaining peripheral auditory system. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The study of the model of sensory receptors can be carried out either 
via trying to understand how the natural receptors process incoming signMs 
and build a representation code, or via the construction of artificial replace- 
ments. In the second case, we are interested in to what extent those 
artificial counterparts have the ability to replace the natural receptors. 
Several groups are now carrying out the design of artificial sensors. 
Artificial cochleas seem to have a number of different designs and a tradition 
of experiments. These make them now available for widespread use as 
prostheses for patients who have sensorineura] deafness caused by hair 
damage. 
© American Institute of Physics 1988 
784 
Although surgery is required for such implants, their performance has 
reached a level of maturity to induce patients to seek out these devices 
voluntarily. Unfortunately, only partial acoustic information is obtained by 
severely deaf patients with cochlear prosthesis. Useful patterns for speech 
communication are not yet 'fully recognizable through auditory prostheses. 
This problem with artificial receptors is true for both single implants, that 
stimulate large sections of the cochlea with signals that cover a large portion 
of the spectrum [4,5], and multi channel implants, that stimulate specific 
regions of the cochlea with specific portions of the auditory spectrum [3,13]. 
In this paper, we tackle the problem of artificial cochlear implants 
through the used of neurocomputing tools. The receptor model used here 
was developed by Gerald Wasserman of the Sensory Coding Laboratory, 
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University [20], and the 
implants were performed by Richard Miyamoto of the Department of Otolar- 
yngology, Indiana University Medical School [11]. 
The idea is to introduce with the cochlear implant, the computation 
that would be performed otherwise by the natural receptors. It would there- 
fore be possible to experimentally manipulate the properties of the implant 
and measure the effect of coding variations on behavior. The model was 
constrained to be portable, simple to implant, fast enough computationally 
for on-line use, and built with a flexible paradigm, which would allow for 
modification of the different parts of the model, without having to recon- 
struct it entirely. In the next section, we review parts of the receptor model, 
and discuss the block diagram of the implant. Section 3 covers the limita- 
tions associated with the technique, and discusses the results obtained with 
a single neuron and one feedback loop. Section 4 discusses the implementa- 
tions of these models using feedforward neural networks, and the computa- 
tional advantages for doing so. 
2. COCHLEAR IMPLANTS AND THE NEURON MODEL 
Although patients cannot reliably recognize randomly chosen spoken 
words to them (when implanted with either multichannel or single channel 
devices), this is not to say that no information is extracted from speech. If 
the vocabulary is reduced to a limited set of words, patients perform 
significantly better than chance, at associating the word with a member of 
the set. 
For these types of experiments, single channel implants correspond to 
reported performance of 14% to 20% better than chance, with 62% perfor- 
mance being the highest reported. For multiple channels, performances of 
95% were reported. So far no one has investigated the differences in perfor- 
mance between the two types of implants. Since the two implants have so 
many differences, it is difficult to point out the cause for the better perfor- 
mance in the multiple channel case. 
The results of such experiments are encouraging, and point to the fact 
that cochlea implants need only minor improvement to be able to mediate 
ad-lib speech perception successfully. Sensory coding studies have suggested 
a solution to the implant problem, by showing that the representation code 
generated by the sensory system is task dependent. This evidence came 
from comparison of intracellular recordings taken from a single receptor of 
intact subjects. 
This coding evidence suggests that the temporal dispersion (time 
integration) found in natural receptors would be a necessary part of any 
785 
cochlear implant. Present cochlear implants have no dispersion at all. Fig- 
ure 2 shows the block diagram for a representative cochlear implant, the 
House-Urban stimulator. The acoustic signal is picked up by the micro- 
phone, which sends it to an AM oscillator. This modulation step is neces- 
sary to induce an electro-magnetic coupling between the external and inter- 
nal coil. The internal coil has been surgically implanted, and it is connected 
to a pair of wires implanted inside and outside the cochlea. 
Just incorporating the temporal dispersion model to an existing device 
would not replicate the fact that in natural receptors, temporal dispersion 
appears in conjunction to other operations which are strongly non linear. 
There are operations like selection of a portion of the spectrum, rectification, 
compression, and time-dispersion to be considered. 
In figure 3, a modified implant is shown, which takes into consideration 
some of these operations. It is depicted as a single-channel implant, 
although the ultimate goal is to make it multichannel. Details of the opera- 
tion of this device can be found elsewhere [21]. Here, it is important to men- 
tion that the implant would also have a compression/rectification function, 
and it would receive a feedback from the integrator stage in order to control 
its gain. 
3. CHARACTERISTICS AND RESULTS OF THE IMPLANTS 
The above model has been implemented as an off-line process, and then 
the patients were exposed to a preprocessed signal which emulated the 
operation of the device. It is not easy to define the amount of feedback 
needed in the system or the amount of time dispersion. It could also be that 
these parameters are variable across different conditions. Another variance 
in the experiment is the amount of damage (and type) among different indi- 
viduals. So, these parameters have to be determined clinically. 
The coupling between the artificial receptor and the natural system also 
presents problems. If a physical connection is used, it increases the risk of 
infections. When inductive methods are used, the coupling is never ideal. If 
portability and limited power is of concern in the implementation, then the 
limited energy available for coupling has to be used very effectively. 
The computation of the receptor model has to be made in a way to 
allow for fast implementation. The signal transformation is to be computed 
on-line. Also, the results from clinical studies should be able to be incor- 
porated fairly easily without having to reengineer the implant. 
Now we present the results of the implementation of the transfer func- 
tion of figure 4. Patients, drawn from a population described elsewhere 
[11,12,14], were given spoken sentences processed off-line, and simultaneously 
presented with a couple of words related to the context. Only one of them 
was the correct answer. The patient had two buttons, one for each alterna- 
tive; he/she was to press the button which corresponded to the correct alter- 
native. The results are shown in the tables below. 
(Average of the population) 
Percentage of correct alternatives 
No disp. 67% 
0.1 msec 78% 
0.3 msec 85% 
Best performance 
786 
1 msec 76% 
3 msec 72 
Table I: Phoneme discrimination in a two-alternate task. 
Percentage of correct alternatives 
No disp. 50% 
1.0 msec 76% Best performance 
Table II: Sentence comprehension in a two-alternative task. 
There were quite a lot of variations in the performance of the different 
patients, some been able to perform better at different dispersion and 
compression amounts than the average of the population. Since one cannot 
control the amount of damage in the system of each patient or differences in 
individuals, it is hard to predict the ideal values for a given patient. 
Nevertheless, the improvements observed are of undeniable value in improv- 
ing speech perception. 
4. THE NEUROCOMPUTING MODEL 
In studying the implementation of such a system for on-line use, yet 
flexible enough to produce a carry-on device, we look at feedforward neuro- 
computer models as a possible answer. First, we wanted a model that easily 
produced a parallel implementation, so that the model could be expanded in 
a multichannel environment without compromising the speed of the system. 
Figure 5 shows the initial idea for the implementation of the device as a Sin- 
gle Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) architecture. 
The implant would be similar to the one described in Figure 4, except 
that the transfer function of the receptor would be performed by a two layer 
feed forward network (Figure 6). Since there is no way of finding out the 
values of compression and dispersion apart from clinical trials, or even if 
these values do change in certain conditions, we need to create a structure 
that is flexible enough to modify the program structure by simple manipula- 
tion of parameters. This is also the same problem we would face when try- 
ing to expand the system to a multichannel implant. Again, neuromorphic 
models provided a nice paradigm in which the dataflow and the function of 
the program could be altered by simple parameter (weight) change. 
For this first implementation we chose to use the no-contact inductive 
coupling method. The drawback of this method is that all the information 
has to be compressed in a single channel for reliable transmission and cross 
talk elimination. 
Since the inductive coupling of the implant-is critical at every cycle, the 
most relevant information must be picked out of the processed signal. This 
information is then given all the available energy, and after all the coupling 
loss, it should be sufficient to provide for speech pattern discrimination. In a 
multichannel setting, this corresponds to doing a sorting of all the n signals 
in the channels, selecting the m highest signals, and adding them up for 
modulation. In a naive single processor implementation, this could 
correspond to n 2 comparisons, and in a multiprocessor implementation, 
log(n) comparisons. Both are dependent on the number of signals to be 
787 
sorted. 
We needed a scheme in which the sorting time would be constant with 
the number of channels, and would be easily implementable in analog circui- 
try, in case this became a future route. Our scheme is shown in Figure 7. 
Each channel is connected to a threshold element, whose threshold can be 
varied externally. A monotonically decreasing function scans the threshold 
values, from the highest possible value of the output to the lowest. The out- 
put of these elements will be high corresponding to the values that are the 
highest first. These output are summed with a quasi-integrator with thres- 
hold set to m. This element, when high, disables the scanning functions; and 
it corresponds to having found the m highest signals. This sorting is 
independent of the number of channels. 
The output of the threshold units are fed into sigma-pi units which 
gates the signals to be modulated. The output of these units are summed 
and correspond to the final processed signal (Figure 8). 
The user has full control of the characteristics of this device. The 
number of channels can be easily altered; the number of components allowed 
in the modulation can be changed; the amount of gain, rectification- 
compression, and dispersion of each channel can also be individually con- 
trolled. The entire system is easily implementable in analog integrated cir- 
cuits, once the clinical tests have determine the optimum operational 
characteristics. 
CONCLUSION 
We have shown that the study of sensory implants can enhance our 
understanding of the representation schemes used for natural sensory recep- 
tors. In particular, implants can be enhanced significantly if the effects of 
the sensory processing and transfer functions are incorporated in the model. 
We have also shown that neuromorphic computing paradigm provides a 
parallel and easily modifiable framework for signal processing structures, 
with advantages that perhaps cannot be offered by other technology. 
We will soon start the use of the first on-line portable model, using a 
single processor. This model will provide a testbed for more extensive clini- 
cal trials of the implant. We will then move to the parallel implementation, 
and from there, possibly move toward analog circuitry implementation. 
Another route for the use of neuromorphic computing in this domain is 
possibly the use of sensory recordings from healthy animals to train self- 
organizing adaptive learning networks, in order to design the implant 
transfer functions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
[2] 
Bilger, R.C.; Black, F.O.; Hopkinson, N.T.; and Myers, E.N., 
"Implanted auditory prosthesis: An evaluation of subjects presently 
fitted with cochlear implants," Otolaryngology, 1977, Vol. 84, pp. 677- 
682. 
Bilger, R.C.; Black, F.O.; Hopkinson, N.T.; Myers, E.N.; Payne, J.L.; 
Stenson, N.R.; Vega, A.; and Wolf, R.V., "Evaluation of subjects 
presently fitted with implanted auditory prostheses," Annals of Otol- 
ogy, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 1977, Vol. 86(Supp. 38), pp. 1-176. 
788 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[9] 
[lO] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[14] 
[15] 
[16] 
Eddington, D.K.; Dobelle, W.H.; Brackmann, D.E.; Mladejovsky, M.G.; 
and Parkin, J., "Place and periodicity pitch by stimulation of multiple 
scala tympani electrodes in deaf volunteers," American Society for 
Artificial Internal Organs, Transactions, 1978, Vol. 24, pp. 1-5. 
House, W.F.; Berliner, K.; Crary, W.; Graham, M.; Luckey, R.: Norton, 
N.; Selters, W.; Tobin, H.; Urban, J.; and Wexler, M., Cochlear 
implants," Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, 1976, Vol. 
85(Supp. 27), pp. 1-93. 
House, W.F. and Urban, J., "Long term results of electrode implanta- 
tion and electronic stimulation of the cochlea in man," Annals of Otol- 
ogy, Rhinology and Laryngology, 1973, Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 504-517. 
Ifukube, T. and White, R.L., "A speech processor with lateral inhibi- 
tion for an eight channel cochlear implant and its evaluation," IEEE 
Trans. on Biomedical Engineering, November 1987, Vol. BME-34, No. 
11. 
Kong, K.-L., and Wasserman, G.S., "Changing response measures 
alters temporal summation in the receptor and spike potentials of the 
Limulus lateral eye," Sensory Processes, 1978, Vol. 2, pp. 21-31. 
Kong, K.-L., and Wasserman, G.S., "Temporal summation in the recep- 
tor potential of the Lirnulus lateral eye: Comparison between retinula 
and eccentric cells," Sensory Processes, 1978, Vol. 2, pp. 9-20. (b) 
Michelson, R.P., "The results of electrical stimulation of the cochlea in 
human sensory deafness," Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngol- 
ogy, 1971, Vol. 80, pp. 914-919. 
Mladejovsky, M.G.; Eddington, D.K.; Dobelle, W.H.; and Brackmann, 
D.E., "Artificial hearing for the deaf by cochlear stimulation: Pitch 
modulation and some parametric thresholds," American Society for 
Artificial Internal Organs, Transactions, 1974, Vol. 21, pp. 1-7. 
Miyamoto, R.T.; Gosseft, S.K.; Groom, G.L.; Kienle, M.L.; Pope, M.L.; 
and Shallop, J.K., "Cochlear implants: An auditory prosthesis for the 
deaf," Journal of the Indiana State Medical Association, 1982, Vol. 75, 
pp. 174-177. 
Miyamoto, R.T.; Myres, W.A.; Pope, M.L.; and Carotta, C.A., 
"Cochlear implants for deaf children," Laryngoscope, 1986, Vol. 96, pp. 
990-996. 
Pialoux, P.; Chouard, C.H.; Meyer, B.; and Fugain, C., "Indications 
and results of the multichannel cochlear implant," Acta Otolaryngology, 
1979, Vo.. 87, pp. 185-189. 
Robbins, A.M.: Osberger, M.J.; Miyamoto, R.T.; Kienle, M.J.; and 
, ß 
Myres, W.A., Speech-tracking performance in single-channel cochlear 
implant subjects," Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 1985, Vol. 
28, pp. 565-578. 
Russell, I.J. and Sellick, P.M., "The tuning properties of cochlear hair 
cells," in E.F. Evans and J.P. Wilson (eds.), Psychophysics and Physiol- 
ogy of Hearing, London: Academic Press, 1977. 
Wasserman, G.S., "Limulus psychophysics: Temporal summation in the 
ventral eye," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 1978, Vol. 
107, pp. 276-286. 
789 
[17] 
[19] 
[20] 
Wasserman, G.S., "Limulus psychophysics: Increment threshold," Per- 
ception  Psychophysics, 1981, Vol. 29, pp. 251-260. 
Wasserman, G.S.; Felsten, G.; and Easland, G.S., "Receptor saturation 
and the psychophysical function," Investigative Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science, 1978, Vol. 17, p. 155 (Abstract). 
Wasserman, G.S.; Felsten, G.; and Easland, G.S., "The psychophysical 
function: Harmonizing Fechner and Stevens," Science, 1979, Vol. 204, 
pp. 85-87. 
Wasserman, G.S., "Cochlear implant codes and speech perception in 
profoundly deaf," Bulletin of Psychonomic Society, Vol. (18)3, 1987. 
Wasserman, G.S.; Wang-Bennett, L.T.; and Miyamoto, R.T., "Tem- 
poral dispersion in natural receptors and pattern discrimination medi- 
ated by artificial receptor," Proc. of the Fechner Centennial Sympo- 
sium, Hans Buffart (Ed.), Elsevier/North Holland, Amsterdam, 1987. 
[--  SENSORY CODING DATA- -- 
7 I I 
.5 9 I .513 I 
STIMULUS SIGNAL ANALYSIS BEHAVIOR 
I 11 I 15 
I r .......... ß I 
' I 
I  SIGNAL 
, 
i 
17 
Fig. 1. Path of Natural and Prosthetic Signals. 
Sound 
I Microphone I 
I External Coil I 
I Internal Coil I 
I Coc.,ea I 
Central Nervous System 
Fig. 2. The House-Urban Cochlear Implant. 
790 
AMPLIFICATION 
DISPERSION 
..I COMPRESSIVE RECTIFIER 
,..I INTEGRATOR 
"1 
Fig. 3. Receptor Model 
Sound 
[ Microphone 
Bandpass Filter 
Compress;e Rectifier , 
Integrator " 
I AM Oscillator 
External Coil 
Central Nervous System 
Fig. 4. Modified Implant Model. 
791 
PORTABLE PARAI I EL NEUROCOMPUTER 
FILTERED 
EXTERNAL 
USER CONTROLLED 
PARAMETERS 
16KHz AM 
MODULATED OUTPUT 
Fig. 5. Initial Concept for a SIMD Architecture. 
MICROPHONE 
EXTERNALLY CONTROLLED 
DISPERSION l  
___ NEURON 
MODEL 
.__' NEURON 
MODEL 
AMPLIFICATION 
SORTER 
OF 
N SIGNALS 
Fig. 6. Feedforward Neuron Model Implant. 
792 
$RTER OF n $16NAL$ IN 0!1! 
S, ={0,1} -- 
SIGNALS 
INPUTS 
 FUNCTK)N 
RESHOLD 
SET OF n, 
EXTERNALLY 
CONTROLLED 
THRESHOLD CONTROL: 
SCANNING FUNCTION FROM I.max TO I. min 
I I 
RESET SCANNING 
I i max 
t 
Fig. 7. Signal Sorting Circuit. 
SIGNAL SELECTORS 
S, = {0,1} 
'n l 
S 1 ...... 
01 = 11. S 1 
S n 
OUTPUT SIGNAL 
Fig. 8. Sigma-Pi Units for Signal Composition. 
793 
USER CONTROLLED PARAMETERS 
MICROPHONE 
DISPERSION 
o 
GAIN 
r BEST 
MATCHES 
FILTER PROCESSOR 
BYPASS BYPASS 
SINGLE 
NEURON 
PROCESSING 
Fig. 9. Parameter ControIs for Clinical Studies. 
