Effective Learning Requires Neuronal 
Remodeling of Hebbian Synapses 
Gal Chechik Isaac Meilijson Eytan Ruppin 
School of Mathematical Sciences 
Tel-Aviv University Tel Aviv, Israel 
ggal@math.tau.ac.il isaco@math.tau.ac.il ruppin@math.tau.ac.il 
Abstract 
This paper revisits the classical neuroscience paradigm of Hebbian 
learning. We find that a necessary requirement for effective as- 
sociative memory learning is that the efcacies of the incoming 
synapses should be uncorrelated. This requirement is difficult to 
achieve in a robust manner by Hebbian synaptic learning, since it 
depends on network level information. Effective learning can yet be 
obtained by a neuronal process that maintains a zero sum of the in- 
coming synaptic efcacies. This normalization drastically improves 
the memory capacity of associative networks, from an essentially 
bounded capacity to one that linearly scales with the network's size. 
It also enables the effective storage of patterns with heterogeneous 
coding levels in a single network. Such neuronal normalization can 
be successfully carried out by activity-dependent homeostasis of the 
neuron's synaptic efcacies, which was recently observed in cortical 
tissue. Thus, our findings strongly suggest that effective associa- 
tive learning with Hebbian synapses alone is biologically implausi- 
ble and that Hebbian synapses must be continuously remodeled by 
neuronally-driven regulatory processes in the brain. 
I Introduction 
Synapse-specific changes in synaptic efcacies, carried out by long-term potentiation 
(LTP) and depression (LTD) are thought to underlie cortical self-organization and 
learning in the brain. In accordance with the Hebbian paradigm, LTP and LTD 
modify synaptic efcacies as a function of the firing of pre and post synaptic neurons. 
This paper revisits the Hebbian paradigm showing that synaptic learning alone 
cannot provide effective associative learning in a biologically plausible 
manner, and must be complemented with neuronally-driven synaptic 
remodeling. 
The importance of neuronally driven normalization processes has already been 
demonstrated in the context of self-organization of cortical maps [1, 2] and in con- 
tinuous unsupervised learning as in principal-component-analysis networks [3]. In 
these scenarios normalization is necessary to prevent the excessive growth of synap- 
Effective Learning Requires Neuronal Remodeling of Hebbian Synapses 97 
tic efficacies that occurs when learning and neuronal activity are strongly coupled. 
In contradistinction, this paper focuses on associative memory learning where this 
excessive synaptic runaway growth is mild [4], and shows that even in this simple 
learning paradigm, normalization processes are essential. Moreover, while numer- 
ous normalization procedures can prevent synaptic runaway, our analysis shows that 
only a specific neuronally-driven correction procedure that preserves the total sum 
of synaptic efiqcacies leads to effective associative memory storage. 
2 Effective Synaptic Learning rules 
We study the computational aspects of associative learning in a model of a low- 
activity associative memory network with binary firing {0, 1} neurons. M uncorre- 
t M 
lated memory patterns { }u= with coding level p (fraction of firing neurons) are 
stored in an N neurons network. The ith neuron updates its state X/t at time t by 
xt+l _ O(f[) f 1 V 1 + sign(f) (1) 
, - , = w, - r, o(f) = 2 ' 
j=l 
where fi is its input field (postsynaptic potential) and T is its firing thresh- 
old. The synaptic weight Wij between the jth (presynaptic) and ith (postsy- 
naptic) neurons is determined by a general additive synaptic learning rule de- 
pending on the neurons' activity in each of the M stored memory patterns " 
presynaptic (j) 
Wij = Z A(?,?) , A(i,j) = postsynaptic(i) 1 c  , (2) 
where the synaptic learning matrix A(/", ?) governs the incremental modifications 
to a synapse as a function of the firing of the presynaptic (column) and postsynaptic 
(row) neurons. In conventional biological terms, c denotes an increment following a 
long-term potentiation (LTP) event,  denotes heterosynaptic long-term depression 
(LTD), and ' a homosynaptic LTD event. 
The parameters a, , % 5 define a four dimensional space in which all linear additive 
Hebbian learning rules reside. However, in order to visualize this space, one may 
represent these Hebbian learning rules in a reduced, two-dimensional space utilizing 
a scaling invariance constraint and the requirement that the synaptic matrix should 
have a zero mean (otherwise the synaptic values diverge, the noise overshadows the 
signal term and no retrieval is possible [5]). 
Figure 1A plots the memory capacity of the network as a function of the two free 
parameters a and . It reveals that considerable memory storage may be obtained 
only along an essentially one dimensional curve, naturally raising the possibility 
of identifying an additional constraint on the relations between (a, , % 5). Such 
a constraint is revealed by a signal-to-noise analysis of the neuronal input field fi 
during retrieval 
Signal 
Noise 
E(fi[i = 1) - E(fi[i = O) 
v/Var(fi) v/Var [Wij] + NpCOV [Wij, Wik] 
+ Vp½OV ' 
(a) 
98 G. Chechik, I. Meilijson and E. Ruppin 
where averages are taken over the ensemble of stored memory patterns. 
A. So 
500 
400 ----. 
':300 
400 " ';" ::  
Ee 200 [ 
200 ' ' lO E 
o ha  
- _; ' ' o.o' 
o o beta 
beta 
Figure 1: A. Memory capacity of a 1000-neurons network with p = 0.05 for different 
values of a and/3 as obtained in computer simulations. Capacity is defined as the 
maximal number of memories that can be retrieved with overlap bigger than 0.95 
when presented with a degraded input cue with overlap 0.8. The overlap serves 
N  
to measure retrieval acuity and is defined as mn 1 -d=l() -p)Xj B. 
p(1-p)N ' 
Memory capacity of the effective learning rules: The peak values on the ridge of 
Figure A, are displayed by tracing their projection on the 3 coordinate. The optimal 
learning rule A(i,j) = (i -P)(j -P) [5], marked with an arrow, performs only 
slightly better than other effective learning rules. 
As evident from equation (3) and already pointed out by [6], when the postsynap- 
tic covariance COV [A(i, j), A(i, )] (determining the covariance between the 
incoming synapses of the postsynaptic neuron) is positive, the network's memory 
capacity is bounded, i.e., it does not scale with the network size. As the postsy- 
naptic covariance is non negative, effective learning rules that obtain linear scaling 
of memory capacity as a function of the network's size require a vanishing post- 
synaptic covariance. Intuitively, when the synaptic weights are correlated, adding 
any new synapse contributes only little new information, thus limiting the number 
of beneficial synapses that help the neuron estimate whether it should fire or not. 
Figure lB depicts the memory capacity of the effective synaptic learning rules which 
lie on the essentially one-dimensional ridge observed in Figure 1A. It shows that all 
these effective rules are only slightly inferior to the optimal synaptic learning rule 
calculated previously by [5, 6], which maximizes memory capacity. 
The vanishing covariance constraint on effective learning rules implies a new re- 
quirement concerning the balance between synaptic depression and facilitation: 
/3 = -_--p a. Thus, effective memory storage requires a delicate balance between 
LTP (xp) and heterosynaptic depression (/3), and is strongly dependent on the cod- 
ing level p which is a global property of the network. It is thus difficult to see how 
effective rules can be implemented at the synaptic level. Moreover, as shown in 
Figure 1A, Hebbian learning rules lack robustness as small perturbations from the 
effective rules may result in large decrease in memory capacity. 
Effective Learning Requires Neuronal Remodeling of Hebbian Synapses 99 
Furthermore, these problems cannot be circumvented by introducing a nonlinear 
Hebbian learning rule of the form Wij = g '"n(i, ?) as even for a nonlinear 
function g the covariance Cov [g('"nA(, ?)), g('"nA(, ))] remains positive 
if Cov(A(i,j), A(i,))is positive. These observations show that effective 
associative learning with Hebbian rules alone is implausible from a bio- 
logical standpoint requiring locality of information. 
3 Effective Learning via Neuronal Weight Correction 
The above results show that in order to obtain effective memory storage, the post- 
synaptic covariance must be kept negligible. How then may effective storage 
take place in the brain with Hebbian learning? We now proceed to show that 
a neuronally-driven procedure (essentially similar to that assumed by [2, 1] to occur 
during self-organization) can maintain a vanishing covariance and turn ineffective 
Hebbian synapses into effective ones. This enables the brain to utilize ineglcient 
learning rules which use local information only, but still attain effective learning 
capabilities. 
The solution emerges when rewriting the signal-to-noise equation (Eq. 3) as 
Noise 
Signal N 
c (4) 
/NVar[Wij] (1 - p) + pVar(.jN__l Wij) 
showing that the post synaptic covariance can be greatly diminished when the 
variance of the sum of incoming synapses is vanishing. We thus propose the following 
neuronal weight correction procedure: During learning, whenever a synapse is 
modified, its postsynaptic neuron additively modifies all its synapses to maintain 
the sum of their eglcacies at a baseline zero level. 
N 
Wij .'. Wij N Z Wij ; Vj = 1..N (5) 
j----1 
As this neuronal weight correction is additive, it can be performed either after 
several memories have been stored (as done in prescriptive learning), or during the 
storge of each memory pattern (as in developmental learning models). 
Interestingly, the joint operation of weight correction over a linear Hebbian learning 
rule is equivalent to the storage of the same set of memory patterns with another 
Hebbian learning rule. We prove that this new rule has a zero-covariance learning 
matrix 
1 I o I 
(a-)(1-p) I (a - )(O - p) I 
(7-5)(1 -p) (7-5)(0-p) 
It should be reemphasized that the matrix on the right is not applied at the synaptic 
level but is the emergent result of the operation of the neuronal mechanism on the 
matrix on the left, and is used here as a mathematical tool to analyze network's 
performance. Thus, using a neuronal mechanism that maintains the sum of incom- 
ing synapses fixed enables the same level of effective performance as would have 
been achieved by using a zero-covariance Hebbian learning rule, but without the 
need to know the memories' coding level. 
100 G. Chechik, I. Meilijson and E. Ruppin 
To demonstrate the beneficiary effects of neuronal weight correction we have first 
applied it to a common realization of the Hebb rule with inhibition added to obtain a 
zero-mean input field (otherwise the capacity vanishes) yielding A(i, j) = 
[7]. Even though this learning rule has a zero mean synaptic matrix, its postsynaptic 
covariance is non-zero and is thus still an ineffective rule. Applying neuronal weight 
correction after learning with the above rule, results in a synaptic matrix which is 
identical to the one generated by the rule A(i, j) = i(j -P) without neuronal 
weight correction, which has both zero mean and zero postsynaptic covariance. 
Figure 2A plots the memory capacity obtained with the zero mean Hebb rule, 
before and after neuronal weight correction, as a function of the network's size. 
After applying neuronal weight correction the originally bounded capacity turns to 
scale linearly with the network's size. 
A. Ineffective learning rule 
B. Variable coding level 
1500 
03 1000 
o 
E 
) 500 
E 
1500 
SO0 1000 1500 2000 
network's size (N) 
500 
optimal learning rule 
+ neuronal correction 
i-1 
0 0 500 1000 1500 2000 
network's size (N) 
Figure 2: Network memory capacity as a function of network's size. A. While 
the original zero-mean learning rule has bounded memory capacity, the capacity 
becomes linear in the network's size when the same learning rule is coupled with 
neuronal-weight-correction. The lines plot analytical results and the squares desig- 
nate simulation results (p -- 0.05). B. Even the optimal learning rule becomes inef- 
fective when the stored patterns have variable coding levels (coding levels are nor- 
mally distributed N(0.1, 0.022), but neuronal-weight-correction provides successful 
memory storage of such patterns. Results were obtained in a computer simulations. 
As the effectiveness of the learning rule depends on the coding level of the stored 
patterns, all learning rules turn ineffective when the coding levels of the stored 
patterns are heterogeneous. Figure 2B compares the memory capacity of a network 
that uses the optimal learning rule (A(i, j) - (i -p)(j -p)) for a coding level of 
p - 0.1 but actually stores memory patterns with coding levels that are normally 
distributed around 0.1. Only the application of neuronal weight correction provides 
effective storage of such patterns while the optimal learning rule does not. 
4 Neuronal Regulation Implements Weight Correction 
Like previous normalization procedures, the proposed neuronal algorithm relies on 
the availability of explicit information about the total sum of synaptic efficacies at 
the neuronal level. However, as explicit information on the synaptic sum may not 
be available, several mechanisms for conservation of the total synaptic strength have 
been proposed (see [8] for a review). Here we focus on one such mechanism, Neu- 
tonal Regulation (NR), where the total synaptic sum is regulated indirectly 
by estimating the neuron's average postsynaptic potential. NR is a slow 
process, continuously modifying synaptic efficacies to maintain the homeostasis of 
Effective Learning Requires Neuronal Remodeling of Hebbian Synapses 1 O1 
neuronal activity. Such activity-dependent scaling of excitatory synapses, which 
acts to maintain the homeostasis of neuronal firing, has already been observed in 
cortical tissues by [9]. 
We have studied the operation of NR-driven correction compared with additive 
neuronal weight correction in an excitatory-inhibitory network. Figure 3 plots the 
memory capacity of networks storing memories according to the Hebb rule, show- 
ing how NR approximates the additive neuronal weight correction and succeeds in 
obtaining a linear growth of memory capacity. 
1200 
>,1000 
. 800 
, 600 
o 
l::: 400 
200 
e--eOriginal Hebb rule .=  
= = Neuronal Weight Correction J : 
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 
network size 
Figure 3. Applying NR achieves a linear 
scaling of memory capacity with a slightly 
inferior capacity compared with that ob- 
tained with neuronal weight correction. 
Memory patterns were stored according to 
the Hebb rule Wij -M= , , 
5 Summary 
In this paper we have analyzed Hebbian learning rules in associative memory net- 
work models, and identified an essential requirement for effective memory storage: 
a vanishing postsynaptic covariance. We show that this constraint depends on the 
coding level of the stored memory patterns, thus requiring the use of network level 
information at the synaptic level. Moreover, when the stored memory patterns are 
heterogeneous, there is no single learning rule that can effectively store all patterns. 
We further show that applying a neuronally driven mechanism that preserves the 
total synaptic sum zeroes the catastrophic covariance and provides effective learn- 
ing even for ineffective synaptic learning rules. The resulting improvement in 
memory capacity is drastic: learning rules yielding bounded capacity 
are transformed into learning rules yielding linear memory capacity as 
a function of the network's size. Finally, the normalization mechanism can 
be carried out by neuronal regulation (NR), a mechanism recently identified in 
mammalian cortical cultures. 
The characterization of effective synaptic learning rules reopens the discussion of 
the computational role of heterosynaptic and homosynaptic depression. Previous 
studies have shown that long-term synaptic depression is necessary to prevent sat- 
uration of synaptic values [10], and to maintain zero mean synaptic efflcacies [11]. 
Our study shows that effective learning requires proper heterosynaptic depression, 
but can be obtained regardless of the homosynaptic depression magnitude. The 
terms potentiation/depression used in the above context should be cautiously in- 
terpreted, as the apparent changes in synaptic efficacies measured in LTD/LTP 
experiments may involve two kinds of processes: Synaptic-driven processes, chang- 
ing synapses according to the covariance between pre and post synaptic neurons, 
and neuronally-driven processes, operating to zero the covariance between incom- 
ing synapses of the neuron. These processes may be experimentally segregated as 
they operate on different time scales ([12, 9]), and their relative weights can be 
experimentally tested. 
102 G. Chechik, I. Meilijson and E. Ruppin 
While several forms of synaptic constraints were suggested to improve the stability 
of Hebbian learning [2, 3], our analysis shows that effective memory storage requires 
that the sum of synaptic strengths which must be preserved, thus predicting that 
it is this specific form of normalization that occurs in the brain. The utilization of 
the simple McCullough-Pitts model studied here has enabled us to gain analytical 
insight to the phenomena in hand. Recent findings of neuronal weight normalization 
in spiking models [13], lead us to believe that these results will also extent to spiking 
neurons' networks. 
Neuronal weight correction qualitatively improves the ability of a neuron to cor- 
rectly discriminate between a large number of input patterns. It thus enhances 
the computational power of the single neuron and is likely to play a fundamental 
computational role in a variety of brain functions such as perceptual processing and 
associative learning. 
References 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[1] K.D. Miller and D.J.C MacKay. The role of constraints in Hebbian learning. 
Neural Computation, 6(1):100-126, 1994. 
[2] C. von der Malsburg. Self organization of orientation sensitive cells in the 
striate cortex. Kybernetik, 14:85-100, 1973. 
[3] Erkki Oja. A simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. 
Journal of Mathematical Biology, 15:267-273, 1982. 
[4] A. Grinstein Massica and E. Ruppin. Synaptic runaway in associative networks 
and the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Neural Computation, 10:451-465, 1998. 
[5] P. Dayan and D.J. Willshaw. Optimizing synaptic learning rules in linear 
associative memories. Biol. Cyber., 65:253, 1991. 
[6] G. Palm and F. Sommer. Associative data storage and retrielval in neural net- 
works. In E. Domani, J.L. vanHemmen, and eds. K. Schulten, editors, Models 
of Neural Networks III. Association, Generalization and Represantation, pages 
79-118. Springer, 1996. 
[7] M.V. Tsodyks. Associative memory in neural networks with Hebbian learning 
rule. Modern Physics letters, 3(7):555-560, 1989. 
[8] K.D. Miller. Synaptic economics: Competition and cooperation in synaptic 
plasticity. Neuron, 17:371-374, 1996. 
[9] G.G. Turrigano, K. Leslie, N. Desai, and S.B. Nelson. Activity depen- 
dent scaling of quantal amplitude in neocoritcal pyramidal neurons. Nature, 
391 (6670):892-896, 1998. 
T.J. Sejnowski. Statistical constraints on synaptic plasticity. J. Theo. Biol., 
69:385-389, 1977. 
D.J. Willshaw and P. Dayan. Optimal plasticity from matrix memories: What 
goes up must come down. Neural Computation, 2(1):85-93, 1990. 
M.F. Bear and W.C. Abraham. Long term depression in hippocampus. Annu. 
Rev. Neurosci., 19:437-462, 1996. 
R. Kempter, W. Gerstner, and J.L. van Hemmen. Hebbian learning and spiking 
neurons. Phys. Rev. E., 59(4), 1999. 
