Lower Bounds on the Complexity of 
Approximating Continuous Functions by 
Sigmoidal Neural Networks 
Michael Schmitt 
Lehrstuhl Mathematik und Informatik 
Fakultt flit Mathematik 
Ruhr-Universitt Bochum 
D-44780 Bochum, Germany 
mschmitt Imi. ruhr-uni-bochum. de 
Abstract 
We calculate lower bounds on the size of sigmoidal neural networks 
that approximate continuous functions. In particular, we show 
that for the approximation of polynomials the network size has 
to grow as ((log k) U4) where k is the degree of the polynomials. 
This bound is valid for any input dimension, i.e. independently of 
the number of variables. The result is obtained by introducing a 
new method employing upper bounds on the Vapnik-Chervonenkis 
dimension for proving lower bounds on the size of networks that 
approximate continuous functions. 
1 Introduction 
Sigmoidal neural networks are known to be universal approximators. This is one of 
the theoretical results most frequently cited to justify the use of sigmoidal neural 
networks in applications. By this statement one refers to the fact that sigmoidal 
neural networks have been shown to be able to approximate any continuous function 
arbitrarily well. Numerous results in the literature have established variants of 
this universal approximation property by considering distinct function classes to be 
approximated by network architectures using different types of neural activation 
functions with respect to various approximation criteria, see for instance [1, 2, 3, 5, 
6, 11, 12, 14, 15]. (See in particular Scarselli and Tsoi [15] for a recent survey and 
further references.) 
All these results and many others not referenced here, some of them being construc- 
tive, some being merely existence proofs, provide upper bounds for the network size 
asserting that good approximation is possible if there are sufficiently many net- 
work nodes available. This, however, is only a partial answer to the question that 
mainly arises in practical applications: "Given some function, how many network 
nodes are needed to approximate it?" Not much attention has been focused on 
establishing lower bounds on the network size and, in particular, for the approx- 
imation of functions over the reals. As far as the computation of binary-valued 
Complexity of Approximating Continuous Functions by Neural Networks 329 
functions by sigmoidal networks is concerned (where the output value of a network 
is thresholded to yield 0 or 1) there are a few results in this direction. For a spe- 
cific Boolean function Koiran [9] showed that networks using the standard sigmoid 
a(y) = 1/(1 + e -y) as activation function must have size fl(n /4) where n is the 
number of inputs. (When measuring network size we do not count the input nodes 
here and in what follows.) Maass [13] established a larger lower bound by construct- 
ing a binary-valued function over l n and showing that standard sigmoidal networks 
require fl(n) many network nodes for computing this function. The first work on 
the complexity of sigmoidal networks for approximating continuous functions is due 
to DasGupta and Schnitger [4]. They showed that the standard sigmoid in network 
nodes can be replaced by other types of activation functions without increasing the 
size of the network by more than a polynomial. This yields indirect lower bounds 
for the size of sigmoidal networks in terms of other network types. DasGupta and 
Schnitger [4] also claimed the size bound A (/') for sigmoidal networks with d 
layers approximating the function sin(Ax). 
In this paper we consider the problem of using the standard sigmoid a(y) = 
1/(1 + e -y) in neural networks for the approximation of polynomials. We show 
that at least fl((log k) x/4) network nodes are required to approximate polynomials 
of degree k with small error in the l norm. This bound is valid for arbitrary input 
dimension, i.e., it does not depend on the number of variables. (Lower bounds can 
also be obtained from the results on binary-valued functions mentioned above by 
interpolating the corresponding functions by polynomials. This, however, requires 
growing input dimension and does not yield a lower bound in terms of the degree.) 
Further, the bound established here holds for networks of any number of layers. As 
far as we know this is the first lower bound result for the approximation of polyno- 
mials. From the computational point of view this is a very simple class of functions; 
they can be computed using the basic operations addition and multiplication only. 
Polynomials also play an important role in approximation theory since they are 
dense in the class of continuous functions and some approximation results for neu- 
ral networks rely on the approximability of polynomials by sigmoidal networks (see, 
e.g., [2, 15]). 
We obtain the result by introducing a new method that employs upper bounds on 
the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension of neural networks to establish lower bounds 
on the network size. The first use of the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension to obtain 
a lower bound is due to Koiran [9] who calculated the above-mentioned bound 
on the size of sigmoidal networks for a Boolean function. Koiran's method was 
further developed and extended by Maass [13] using a similar argument but another 
combinatorial dimension. Both papers derived lower bounds for the computation 
of binary-valued functions (Koiran [9] for inputs from {0, 1} n, Maass [13] for inputs 
from l n). Here, we present a new technique to show that and how lower bounds can 
be obtained for networks that approximate continuous functions. It rests on two 
fundamental results about the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension of neural networks. 
On the one hand, we use constructions provided by Koiran and Sontag [10] to build 
networks that have large Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension and consist of gates that 
compute certain arithmetic functions. On the other hand, we follow the lines of 
reasoning of Karpinski and Macintyre [7] to derive an upper bound for the Vapnik- 
Chervonenkis dimension of these networks from the estimates of Khovanskil [8] and 
a result due to Warren [16]. 
In the following section we give the definitions of sigmoidal networks and the Vapnik- 
Chervonenkis dimension. Then we present the lower bound result for function 
approximation. Finally, we conclude with some discussion and open questions. 
330 M. Schmitt 
2 Sigmoidal Neural Networks and VC Dimension 
We briefly recall the definitions of a sigmoidal neural network and the Vapnik- 
Chervonenkis dimension (see, e.g., [7, 10]). We consider feedforward neural networks 
which have a certain number of input nodes and one output node. The nodes 
which are not input nodes are called computation nodes and associated with each 
of them is a real number t, the threshold. Further, each edge is labelled with a 
real number w called weight. Computation in the network takes place as follows: 
The input values are assigned to the input nodes. Each computation node applies 
the standard sigmoid a(y) = 1/(1 + e -y) to the sum wxxx + ... + WrXr -- t where 
xx,..., xr are the values computed by the node's predecessors, w,..., wr are the 
weights of the corresponding edges, and t is the threshold. The output value of the 
network is defined to be the value computed by the output node. As it is common 
for approximation results by means of neural networks, we assume that the output 
node is a linear gate, i.e., it just outputs the sum wxxx + ... + wrxr - t. (Clearly, 
for computing functions on finite sets with output range [0, 1] the output node 
may apply the standard sigmoid as well.) Since a is the only sigmoidal function 
that we consider here we will refer to such networks as sigmoidal neural networks. 
(Sigmoidal functions in general need to satisfy much weaker assumptions than a 
does.) The definition naturally generalizes to networks employing other types of 
gates that we will make use of (e.g. linear, multiplication, and division gates). 
The Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension is a combinatorial dimension of a function class 
and is defined as follows: A dichotomy of a set S C_ I n is a partition of S into two 
disjoint subsets (So, Sx) such that So U Sx = S. Given a set . of functions mapping 
ll n to {0, 1} and a dichotomy (So, Sx) of $, we say that . induces the dichotomy 
(S0, Sx) on S if there is some f  . such that f(So) C_ {0} and f(Sx) C_ {1}. 
We say further that  shatters S if  induces all dichotomies on S. The Vapnik- 
Chervonenkis (VC) dimension of , denoted VCdim(), is defined as the largest 
number m such that there is a set of m elements that is shattered by . We refer 
to the VC dimension of a neural network, which is given in terms of a "feedforward 
architecture", i.e. a directed acyclic graph, as the VC dimension of the class of 
functions obtained by assigning real numbers to all its programmable parameters, 
which are in general the weights and thresholds of the network or a subset thereof. 
Further, we assume that the output value of the network is thresholded at 1/2 to 
obtain binary values. 
3 Lower Bounds on Network Size 
Before we present the lower bound on the size of sigmoidal networks required for 
the approximation of polynomials we first give a brief outline of the proof idea. 
We will define a sequence of univariate polynomials (p,,x by means of which 
we show how to construct neural architectures Af,consistg of various types of 
gates such as linear, multiplication, and division gates, and, in particular, gates 
that compute some of the polynomials. Further, this architecture has a single 
weight as programmable parameter (all other weights and thresholds are fixed). 
We then demonstrate that, assuming the gates computing the polynomials can be 
approximated by sigmoidal neural networks sufficiently well, the architecture 
can shatter a certain set by assigning suitable values to its programmable weight. 
The final step is to reason along the lines of Karpinski and Macintyre [7] to obtain 
via Khovanski¾'s estimates [8] and Warren's result [16] an upper bound on the VC 
dimension of Afn in terms of the number of its computation nodes. (Note that we 
cannot directly apply Theorem 7 of [7] since it does not deal with division gates.) 
Comparing this bound with the cardinality of the shattered set we will then be able 
Complexity of Approximating Continuous Functions by Neural Networks 331 
i 
w 
w? ) 
Figure 1: The network A/'n with values k,j,i, 1 assigned to the input nodes 
xx, x2, xa, x4 respectively. The weight w is the only programmable parameter of 
the network. 
to conclude with a lower bound on the number of computation nodes in A/'n and 
thus in the networks that approximate the polynomials. 
Let the sequence (p,),>_x of polynomials over I be inductively defined by 
4x(1 - x) 
p(x) = p(p_x(x)) 
n--l 
n>2. 
Clearly, this uniquely defines p for every n _> 1 and it can readily be seen that 
p has degree 2 n. The main lower bound result is made precise in the following 
statement. 
Theorem 1 Sigmoidal neural networks that approximate the polynomials (p)_> x 
on the interval [0, 1] with error at most O(2 -) in the lo norm must have at least 
(n x/4) computation nodes. 
Proof. For each n a neural architecture Af can be constructed as follows: The 
network has four input nodes xx, x2, xa, x4. Figure I shows the network with input 
values assigned to the input nodes in the order x4 = 1, xa = i, x2 = j, xx = k. 
There is one weight which we consider as the (only) programmable parameter of 
Afn. It is associated with the edge outgoing from input node x4 and is denoted 
by w. The computation nodes are partitioned into six levels as indicated by the 
boxes in Figure 1. Each level is itself a network. Let us first assume, for the sake of 
simplicity, that all computations over real numbers are exact. There are three levels 
labeled with l'I, having n + 1 input nodes and one output node each, that compute 
so-called projections r: 1 + -> 1 where r(y,..., y, a) = Ya for a  {1,..., n}. 
The levels labeled Ps, P2, Px have one input node and n output nodes each. Level 
Ps receives the constant I as input and thus the value w which is the parameter of 
the network. We define the output values of level P for A - 3, 2, 1 by 
w? ) =p,.x-(v) , b-1,...,n 
where v denotes the input value to level PA. This value is equal to w for A = 3 and 
+x) ß 
....  , xx+) otherwise. We observe thatø (x) 
, , '"b+ can be calculated from 
332 M. Schmitt 
w? ') as p,- (w?)). Therefore, the computations of level P can be implemented 
using n gates each of them computing the function Pn-- 
We show now that Afn can shatter a set of cardinality r 3. Let S = {1,..., r} 3. It 
has been shown in Lemma 2 of [10] that for each (/x,...,/%)  {0, 1} r the}e exists 
some w  [0, 1] such that for q = 1,..., r 
pq(w) 6 [0,1/2) if&=0, andpq(w)  (1/2,1] if&=l. 
This implies that, for each dichotomy (So, $x) of $ there is some w  [0, 1] such 
that for every (i, j, k)  S 
pk(Pj.n(Pi.n2(W))) < 1/2 if (i,j,k)  So, 
Pk(Pj.n(Pi.n2(W))) > 1/2 if (i,j,k)  Sx . 
Note that P(Pj.n(Pi.na (w))) is the value computed by A/'n given input values k, j, i, 1. 
Therefore, choosing a suitable value for w, which is the parameter of Afn, the network 
can induce any dichotomy on S. In other words, S is shattered by 
It has been shown in Lemma 1 of [10] that there is an architecture .A such that 
for each e > 0 weights can be chosen for An such that the function fn, computed 
by this network satisfies lim_0 fn, (yx,..., Yn, a) = ya. Moreover, this architecture 
consists of O(n) computation nodes, which are linear, multiplication, and division 
gates. (Note that the size of An does not depend on e.) Therefore, choosing 
sufficiently small, we can implement the projections r in A/'n by networks of O(n) 
computation nodes such that the resulting network A/'' still shatters $. Now in A/'' 
we have O(n) computation nodes for implementing the three levels labeled II and 
we have in each level P a number of O(n) computation nodes for computing 
respectively. Assume now that the computation nodes for Pn- can be replaced 
by sigmoidal networks such that on inputs from S and with the parameter values 
defined above the resulting network A/'" computes the same functions as A/''. (Note 
that the computation nodes for Pn- have no programmable parameters.) 
We estimate the size of A/'". According to Theorem 7 of Karpinski and Macintyre 
[7] a sigmoidal neural network with I programmable parameters and m computation 
nodes has VC dimension O((ml)a). We have to generalize this result slightly before 
being able to apply it. It can readily be seen from the proof of Theorem 7 in [7] that 
the result also holds if the network additionally contains linear and multiplication 
gates. For division gates we can derive the same bound taking into account that for 
a gate computing division, say :r/y, we can introduce a defining equality x = z ß y 
where z is a new variable. (See [7] for how to proceed.) Thus, we have that a 
network with I programmable parameters and m computation nodes, which are 
linear, multiplication, division, and sigmoidal gates, has VC dimension O((ml)a). 
In particular, if m is the number of computation nodes of A/'", the VC dimension 
is O(ma). On the other hand, as we have shown above, A/'" can shatter a set 
of cardinality r 3. Since there are O(n) sigmoidal networks in A/'" computing the 
functions Pn-, and since the number of linear, multiplication, and division gates 
is bounded by O(n), for some value of A a single network computing Pn- must 
have size at least (v). This yields a lower bound of (r x/4) for the size of a 
sigmoidal network computing 
Thus far, we have assumed that the polynomials Pn are computed exactly. Sincb 
polynomials are continuous functions and since we require them to be calculated 
only on a finite set of input values (those resulting from S and from the parameter 
values chosen for w to shatter S) an approximation of these polynomials is sufficient. 
A straightforward analysis, based on the fact that the output value of the network 
has a "tolerance" close to 1/2, shows that if pn is approximated with error O(2 -n) 
Complexity of Approximating Continuous Functions by Neural Networks 333 
in the Im norm, the resulting network still shatters the set $. This completes the 
proof of the theorem. [] 
The statement of the previous theorem is restricted to the approximation of poly- 
nomials on the input domain [0, 1]. However, the result immediately generalizes to 
any arbitrary interval in 11. Moreover, it remains valid for multivariate polynomials 
of arbitrary input dimension. 
Corollary 2 The approximation of polynomials of degree k by sigmoidal neural 
networks with approximation error O(1/k) in the loo norm requires networks of size 
f((log k)/4). This holds for polynomials over any number of variables. 
4 Conclusions and Open Questions 
We have established lower bounds on the size of sigmoidal networks for the approx- 
imation of continuous functions. In particular, for a concrete class of polynomials 
we have calculated a lower bound in terms of the degree of the polynomials. The 
main result already holds for the approximation of univariate polynomials. Intu- 
itively, approximation of multivariate polynomials seems to become harder when 
the dimension increases. Therefore, it would be interesting to have lower bounds 
both in terms of the degree and the input dimension. 
Further, in our result the approximation error and the degree are coupled. Naturally, 
one would expect that the number of nodes has to grow for each fixed function when 
the error decreases. At present we do not know of any such lower bound. 
We have not aimed at calculating the constants in the bounds. For practical appli- 
cations such values are indispensable. Refining our method and using tighter results 
it should be straightforward to obtain such numbers. Further, we expect that better 
lower bounds can be obtained by considering networks of restricted depth. 
To establish the result we have introduced a new method for deriving lower bounds 
on network sizes. One of the main arguments is to use the functions to be approxi- 
mated to construct networks with large VC dimension. The method seems suitable 
to obtain bounds also for the approximation of other types of functions as long as 
they are computationally powerful enough. 
Moreover, the method could be adapted to obtain lower bounds also for networks 
using other activation functions (e.g. more general sigmoidal functions, ridge func- 
tions, radial basis functions). This may lead to new separation results for the 
approximation capabilities of different types of neural networks. In order for this 
to be accomplished, however, an essential requirement is that small upper bounds 
can be calculated for the VC dimension of such networks. 
Acknowledgments 
I thank Hans U. Simon for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part 
by the ESPRIT Working Group in Neural and Computational Learning II, Neuro- 
COLT2, No. 27150. 
References 
[1] A. Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superposition of a sigmoidal 
function. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 39:930-945, 1993. 
334 M. Schmitt 
[16] 
[2] C. K. Chui and X. Li. Approximation by ridge functions and neural networks 
with one hidden layer. Journal of Approximation Theory, 70:131-141, 1992. 
[3] G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math- 
ematics of Control, Signals, and Systems, 2:303-314, 1989. 
[4] B. DasGupta and G. Schnitger. The power of approximating: A comparison 
of activation functions. In C. L. Giles, S. J. Hanson, and J. D. Cowan, editors, 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 5, pages 615-622, Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1993. 
[5] K. Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. 
Neural Networks, 4:251-257, 1991. 
[6] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White. Multilayer feedforward networks 
are universal approximators. Neural Networks, 2:359-366, 1989. 
[7] M. Karpinski and A. Macintyre. Polynomial bounds for VC dimension of 
sigmoidal and general Pfattian neural networks. Journal of Computer and 
System Sciences, 54:169-176, 1997. 
[8] A. G. Khovanski¾. Fewnomials, volume 88 of Translations of Mathematical 
Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1991. 
[9] P. Koiran. VC dimension in circuit complexity. In Proceedings of the 11th 
Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity CCC'96, pages 81-85, 
IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1996. 
[10] P. Koiran and E. D. Sontag. Neural networks with quadratic VC dimension. 
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 54:190-198, 1997. 
[11] V. Y. Kreinovich. Arbitrary nonlinearity is sufficient to represent all functions 
by neural networks: A theorem. Neural Networks, 4:381-383, 1991. 
[12] M. Leshno, V. Y. Lin, A. Pinkus, and $. Schocken. Multilayer feedforward net- 
works with a nonpolynomial activation function can approximate any function. 
Neural Networks, 6:861-867, 1993. 
[13] W. Maass. Noisy spiking neurons with temporal coding have more compu- 
tational power than sigmoidal neurons. In M. Mozer, M. I. Jordan, and 
T. Petsche, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 9, 
pages 211-217. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1997. 
[14] H. Mhaskar. Neural networks for optimal approximation of smooth and analytic 
functions. Neural Computation, 8:164-177, 1996. 
[15] F. Scarselli and A. C. Tsoi. Universal approximation using feedforward neural 
networks: A survey of some existing methods and some new results. Neural 
Networks, 11:15-37, 1998. 
H. E. Warren. Lower bounds for approximation by nonlinear manifolds. Trans- 
actions of the American Mathematical Society, 133:167-178, 1968. 
