Differentiating Functions of the Jacobian 
with Respect to the Weights 
Gary William Flake 
NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
flake @ research. nj. ne c. corn 
Barak A. Pearlmutter 
Dept of Computer Science, FEC 313 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
bap @ cs. unm. edu 
Abstract 
For many problems, the correct behavior of a model depends not only on 
its input-output mapping but also on properties of its Jacobian matrix, the 
matrix of partial derivatives of the model's outputs with respect to its in- 
puts. We introduce the J-prop algorithm, an efficient general method for 
computing the exact partial derivatives of a variety of simple functions of 
the Jacobian of a model with respect to its free parameters. The algorithm 
applies to any parametrized feedforward model, including nonlinear re- 
gression, multilayer perceptrons, and radial basis function networks. 
1 Introduction 
Let f (a:, w) be an n input, m output, twice differentiable feedforward model parameterized 
by an input vector, a:, and a weight vector w. Its Jacobian matrix is defined as 
... Of 
O/m ... 
df(a:, w) 
dx 
The algorithm we introduce can be used to optimize functions of the form 
or 
I 2 
1 
Ev(w) =  IIJv - bll 2 (2) 
where u, v, a, and b are user-defined constants. Our algorithm, which we call J-prop, 
can be used to calculate the exact value of both OEu/Ow or OEv/OW in O(1) times the 
time required to calculate the normal gradient. Thus, J-prop is suitable for training models 
to have specific first derivatives, or for implementing several other well-known algorithms 
such as Double Backpropagation [1] and Tangent Prop [2]. 
Clearly, being able to optimize Equations 1 and 2 is useful; however, we suspect that the 
formalism which we use to derive our algorithm is actually more interesting because it 
allows us to modify J-prop to easily be applicable to a wide-variety of model types and 
436 G. W. Flake and B. A. Pearlmutter 
objective functions. As such, we spend a fair portion of this paper describing the mathe- 
matical framework from which we later build J-prop. 
This paper is divided into four more sections. Section 2 contains background information 
and motivation for why optimizing the properties of the Jacobian is an important problem. 
Section 3 introduces our formalism and contains the derivation of the J-prop algorithm. 
Section 4 contains a brief numerical example of J-prop. And, finally, Section 5 describes 
further work and gives our conclusions. 
2 Background and motivation 
Previous work concerning the modeling of an unknown function and its derivatives can be 
divided into works that are descriptive or prescriptive. Perhaps the best known descriptive 
result is due to White et al. [3, 4], who show that given noise-free data, a multilayer percep- 
tron (MLP) can approximate the higher derivatives of an unknown function in the limit as 
the number of training points goes to infinity. The difficulty with applying this result is the 
strong requirements on the amount and integrity of the training data; requirements which 
are rarely met in practice. This problem was specifically demonstrated by Principe, Rathie 
and Kuo [5] and Deco and Schfirmann [6], who showed that using noisy training data from 
chaotic systems can lead to models that are accurate in the input-output sense, but inaccu- 
rate in their estimates of quantifies related to the Jacobian of the unknown system, such as 
the largest Lyapunov exponent and the correlation dimension. 
MLPs are particularly problematic because large weights can lead to saturation at a particu- 
lar sigmoidal neuron which, in turn, results in extremely large first derivatives at the neuron 
when evaluated near the center of the sigmoid transition. Several methods to combat this 
type of over-fitting have been proposed. One of the earliest methods, weight decay [7], 
uses a penalty term on the magnitude of the weights. Weight decay is arguably optimal 
for models in which the output is linear in the weights because minimizing the magnitude 
of the weights is equivalent to minimizing the magnitude of the model's first derivatives. 
However, in the nonlinear case, weight decay can have suboptimal performance [1] be- 
cause large (or small) weights do not always correspond to having large (or small) first 
derivatives. 
The Double Backpropagation algorithm [1] adds an additional penalty term to the error 
function equal to I lcgE/cga:ll 2. Training on this function results in a form of regularization 
that is in many ways an elegant combination of weight decay and training with noise: it is 
strictly analytic (unlike training with noise) but it explicitly penalizes large first derivatives 
of the model (unlike weight decay). Double Backpropagation can be seen as a special case 
of J-prop, the algorithm derived in this paper. 
As to the general problem of coercing the first derivatives of a model to specific values, 
Simard, et al., [2] introduced the Tangent Prop algorithm, which was used to train MLPs 
for optical character recognition to be insensitive to small affine transformations in the 
character space. Tangent Prop can also be considered a special case of J-prop. 
3 Derivation 
We now define a formalism under which J-prop can be easily derived. The method is 
very similar to a technique introduced by Pearlmutter [8] for calculating the product of the 
Hessian of an MLP and an arbitrary vector. However, where Pearlmutter used differential 
operators applied to a model's weight space, we use differential operators defined with 
respect to a model's input space. 
Our entire derivation is presented in five steps. First, we will define an auxiliary error 
Differentiating Funca'ons of the Jacobian 43 7 
function that has a few useful mathematical properties that simplify the derivation. Next, 
we will define a special differential operator that can be applied to both the auxiliary error 
function, and its gradient with respect to the weights. We will then see that the result of 
applying the differential operator to the gradient of the auxiliary error function is equivalent 
to analytically calculating the derivatives required to optimize Equations 1 and 2. We then 
show an example of the technique applied to an MLP. Finally, in the last step, the complete 
algorithm is presented. 
To avoid confusion, when referring to generic data-driven models, the model will always be 
expressed as a vector function y = f(x, w), where x refers to the model input and to refers 
to a vector of all of the tunable parameters of the model. In this way, we can talk about 
models while ignoring the mechanics of how the models work internally. Complementary 
to the generic vector notation, the notation for an MLP uses only scalar symbols; however, 
these symbols must refer to internal variable of the model (e.g., neuron thresholds, net 
inputs, weights, etc.), which can lead to some ambiguity. To be clear, when using vector 
notation, the input and output of an MLP will always be denoted by x and y, respectively, 
and the collection of all of the weights (including biases) map to the vector to. However, 
when using scalar arithmetic, the scalar notation for MLPs will apply. 
3.1 Auxiliary error function 
Our auxiliary error function,/, is defined as 
to)= urf(, to). 
(3) 
Note that we never actually optimize with respect ; we define it only because it has the 
property that 0//0x = uTJ, which will be useful to the derivation shortly. Note that 
0//0x appears in the Taylor expansion of/ about a point in input space: 
(4) 
Thus, while holding the weights, to, fixed and letting Ax be a perturbation of the input, x, 
Equation 4 characterizes how small changes in the input of the model change the value of 
the auxiliary error function. 
Be setting Ax = rv, with v being an arbitrary vector and r being a small value, we can 
rearrange Equation 4 into the form: 
~T 
= lim 1 [/(x+rv, w) l(x,w)l 
r---0 T 
u T Jr = 31(x+rv'w),.=o' (5) 
This final expression will allow us to define the differential operator in the next subsection. 
3.2 Differential operator 
Let h(x, to) be an arbitrary twice differentiable function. 
operator 
0 t(x + rv, to) 
We define the differentiable 
(6) 
438 G. W. Flake and B. .4. Pearlmutter 
which has the property that R¾{/(x, w)} = urJv. Being a differential operator, R¾{.} 
obeys all of the standard rules for differentiation: 
The operator also yields the identity _¾{x} - v. 
3.3 Equivalence 
We will now see that the result of calculating/¾{0//0to} can be used to calculate both 
OE,/Oto and OEv/Oto. Note that Equations 3-5 all assume that both u and v are in- 
dependent of :r and to. To calculate OEu/Oto and OEv/Oto, we will actually set u or 
v to a value that depends on both :r and to; however, the derivation still works because 
our choices are explicitly made in such a way that the chain rule of differentiation is not 
supposed to be applied to these terms. Hence, the correct analytical solution is obtained 
despite the dependence. 
To optimize with respect to Equation 1, we use: 
(7) 
I l 
i -- y l--1 l 
Yj Wij -- 0 i. 
J 
In these equations, superscripts denote the layer number (starting at 0), subscripts index 
over terms in a particular layer, and Nt is the number of input nodes in layer I. Thus, y is 
t is the net input coming into the same neuron. 
the output of neuron i at node layer l, and x i 
Moreover, yp is an output of the entire MLP while y/o is an input going into the MLP. 
The feedback equations calculated with respect to/ are: 
= ui (11) 
(10) 
with v = (JTtt - a). To optimize with respect to Equation 2, we use: 
0 1,,Jv_b[,2=(Jv_b)TlOJv  
ow2 k-w-wj = ' (8) 
with u - (Jv - b). 
3.4 Method applied to MLPs 
We are now ready to see how this technique can be applied to a specific type of model. 
Consider an MLP with L + 1 layers of nodes defined by the equations: 
y-- g(3fi) (9) 
Nt 
Differentiating Functions of the JacobJan 439 
01 v,+ 01 
-- wij ,' l-q- 1 
j IJXj 
= 
Ox; Oy 
o o 
l--1 
= yj 
Ow 
(for/< L) (12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
where the u i term is a component in the vector u from Equation 1. Applying the R,,{-} 
operator to the feedforward equations yields: 
4y?) = 
= 
?)i (16) 
I l 
g'(xi)Rv{xi} (for/ > 0) (17) 
N, 
E Rv{Y} -1 ) wlij ' (18) 
J 
where the vi term is a component in the vector v from Equation 2. As the final step, we 
apply the R,,{.} operator to the feedback equations, which yields: 
Rv Oy i 
n-Z--_/. 5 = 0 (19) 
O  t+ ,_, f 0/ (for/ < L) (20) 
OYi j 
= + 9"(x'i) 44) (21) 
R Owti j = R  yj + {yj- } (22) 
ox i 
o 
}. (23) 
3.5 Complete algorithm 
Implementing this algorithm is nearly as simple as implementing normal gradient descent. 
For each type of variable that is used in an MLP (net input, neuron output, weights, thresh- 
olds, partial derivatives, etc.), we require that an extra variable be allocated to hold the 
result of applying the R,,{.} operator to the original variable. With this change in place, the 
complete algorithm to compute OE,/Ow is as follows: 
ß Set u and a to the user specified vectors from Equation 1. 
ß Set the MLP inputs to the value of x that J is to be evaluated at. 
ß Perform a normal feedforward pass using Equations 9 and 10. 
ß Set 0//0yi 6 to ui. 
440 G. W. Flake and B. A. Pearlmutter 
(a) Co) 
Figure 1: Learning only the derivative: showing (a) poor approximation of the function 
with (b) excellent approximation of the derivative. 
ß Perform the feedback pass with Equations 11-15. Note that values in the 
terms are now equal to JTu. 
ß Set v to (JTu -- a) 
ß Perform a Rv{.} forward pass with Equations 16-18. 
ß Set the P,{0//0gt/L} terms to0. 
ß Perform a Rv{.} backward pass with Equations 19-23. 
After the last step, the values in the R,,,{Ot/Owtij} and R,,,{01/00(} terms contain the 
required result. It is important to note that the time complexity of thd"J-forward" and "J- 
backward" calculations are nearly identical to the typical output and gradient evaluations 
(i.e., the "forward" and "backward" passes) of the models used. 
A similar technique can be used for calculating OEv/OW. The main difference is that the 
Rv{-} forward pass is performed between the normal forward and backward passes because 
u can only be determined after the P{f(a:, w)) has been calculated. 
4 Experimental results 
To demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of the J-prop algorithm, we have imple- 
mented it on top of an existing neural network library [9] in such a way that the algorithm 
can be used on a large number of architectures, including MLPs, radial basis function net- 
works, and higher order networks. 
We trained an MLP with ten hidden tanh nodes on 100 points with conjugate gradient. The 
training exemplars consisted of inputs in [-1, 1] and a target derivative from 3 cos(3a:) + 
5 cos(10a:). Our unknown function (which the MLP never sees data from) is sin(3a:) + 
- sin(10a:). The model quickly converges to a solution in approximately 100 iterations. 
Figure 1 shows the performance of the MLP. Having never seen data from the unknown 
function, the MLP yields a poor approximation of the function, but a very accurate approx- 
imation of the function's derivative. We could have trained on both outputs and derivatives, 
but our goal was to illustrate that J-prop can target derivatives alone. 
Differentiating Functions of the Jacobian 441 
5 Conclusions 
We have introduced a general method for calculating the weight gradient of functions of 
the Jacobian matrix of feedforward nonlinear systems. The method can be easily applied to 
most nonlinear models in common use today. The resulting algorithm, J-prop, can be easily 
modified to minimize functionals from several application domains [10]. Some possible 
uses include: targeting known first derivatives, implementing Tangent Prop and Double 
Backpropagation, enforcing identical I/O sensitivities in auto-encoders, deflating the largest 
eigenvalue and minimizing all eigenvalue bounds, optimizing the determinant for blind 
source separation, and building nonlinear controllers. 
While some special cases of the J-prop algorithm have already been studied, a great deal 
is unknown about how optimization of the Jacobian changes the overall optimization prob- 
lem. Some anecdotal evidence seems to imply that optimization of the Jacobian can lead to 
better generalization and faster training. It remains to be seen if J-prop used on a nonlinear 
extension of linear methods will lead to superior solutions. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Frans Coetzee, Yannis Kevrekidis, Joe O'Ruanaidh, Lucas Parra, Scott Rickard, 
Justinian Rosca, and Patrice Simard for helpful discussions. GWF would also like to thank 
Eric Baum and the NEC Research Institute for funding the time to write up these results. 
References 
[ 1 ] H. Drucker and Y. Le Cun. Improving generalization performance using double back- 
propagation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 3(6), November 1992. 
[2] P. Simard, B. Victorri, Y. Le Cun, and J. Denker. Tangent prop--A formalism for 
specifying selected invariances in an adaptive network. In John E. Moody, Steve J. 
Hanson, and Richard P. Lippmann, editors, Advances in Neural Information Process- 
ing Systems, volume 4, pages 895-903. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 1992. 
[3] H. White and A. R. Gallant. On learning the derivatives of an unknown mapping 
with multilayer feedforward networks. In Halbert White, editor, Artificial Neural 
Networks, chapter 12, pages 206-223. Blackwell, Cambridge, Mass., 1992. 
[4] H. White, K. Hornik, and M. Stinchcombe. Universal approximation of an unknown 
mapping and its derivative. In Halbert White, editor, Artificial Neural Networks, 
chapter 6, pages 55-77. Blackwell, Cambridge, Mass., 1992. 
[5] J. Principe, A. Rathie, and J. Kuo. Prediction of chaotic time series with neural 
networks and the issues of dynamic modeling. Bifurcations and Chaos, 2(4), 1992. 
[6] G. Deco and B. Schfirmann. Dynamic modeling of chaotic time series. In Russell 
Greiner, Thomas Petsche, and Stephen Jos6 Hanson, editors, Computational Learn- 
ing Theory and Natural Learning Systems, volume IV of Making Learning Systems 
Practical, chapter 9, pages 137-153. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1997. 
[7] G. E. Hinton. Learning distributed representations of concepts. In Proc. Eigth Annual 
Conf Cognitive Science Society, pages 1-12, Hillsdale, NJ, 1986. Erlbaum. 
[8] Barak A. Pearlmutter. Fast exact multiplication by the Hessian. Neural Computation, 
6(1):147-160, 1994. 
[9] G. W. Flake. Industrial strength modeling tools. Submitted to NIPS 99, 1999. 
[ 10] G.W. Flake and B. A. Pearlmutter. Optimizing properties of the Jacobian of nonlinear 
feedforward systems. In preperation, 1999. 
