Approximate inference algorithms for two-layer 
Bayesian networks 
Andrew Y. Ng 
Computer Science Division 
UC Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
ang @ cs. berkeley. edu 
Michael I. Jordan 
Computer Science Division and 
Department of Statistics 
UC Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
jordan @ cs. berkeley. edu 
Abstract 
We present a class of approximate inference algorithms for graphical 
models of the QMR-DT type. We give convergence rates for these al- 
gorithms and for the Jaakkola and Jordan (1999) algorithm, and verify 
these theoretical predictions empirically. We also present empirical re- 
sults on the difficult QMR-DT network problem, obtaining performance 
of the new algorithms roughly comparable to the Jaakkola and Jordan 
algorithm. 
1 Introduction 
The graphical models formalism provides an appealing framework for the design and anal- 
ysis of network-based learning and inference systems. The formalism endows graphs with 
a joint probability distribution and interprets most queries of interest as marginal or con- 
ditional probabilities under this joint. For a fixed model one is generally interested in the 
conditional probability of an output given an input (for prediction), or an input conditional 
on the output (for diagnosis or control). During learning the focus is usually on the like- 
lihood (a marginal probability), on the conditional probability of unobserved nodes given 
observed nodes (e.g., for an EM or gradient-based algorithm), or on the conditional proba- 
bility of the parameters given the observed data (in a Bayesian setting). 
In all of these cases the key computational operation is that of marginalization. There are 
several methods available for computing marginal probabilities in graphical models, most 
of which involve some form of message-passing on the graph. Exact methods, while viable 
in many interesting cases (involving sparse graphs), are infeasible in the dense graphs that 
we consider in the current paper. A number of approximation methods have evolved to treat 
such cases; these include search-based methods, loopy propagation, stochastic sampling, 
and variational methods. 
Variational methods, the focus of the current paper, have been applied successfully to a 
number of large-scale inference problems. In particular, Jaakkola and Jordan (1999) de- 
veloped a variational inference method for the QMR-DT network, a benchmark network 
involving over 4,000 nodes (see below). The variational method provided accurate ap- 
proximation to posterior probabilities within a second of computer time. For this difficult 
534 A. Y. Ng and M. I. dordan 
inference problem exact methods are entirely infeasible (see below), loopy propagation 
does not converge to correct posteriors (Murphy, Weiss, & Jordan, 1999), and stochastic 
sampling methods are slow and unreliable (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1999). 
A significant step forward in the understanding of variational inference was made by Kearns 
and Saul (1998), who used large deviation techniques to analyze the convergence rate of 
a simplified variational inference algorithm. Imposing conditions on the magnitude of the 
weights in the network, they established a O(v/log N/N) rate of convergence for the error 
of their algorithm, where N is the fan-in. 
In the current paper we utilize techniques similar to those of Kearns and Saul to derive a 
new set of variational inference algorithms with rates that are faster than O(v/log N/N). 
Our techniques also allow us to analyze the convergence rate of the Jaakkola and Jordan 
(1999) algorithm. We test these algorithms on an idealized problem and verify that our 
analysis correctly predicts their rates of convergence. We then apply these algorithms to 
the difficult the QMR-DT network problem. 
2 Background 
2.1 The QMR-DT network 
The QMR-DT (Quick Medical Reference, Decision-Theoretic) network is a bipartite graph 
with approximately 600 top-level nodes di representing diseases and approximately 4000 
lower-level nodes f5 representing findings (observed symptoms). All nodes are binary- 
valued. Each disease is given a prior probability P(di -- 1), obtained from archival data, 
and each finding is parameterized as a "noisy-OR" model: 
where ri is the set of parent diseases for finding fi, and where the parameters 0ij are 
obtained from assessments by medical experts (see Shwe, et al., 1991). 
Letting zi = Oio + YjE Oid, we have the following expression for the likelihoodl: 
i----1 i=1 jl 
(1) 
where the sum is a sum across the approximately 26øø configurations of the diseases. Note 
that the second product, a product over the negative findings, factorizes across the diseases 
ds; these factors can be absorbed into the priors P(d) and have no significant effect on the 
complexity of inference. It is the positive findings which couple the diseases and prevent 
the sum from being distributed across the product. 
Generic exact algorithms such as the junction tree algorithm scale exponentially in the 
size of the maximal clique in a moralized, triangulated graph. Jaakkola and Jordan (1999) 
found cliques of more than 150 nodes in QMR-DT; this rules out the junction tree algo- 
rithm. Heckerman (1989) discovered a factorization specific to QMR-DT that reduces the 
complexity substantially; however the resulting algorithm still scales exponentially in the 
number of positive findings and is only feasible for a small subset of the benchmark cases. 
In this expression, the factors P(dj) are the probabilities associated with the (parent-less) disease 
nodes, the factors (1 - e -z ) are the probabilities of the (child) finding nodes that are observed to be 
in their positive state, and the factors e- z are the probabilities of the negative findings. The resulting 
product is the joint probability P(f, d), which is marginalized to obtain the likelihood P(f). 
Approximate Inference Algorithms for Two-Layer Bayesian Networks 535 
2.2 The Jaakkola and Jordan (J J) algorithm 
Jaakkola and Jordan (1999) proposed a variational algorithm for approximate inference in 
the QMR-DT setting. Briefly, their approach is to make use of the following variational 
inequality: 
I - e -zl <_ e 'izi--ci , 
where ci is a deterministic function of )q. This inequality holds for arbitrary values of 
the free "variational parameter" Ai. Substituting these variational upper bounds for the 
probabilities of positive findings in Eq. (1), one obtains a factorizable upper bound on the 
likelihood. Because of the factorizability, the sum across diseases can be distributed across 
the joint probability, yielding a product of sums rather than a sum of products. One then 
minimizes the resulting expression with respect to the variational parameters to obtain the 
tightest possible variational bound. 
2.3 The Kearns and Saul (KS) algorithm 
A simplified variational algorithm was proposed by Kearns and Saul (1998), whose main 
goal was the theoretical analysis of the rates of convergence for variational algorithms. In 
their approach, the local conditional probability for the finding fi is approximated by its 
value at a point a small distance i above or below (depending on whether upper or lower 
bounds are desired) the mean input E[zi]. This yields a variational algorithm in which the 
values i are the variational parameters to be optimized. Under the assumption that the 
weights Oij are bounded in magnitude by r/N, where r is a constant and N is the number 
of parent ("disease") nodes, Kearns and Saul showed that the error in likelihood for their 
algorithm converges at a rate of O(x/log N/N). 
3 Algorithms based on local expansions 
Inspired by Kearns and Saul (1998), we describe the design of approximation algorithms 
for QMR-DT obtained by expansions around the mean input to the finding nodes. Rather 
than using point approximations as in the Kearns-Saul (KS) algorithm, we make use of 
Taylor expansions. (See also Plefka (1982), and Barber and van de Laar (1999) for other 
perturbational techniques.) 
Consider a generalized QMR-DT architecture in which the noisy-OR model is replaced by a 
general function b(z): 11 --> [0, 1] having uniformly bounded derivatives, i.e., Ib(i) (z)l < 
B i. Define F(z1,... ,ZK) -- H/K=i (½(zi)) fl H/K=i (1- )(zi)) 1-fl so that the likelihood 
can be written as 
P(f) = E{z,}[F(zl,...,ZK)]. (2) 
N 
Also define/i = E[zi] = Oio + Ej=i OoP(dJ = 1). 
A simple mean-field-like approximation can be obtained by evaluating F at the mean values 
/i: 
P(f)  F(i,... ,K). (3) 
We refer to this approximation as "MF(0)." 
Expanding the function F to second order, and defining ci -- zi - Ii, we have: 
K I K K 
P(f) = E{,,} F()+ E Fil()cixq- .1 E E Fili2()ili2 q- 
t. i:1 i1=1 i=1 
1 K K K __> 
- E E E Zili2i$( *)ili2i$ (4) 
i1=1 i2=1 ia=l 
536 A. Y. Ng and M. I. dordan 
where the subscripts on F represent derivatives. Dropping the remainder term and bringing 
the expectation inside, we have the "MF(2)" approximation: 
1 K K 
P(f)  F() +    Fili2()E[ili2] 
i1=1 i2-1 
More generally, we obtain a "MF(i)" approximation by carrying out a Taylor expansion to 
i-th order. 
3.1 Analysis 
In this section, we give two theorems establishing convergence rates for the MF(i) family 
of algorithms and for the Jaakkola and Jordan algorithm. As in Kearns and Saul (1998), 
our results are obtained under the assumption that the weights are of magnitude at most 
O(1/N) (recall that N is the number of disease nodes). For large N, this assumption of 
"weak interactions" implies that each zi will be close to its mean value with high probability 
(by the law of large numbers), and thereby gives justification to the use of local expansions 
for the probabilities of the findings. 
Due to space constraints, the detailed proofs of the theorems given in this section are de- 
ferred to the long version of this paper, and we will instead only sketch the intuitions for 
the proofs here. 
Theorem 1 Let K (the number offindings) be fixed, and suppose IOijl _<  for all i, j for 
some fixed constant r. Then the absolute error of the MF( k ) approximation is 0 ( 1 
N(/+1)/2 ) 
1 
for k odd and 0 (N(/2+1) ) for k even. 
Proof intuition. First consider the case of odd k. Since IOijl < r 
_ N, the quantity ei = zi - 
Ii = Y',j Oij(dj - E[dj]) is like an average of N random variables, and hence has standard 
deviation on the order I/v/fl. Since MF(k) matches F up to the k-th order derivatives, we 
find that when we take a Taylor expansion of MF(k)'s error, the leading non-zero term is the 
_k+l Now because ei has standard 
k + 1-st order term, which contains quantities such as i ß 
deviation on the order 1/v/if, it is unsurprising that E[e +1] is on the order l/N( +1)/2, 
which gives the error of MF(k) for odd k. 
For k even, the leading non-zero term in the Taylor expansion of the error is a k + 1-st order 
_+1 But if we think of ei as converging (via a central limit 
term with quantities such as i ß 
theorem effect) to a symmetric distribution, then since symmetric distributions have small 
odd central moments, E[e/+1] would be small. This means that for k even, we may look to 
the order k + 2 term for the error, which leads to MF(k) having the the same big-O error as 
MF(k + 1). Note this is also consistent with how MF(0) and MF(1) always give the same 
estimates and hence have the same absolute error. [] 
A theorem may also be proved for the convergence rate of the Jaakkola and Jordan (JJ) 
algorithm. For simplicity, we state it here only for noisy-OR networks. 2 A closely related 
result also holds for sigmoid networks with suitably modified assumptions; see the full 
paper. 
Theorem 2 Let K be fixed, and suppose b(z) = 1-e -z is the noisy-OR function. Suppose 
further that 0 < Oij  k for all i, j for some fixed constant r, and that Ii _> ]gmin for all 
i, for some fixed ]gmin > 0. Then the absolute error of the JJ approximation is 0 (- ). 
2Note in any case that JJ can be applied only when b is log-concave, such as in noisy-OR networks 
(where incidentally all weights are non-negative). 
Approximate Inference Algorithms for Two-Layer Bayesian Networks 537 
The condition of some/gmi n lowerbounding the/zi's ensures that the findings are not too 
unlikely; for it to hold, it is sufficient that there be bias ("leak") nodes in the network with 
weights bounded away from zero. 
Proof intuition. Neglecting negative findings, (which as discussed do not need to be han- 
dled variationally,) this result is proved for a "simplified" version of the JJ algorithm, that 
always chooses the variational parameters so that for each i, the exponential upperbound 
on P(zi) is tangent to ;b at zi -/zi. (The "normal" version of JJ can have error no worse 
than this simplified one.) Taking a Taylor expansion again of the approximation's error, we 
find that since the upperbound has matched zeroth and first derivatives with F, the error is 
2 As discussed in the MF(k) proof outline, 
a second order term with quantities such as e i . 
this quantity has expectation on the order I/N, and hence JJ's error is O(1/N). [] 
To summarize our results in the most useful cases, we find that MF(0) has a convergence 
rate of O(1/N), both MF(2) and MF(3) have rates of O(1/N2), and JJ has a convergence 
rate of O(1/N). 
4 Simulation results 
4.1 Artificial networks 
We carried out a set of simulations that were intended to verify the theoretical results pre- 
sented in the previous section. We used bipartite noisy-OR networks, with full connectivity 
between layers and with the weights Oij chosen uniformly in (0, 2IN). The number N of 
top-level ("disease") nodes ranged from 10 to 1000. Priors on the disease nodes were 
chosen uniformly in (0, 1). 
The results are shown in Figure 1 for one and five positive findings (similar results where 
obtained for additional positive findings). 
10 ø 
i;o o0o 
#diseases 
lO 6 
lff a 
10 100 1000 
#diseases 
Figure 1: Absolute error in likelihood (averaged over many randomly generated networks) as a func- 
tion of the number of disease nodes for various algorithms. The short-dashed lines are the KS upper 
and lower bounds (these curves overlap in the left panel), the long-dashed line is the JJ algorithm and 
the solid lines are MF(0), MF(2) and MF(3) (the latter two curves overlap in the right panel). 
The results are entirely consistent with the theoretical analysis, showing nearly exactly the 
expected slopes of -1/2, -1 and -2 on a loglog plot. 3 Moreover, the asymptotic results are 
3The anomalous behavior of the KS lower bound in the second panel is due to the fact that the 
algorithm generally finds a vacuous lower bound of 0 in this case, which yields an error which is 
essentially constant as a function of the number of diseases. 
538 A. Y. Ng and M. I. Jordan 
also predictive of overall performance: the MF(2) and MF(3) algorithms perform best in 
all cases, MF(0) and JJ are roughly equivalent, and KS is the least accurate. 
4.2 QMR-DT network 
We now present results for the QMR-DT network, in particular for the four benchmark 
CPC cases studied by Jaakkola and Jordan (1999). These cases all have fewer than 20 
positive findings; thus it is possible to run the Heckerman (1989) "Quickscore" algorithm 
to obtain the true likelihood. 
Case 16 
Case 32 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 
#Exactly treated findings #Exactly treated findings 
Figure 2: Results for CPC cases 16 and 32, for different numbers of exactly treated findings. The 
horizontal line is the true likelihood, the dashed line is JJ's estimate, and the lower solid line is 
MF(3)'s estimate. 
10 -;; 
10 -H 
10 - 
Case 34 
Case 46 
2 4 6 8 1 12 2 4 6 8 1 
#Exactly treated findings #Exactly treated findings 
Figure 3: Results for CPC cases 34 and 46. Same legend as above. 
In Jaakkola and Jordan (1999), a hybrid methodology was proposed in which only a portion 
of the findings were treated approximately; exact methods were used to treat the remaining 
findings. Using this hybrid methodology, Figures 2 and 3 show the results of running JJ 
and MF(3) on these four cases. 4 
4These experiments were run using a version of the JJ algorithm that optimizes the variational 
parameters just once without any findings treated exactly, and then uses these fixed values of the 
parameters thereafter. The order in which findings are chosen to be treated exactly is based on JJ's 
estimates, as described in Jaakkola and Jordan (1999). Missing points in the graphs for cases 16 and 
Approximate Inference Algorithms for Two-Layer Bayesian Networks 539 
The results show the MF algorithm yielding results that are comparable with the JJ algo- 
rithm. 
5 Conclusions and extension to multilayer networks 
This paper has presented a class of approximate inference algorithms for graphical models 
of the QMR-DT type, supplied a theoretical analysis of convergence rates, verified the rates 
empirically, and presented promising empirical results for the difficult QMR-DT problem. 
Although the focus of this paper has been two-layer networks, the MF(k) family of al- 
gorithms can also be extended to multilayer networks. For example, consider a 3-layer 
network with nodes bi being parents of nodes di being parents of nodes fi. To approximate 
Pr[f] using (say) MF(2), we first write Pr[f] as an expectation of a function (F) of the 
zi's, and approximate this function via a second-order Taylor expansion. To calculate the 
expectation of the Taylor approximation, we need to calculate terms in the expansion such 
as E[di], E[didj] and E[d,2. ]. When di had no parents, these quantities were easily derived in 
terms of the disease prior probabilities. Now, they instead depend on the joint distribution 
of di and dj, which we use our two-layer version of MF(k), applied to the first two (bi and 
di) layers of the network, to approximate. It is important future work to carefully study the 
performance of this algorithm in the multilayer setting. 
Acknowledgments 
We wish to acknowledge the helpful advice of Tommi Jaakkola, Michael Kearns, Kevin 
Murphy, and Larry Saul. 
References 
[1] Barber, D., & van de Laar, P. (1999) Variational cumulant expansions for intractable distributions. 
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 10, 435-455. 
[2] Heckerman, D. (1989). A tractable inference algorithm for diagnosing multiple diseases. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. 
[3] Jaakkola, T. S., & Jordan, M. I. (1999). Variational probabilistic inference and the QMR-DT 
network. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 10, 291-322. 
[4] Jordan, M. I., Ghahramani, Z., Jaakkola, T. S., & Saul, L. K. (1998). An introduction to variational 
methods for graphical models. In Learning in Graphical Models. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
[5] Keams, M. J., & Saul, L. K. (1998). Large deviation methods for approximate probabilistic infer- 
ence, with rates of convergence. In G. F. Cooper & S. Moral (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
[6] Murphy, K. P., Weiss, Y., & Jordan, M. I. (1999). Loopy belief propagation for approximate 
inference: An empirical study. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial 
Intelligence. 
[7] Plefka, T. (1982). Convergence condition of the TAP equation for the infinite-ranged Ising spin 
glass model. In J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 5(6). 
[8] Shwe, M., Middleton, B., Heckerman, D., Henrion, M., Horvitz, E., Lehman. n, H., & Cooper, G. 
(1991). Probabilistic diagnosis using a reformulation of the INTERNIST-1/QMR knowledge base I. 
The probabilistic model and inference algorithms. Methods oflnformation in Medicine, 30, 241-255. 
34 correspond to runs where our implementation of the Quickscore algorithm encountered numerical 
problems. 
