An Oculo-Motor System with Multi-Chip 
Neuromorphic Analog VLSI Control 
Oliver Landolt* 
CSEM SA 
2007 Neuchtel / Switzerland 
E-mail: landolt@caltech.edu 
Stive Gyger 
CSEM SA 
2007 Neuchatel / Switzerland 
E-mail: steve.gyger @csem.ch 
Abstract 
A system emulating the functionality of a moving eye hence the name 
oculo-motor system--has been built and successfully tested. It is made 
of an optical device for shifting the field of view of an image sensor by up 
to 45 o in any direction, four neuromorphic analog VLSI circuits imple- 
menting an oculo-motor control loop, and some off-the-shelf electronics. 
The custom integrated circuits communicate with each other primarily by 
non-arbitrated address-event buses. The system implements the behav- 
iors of saliency-based saccadic exploration, and smooth pursuit of light 
spots. The duration of saccades ranges from 45 ms to 100 ms, which is 
comparable to human eye performance. Smooth pursuit operates on light 
sources moving at up to 50 ø/s in the visual field. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Inspiration from biology has been recognized as a seminal approach to address some en- 
gineering challenges, particularly in the computational domain [1]. Researchers have bor- 
rowed architectures, operating principles and even micro-circuits from various biological 
neural structures and turned them into analog VLSI circuits [2]. Neuromorphic approaches 
are often considered to be particularly suited for machine vision, because even simple 
animals are fitted with neural systems that can easily outperform most sequential digital 
computers in visual processing tasks. It has long been recognized that the level of visual 
processing capability needed for practical applications would require more circuit area than 
can be fitted on a single chip. This observation has triggered the development of inter-chip 
communication schemes suitable for neuromorphic analog VLSI circuits [3]-[4], enabling 
the combination of several chips into a system capable of addressing tasks of higher com- 
plexity. Despite the availability of these communication protocols, only few successful 
implementations of multi-chip neuromorphic systems have been reported so far (see [5] for 
a review). The present contribution reports the completion of a fully functional multi-chip 
system emulating the functionality of a moving eye, hence the denomination oculo-motor 
system. It is made of two 2D VLSI retina chips, two custom analog VLSI control chips, 
dedicated optical and mechanical devices and off-the-shelf electronic components. The 
four neuromorphic chips communicate mostly by pulse streams mediated by non-arbitrated 
address-event buses [4]. In its current version, the system can generate saccades (quick eye 
* Now with Koch Lab, Division of Biology 139-74, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
An Oculo-Motor System with Multi-Chip Neuromorphic Analog VLSI Control 711 
movements) toward salient points of the visual scene, and track moving light spots. The 
purpose of the saccadic operating mode is to explore the visual scene efficiently by allo- 
cating processing time proportionally to significance. The purpose of tracking (also called 
smooth pursuit) is to slow down or suppress the retina image slip of moving objects in order 
to leave visual circuitry more time for processing. The two modes--saccadic exploration 
and smooth pursuit operate concurrently and interact with each other. The development 
of this oculo-motor system was meant as a framework in which some general issues per- 
tinent to neuromorphic engineering could be addressed. In this respect, it complements 
Horiuchi's pioneering work [6]-[7], which consisted of developing a 1D model of the pri- 
mate oculo-motor system with a focus on automatic on-chip learning of the correct control 
function. The new system addresses different issues, notably 2D operation and the problem 
of strongly non-linear mapping between 2D visual and motor spaces. 
2 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The oculo-motor system is made of three modules (Fig. 1). The moving eye module con- 
tains a 35 by 35 pixels electronic retina [8] fitted with a light deflection device driven by two 
motors. This device can shift the field of view of the retina by up to 45 o in any direction. 
The optics are designed to cover only a narrow field of view of about 12 o. Thereby, the 
retina serves as a high-resolution "spotlight" gathering details of interesting areas of the 
visual scene, similarly to the fovea of animals. Two position control loops implemented 
by off-the-shelf components keep the optical elements in the position specified by input 
signals applied to this module. The other modules control the moving eye in two types 
of behavior, namely saccadic exploration and smooth pursuit. They are implemented as 
physically distinct printed circuit boards which can be enabled or disabled independently. 
wide-angle retina 
'- saccadic ] ......... 
   . / saaencymsmouuon l"----. 
 ' [ consol  t lllll X 
 : I , chp /  :: 
., moor 
/ poiio 
, . .. . : 
 : incremenui I- spot spot reda 
position location  age 
 m,  chp 
Figure 1: Oculo-motor system architecture 
The light deflection device is made of two transparent and flat disks with a micro-prism 
grating on one side, mounted perpendicularly to the optical axis of a lens. Each disk can 
rotate without restriction around this axis, independently from the other. As a whole, each 
micro-prism grating acts on light essentially like a single large prism, except that it takes 
much less space (Fig. 2). Although a single fixed prism cannot have an adjustable de- 
flection angle, with two mobile prisms, any magnitude and direction of deflection within 
some boundary can be selected, because the two contributions may combine either con- 
712 O. Landolt and S. Gyger 
structively or destructively depending on the relative prism orientations. The relationship 
between prism orientations and deflection angle has been derived in [9]. The advantage of 
this system over many other designs is that only two small passive optical elements have 
to move whereas most of the components are fixed, which enables fast movements and 
avoids electrical connections to moving parts. The drawback of this principle is that optical 
aberrations introduced by the prisms degrade image quality. However, when the device is 
used in conjunction with a typical electronic retina, this degradation is not limiting because 
these image sensors are characterized by a modest resolution due to focal-plane electronic 
processing. 
lens 
retina 
Go 
micro-prism 
gratings 
ß :.* '1 
Figure 2: A. Light deflection device principle. B. Replacement of conventional prisms by 
micro-prism gratings. C. Photograph of the prototype with motors and orientation sensors. 
The saccadic exploration module (Fig. 1) consists of an additional retina fitted with a 
fixed wide-angle lens, and a neuromorphic saccadic control chip. The retina gathers low- 
resolution information from the whole visual scene accessible to the moving eye, deter- 
mines the degree of interest or saliency [10] of every region and transmits the resulting 
saliency distribution to the saccadic control chip. In the current version of the system, the 
distribution of saliency is just the raw output image of the retina, whereby saliency is deter- 
mined by the brightness of visual scene locations. By inserting additional visual processing 
hardware between the retina and the saccadic control chip, it would be possible to generate 
interest for more sophisticated cues like edges, motion or specific shapes or patterns. The 
saccadic control chip (Fig. 3) determines the sequence and timing of an endless succes- 
sion of quick jumps or saccades to be executed by the moving eye, in such a way that 
salient locations are attended longer and more frequently than less significant locations. 
The chip contains a 2D array of about 900 cells, which is called visual map because its 
organization matches the topology of the visual field accessible by the moving eye. The 
chip also contains two 1D arrays of 64 cells called motor maps, which encode micro-prism 
orientations in the light deflection device. Each cell of the visual map is externally stim- 
ulated by a stream of brief pulses, the frequency of which encodes saliency. The cells 
integrate incoming pulses over time on a capacitor, thereby building up an internal voltage 
at a rate proportional to pulse frequency. A global comparison circuit called winner- 
take-all--selects the cell with the highest internal voltage. In the winning cell, a leakage 
mechanism slowly decrease the internal voltage over time, thereby eventually leading an- 
other cell to win. With this principle, any cell stimulated to some degree wins from time 
to time. The frequency of winning and the time ellapsed until another cell wins increases 
with saliency. The visual map and the two motor maps are interconnected by a so-called 
network of links [9], which embodies the mapping between visual and motor spaces. This 
network consists of a pair of wires running from each visual cell to one cell in each of the 
two motor maps. Thereby, the winning cell in the visual map stimulates exactly one cell in 
An Oculo-Motor System with Multi-Chip Neuromorphic Analog VLSI Control 713 
each motor map. The location of the active cell in a motor map encodes the orientation of 
a micro-prism grating, therefore this representation convention is called place coding [9]. 
The addresses of the active cells on the motor maps are transmitted to the moving eye, 
which triggers micro-prism displacements toward the specified orientations. 
motor maps 
visual map 
saliency 
distribution 
5-- orientations 
,1  " .. (address- 
(adress-[-  event) 
event)  
network of links 
Figure 3: Schematic of the saccadic control chip 
The smooth pursuit module consists of an EPROM chip and a neuromorphic incremental 
control chip (Fig. 1). The address-event stream delivered by the narrow-field retina is 
applied to the EPROM. The field of view of this retina has been divided up into eight 
angular sectors and a center region (Fig. 4A). The EPROM maps the addresses of pixels 
located in the same sector onto a common output address, thereby summing their spiking 
frequencies. The resulting address-event stream is applied to a topological map of eight 
cells constituting one of the inputs of the neuromorphic incremental control chip. If a 
single bright spot is focused on the retina away from the center, a large sum is produced in 
one or two neighboring cells of this map, whereas the other cells receive only background 
stimulation levels close to zero. Thereby, the angular position of the light spot is encoded by 
the location of the spot of activity on the mapwin other words place coding. Other objects 
than light spots could be processed similarly after insertion of relevant detection hardware 
between the retina and the EPROM. The incremental control chip has two additional input 
maps representing the current orientations of the two prisms (Fig. 4B). These maps are 
connected to position sensors incorporated into the moving eye module (Fig. 1). These 
additional inputs are necessary because the control actions depends not only on the location 
of the target on the retina, but also on the current prism orientations [9]. The control actions 
are computed by three networks of links relating the primary inputs maps to the final output 
map via an intermediate layer. The purpose of this intermediate stage is to break down the 
control function of three variables into three functions of only two variables, which can 
be implemented by a lower number of links [11]. As in the saccadic control chip, the 
mapping between the input and output spaces has been calculated numerically prior to chip 
fabrication, then hardwired as electrical connections. The final outputs of the chip are pulse 
streams encoding the direction and rate at which each micro-prism grating must rotate in 
order to shift the target toward the center of the retina. These pulses incrementally update 
prism orientations settings at the input of the moving eye module (Fig. 1). 
Since two different modules control the same moving eye, it is necessary to coordinate 
them in order to avoid conflicts. Saccadic module interventions occur whenever a saccade 
is generated, namely every 200-500 ms in typical operating conditions. At the instant a 
saccade is requested, the smooth pursuit module is shut off in order to prevent it from 
reacting against the saccade. A similar mechanism called saccadic suppression exists in 
biology. When the eye reaches the target location, control is left entirely to the smooth 
pursuit module until the next saccade is generated. Reciprocally, if an object tracked by 
714 O. Landolt and S. Gyger 
mo 
0% 
80% 20% 
0% 0% o% 
0% 
go 
spot 
location 
current 
prism 
positions 
input maps intermediate output maps 
m . 
Mj52x/ pn.'sm 
  /5 .orientation 
lncrem, ents 
networks of links 
Figure 4: A. Place-coded spot location obtained by summing the outputs of pixels belong- 
ing to the same sector. B. Architecture of the incremental control chip 
the smooth pursuit module reaches the boundary of the global visual field, the incremental 
control chip sends a signal triggering a saccade back toward the center of the visual field-- 
which is called nystagmus in biology. The reason for splitting control into two modules is 
that visuo-motor coordinate mappings are very different for saccadic exploration and for 
smooth pursuit [9]. In the former case, visual input is related to the global field of view 
covered by the fixed wide-angle retina, and outputs are absolute micro-prism orientations. 
Saccade targets need not be initially visible to the moving eye. Since saccades are executed 
without permanent visual feedback, their accuracy is limited by the mapping hardwired in 
the control chip. Inversely, smooth pursuit is based on information extracted directly from 
the retina image of the moving eye. The output of the incremental control chip are small 
changes in micro-prism orientations instead of absolute positions. Thereby, the smooth 
pursuit module operates under closed-loop visual feedback, which confers it high accuracy. 
However, operation under visual feedback is slower than open-loop saccadic movements, 
and smooth pursuit inherently applies only to a single target. Thus, the two control modules 
are very complementary in purpose and performance. 
3 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The present section reports both qualitative observations and quantitative measurements 
made on the oculo-motor system, because the complexity of its behavior is difficult to 
convey by just a few numbers. The measurement setup consisted of a black board on 
which high efficiency white light emitting diodes were mounted, the intensity of which 
could be set individually. The visual scene was placed about 70 cm away from the moving 
eye. The axes of the two retinas were parallel at a distance of 6.5 cm. It was necessary 
to take this spacing into account for the visuo-motor coordinate mapping. The saliency 
distribution produced by the visual scene was measured by analyzing the output image of 
the wide-angle retina chip (Fig. 1). 
When a single torchlight was waved in front of the moving eye, it was found that the 
smooth pursuit system indeed keeps the center of gravity of the light source image at the 
center of the narrow field of view. The maximum tracking velocity depends on the intensity 
ratio contrastwbetween the light spot and the background. This behavior was expected 
because by construction, the incremental control chip generates correction pulses at a rate 
proportional to the magnitude of its input signals. At the highest contrast, we were able to 
achieve a maximum tracking speed of 50 ø/s. For comparison, smooth pursuit in humans 
can in principle reach up to 180 ø/s, but tracking is accurate only up to about 30 ø/s [7]. 
When shown two fixed light spots, the moving eye jumps from one to the other periodically. 
An Oculo-Motor System with Multi-Chip Neuromorphic Analog VLSI Control 715 
The relative time spent on each light source depends on their intensity ratio. The duty cycle 
has been measured for ratios ranging from 0.1 to 10 (Fig. 5A). It is close to 50% for equal 
saliency, and tends toward a ratio of 10 to 1 in favor of the brightest spot at the extremities of 
the range. The delay between onset of a saccade and stabilization on the target ranges from 
45 ms to lOOms. The delay is not constant because it depends to some extent on saccade 
magnitude, and because of occasional mechanical slipping at the onset. In humans, the 
duration of saccades tends to be proportional to their amplitude, and ranges between 25 ms 
and 200 ms. 
mo 
lOO 
80 
60 
40 
20 
o 
o.1 
saccades duty cycle 
1 
saliency ratio 
10 
go 
. 60 
 50 
E 40 
"' 30 
= 20 
0 10 
 0 
 0.1 
background observation time 
10 
100 
spot intensity / total background intensity [%] 
Figure 5' Measured data plots. A. Gaze time sharing between two salient spots versus 
saliency ratio. B. Gaze time on background versus spot-to-background intensity ratio. 
When more than two spots are turned on, the saccadic exploration is not obviously peri- 
odic anymore, but the eye keeps spending most time on the light spots, with a noticeable 
preference for larger intensities. This behavior is consistent with measurements previously 
made on the saccadic control chip alone under electrical stimulation [9]. Saccades towards 
locations in the background are rare and brief if the intensity ratio between the light sources 
and the background is high enough. This phenomenon has been studied quantitatively by 
measuring the fraction of time spent on background locations for different light source in- 
tensities (Fig. 5B). The quantity on the horizontal axis of the plot is the ratio between the 
total intensity in light spots and the total background intensity. These two quantities are 
measured by summing the outputs of wide-angle retina pixels belonging to the light spot 
images and to the background respectively. It can be seen that if this ratio is above 1, less 
than 10% of the time is spent scanning the background. 
Open-loop saccade accuracy has been evaluated by switching off the smooth pursuit mod- 
ule, and measuring the error vector between the center of gravity of the light spot and the 
center of the narrow-field retina after each saccade, for six different light spots spread over 
the field of view. The error vectors were found to be always less than 2 o in magnitude, with 
different orientations in each case. Whenever the moving eye returned to a same light spot, 
the error vector was the same. This shows that the residual error is not due to random noise, 
but to the limited accuracy of visuo-motor mapping within the saccadic control chip. The 
magnitude of the error is always low enough that the target light spot is completely visible 
by the moving eye, thereby ensuring that the smooth pursuit module can indeed correct the 
error when enabled. 
4 CONCLUSION 
The oculo-motor system described herein performs as intended, thereby demonstrating the 
value of a neuromorphic engineering approach in the case of a relatively complex task 
involving mechanical and optical components. This system provides an experimental plat- 
form for studying active vision, whereby a visual system acts on itself in order to facilitate 
perception of its surroundings. Besides saccadic exploration and smooth pursuit, a mov- 
716 O. Landolt and S. Gyger 
ing eye can be exploited to improve vision in many other ways. For instance, resolution 
shortcomings in retinas incorporating only a modest number of pixels can be overcome 
by continuously sweeping the field of view back and forth, thereby providing continuous 
information in space--although not simultaneously in time. In binocular vision, 3D infor- 
mation perception by stereopsis is also made easier if the fields of view can be aligned by 
vergence control [12]. Besides active vision, the oculo-motor system also lends itself as 
a framework for testing and demonstrating other analog VLSI vision circuits. As already 
mentioned, due to its modular architecture, it is possible to insert additional visual pro- 
cessing chips either in the saccadic exploration module, or in the smooth pursuit module, 
in order to make the current light-source oriented system suitable for operation in natural 
visual environments. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to express their gratitude to all their colleagues at CSEM who contributed 
to this work. Special thanks are due to Patrick Debergh for the micro-prism light deflec- 
tion concept, to Friedrich Heitger for designing and building the mechanical device, and 
to Edoardo Franzi for designing and building the related electronic interface. Thanks are 
also due to Arnaud Tisserand, Friedrich Heitger, Eric Vittoz, Reid Harrison, Theron Stan- 
ford, and Edoardo Franzi for helpful comments on the manuscript. Mr. Roland Lagger, 
from Portescap, La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland, provided friendly assistance in a critical 
mechanical assembly step. 
References 
[1] C. Mead. Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Addison Wesley, 1989. 
[2] T.S. Lande, editor. Neuromorphic Systems Engineering. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dor- 
drecht, 1998. 
[3] K. Boahen. Retinomorphic vision systems II: Communication channel design. In IEEE lnt. 
Syrup. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS'96), Atlanta, May 1996. 
[4] A. Mortara, E. Vittoz, and P. Venier. A communication scheme for analog VLSI perceptive 
systems. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 30, June 1995. 
[5] C.M. Higgins. Multi-chip neuromorphic motion processing. In Conference on Advanced Re- 
search in VLSI, Atlanta, March 1999. 
[6] T.K. Horiuchi, B. Bishofberger, and C. Koch. An analog VLSI saccadic eye movement system. 
In Advances in Neural Processing Systems 6, 1994. 
[7] T.K. Horiuchi. Analog VLSI-Based, Neuromorphic Sensorimotor Systems: Modeling the Pri- 
mate Oculomotor System. PhD thesis, Caltech, Pasadena, 1997. 
[8] P. Venier. A constrast sensitive silicon retina based on conductance modulation in a diffu- 
sion network. In 6th lnt. Conf. Microelectronics for Neural Networks and Fuzzy Systems (Mi- 
croNeuro'97), Dresden, Sept 1997. 
[9] O. Landolt. Place Coding in Analog VLSI - A Neuromorphic Approach to Computation. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1998. 
[10] TG. Morris and S.P. DeWeerth. Analog VLSI excitatory feedback circuits for attentional shifts 
and tracking. Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, 13, May-June 1997. 
[11] O. Landok. Place coding in analog VLSI and its application to the control of a light deflection 
system. In MicroNeuro'97, Dresden, Sept 1997. 
[12] M. Mahowald. An Analog VLSI System for Stereoscopic Vision. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, 1994. 
