An Oscillatory Correlation Framework for 
Computational Auditory Scene Analysis 
Guy J. Brown 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
Regent Court, 211 Portobello Street, 
Sheffield S 1 4DP, UK 
Email: g. brown @dcs. shefac. uk 
DeLiang L. Wang 
Department of Computer and Information 
Science and Centre for Cognitive Science 
The Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH 43210-1277, USA 
Email: dwang @ cis. ohio-state. edu 
Abstract 
A neural model is described which uses oscillatory correlation to 
segregate speech from interfering sound sources. The core of the model 
is a two-layer neural oscillator network. A sound stream is represented 
by a synchronized population of oscillators, and different streams are 
represented by desynchronized oscillator populations. The model has 
been evaluated using a corpus of speech mixed with interfering sounds, 
and produces an improvement in signal-to-noise ratio for every mixture. 
1 Introduction 
Speech is seldom heard in isolation: usually, it is mixed with other environmental sounds. 
Hence, the auditory system must parse the acoustic mixture reaching the ears in order to 
retrieve a description of each sound source, a process termed auditory scene analysis 
(ASA) [2]. Conceptually, ASA may be regarded as a two-stage process. The first stage 
(which we term 'segmentation') decomposes the acoustic stimulus into a collection of 
sensory elements. In the second stage ('grouping'), elements that are likely to have arisen 
from the same environmental event are combined into a perceptual structure called a 
stream. Streams may be further interpreted by higher-level cognitive processes. 
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the development of computational systems 
that mimic ASA [4], [1], [5]. Such computational auditory scene analysis (CASA) 
systems are inspired by auditory function but do not model it closely; rather, they employ 
symbolic search or high-level inference engines. Although the performance of these 
systems is encouraging, they are no match for the abilities of a human listener; also, they 
tend to be complex and computationally intensive. In short, CASA currently remains an 
unsolved problem for real-time applications such as automatic speech recognition. 
Given that human listeners can segregate concurrent sounds with apparent ease, 
computational systems that are more closely modelled on the neurobiological mechanisms 
of hearing may offer a performance advantage over existing CASA systems. This 
observation - together with a desire to understand the neurobiological basis of ASA - has 
led some investigators to propose neural network models of ASA. Most recently, Brown 
and Wang [3] have given an account of concurrent vowel separation based on oscillatory 
correlation. In this framework, oscillators that represent a perceptual stream are 
synchronized (phase locked with zero phase lag), and are desynchronized from oscillators 
that represent different streams [8]. Evidence for the oscillatory correlation theory comes 
from neurobiological studies which report synchronised oscillations in the auditory, visual 
and olfactory cortices (see [10] for a review). 
748 G. J. Brown and D. L. Wang 
In this paper, we propose a neural network model that uses oscillatory correlation as the 
underlying neural mechanism for ASA; streams are formed by synchronizing oscillators 
in a two-dimensional time-frequency network. The model is evaluated on a task that 
involves the separation of two time-varying sounds. It therefore extends our previous 
study [3], which only considered the segregation of vowel sounds with static spectra. 
2 Model description 
The input to the model consists of a mixture of speech and an interfering sound source, 
sampled at a rate of 16 kHz with 16 bit resolution. This input signal is processed in four 
stages described below (see [10] for a detailed account). 
2.1 Peripheral auditory processing 
Peripheral auditory frequency selectivity is modelled using a bank of 128 gammatone 
filters with center frequencies equally distributed on the equivalent rectangular bandwidth 
(ERB) scale between 80 Hz and 5 kHz [1]. Subsequently, the output of each filter is 
processed by a model of inner hair cell function. The output of the hair cell model is a 
probabilistic representation of auditory nerve firing activity. 
2.2 Mid-level auditory representations 
Mechanisms similar to those underlying pitch perception can contribute to the perceptual 
separation of sounds that have different fundamental frequencies (F0s) [3]. Accordingly, 
the second stage of the model extracts periodicity information from the simulated auditory 
nerve firing patterns. This is achieved by computing a running autocorrelation of the 
auditory nerve activity in each channel, forming a representation known as a correlogram 
[1], [5]. At time step j, the autocorrelation A(i},'c) for channel i with time lag 'c is given by: 
K-I 
A(i'i') = E r(i'i-k)r(i'j-k-)w(k) (1) 
k=0 
Here, r is the output of the hair cell model and w is a rectangular window of width K time 
steps. We use K = 320, corresponding to a window width of 20 ms. The autocorrelation lag 
'c is computed in L steps of the sampling period between 0 and L-l; we use L = 201, 
corresponding to a maximum delay of 12.5 ms. Equation (1) is computed for M time 
frames, taken at 10 ms intervals (i.e., at intervals of 160 steps of the time index j). 
For periodic sounds, a characteristic 'spine' appears in the correlogram which is centered 
on the lag corresponding to the stimulus period (Figure 1A). This pitch-related structure 
can be emphasized by forming a 'pooled' correlogram s(j,'c), which exhibits a prominent 
peak at the delay corresponding to perceived pitch: 
N 
s(j, x) =  A(i, j, x) (2) 
i=1 
It is also possible to extract harmonics and formants from the correlogram, since 
frequency channels that are excited by the same acoustic component share a similar 
pattern of periodicity. Bands of coherent periodicity can be identified by cross-correlating 
adjacent correlogram channels; regions of high correlation indicate a harmonic or formant 
[1]. The cross-correlation C(i/) between channels i and i+1 at time framej is defined as: 
L-1 
1 
C(i,j) =  E (i,j,x)(i+ l,j,x) (I<i<N-1) (3) 
Here, (i, j, 'c) is the autocorrelation function of (1) which has been normalized to have 
zero mean and unity variance. A typical cross-correlation function is shown in Figure 1A. 
Oscillatory Correlation for CASA 749 
2.3 Neural oscillator network: overview 
Segmentation and grouping take place within a two-layer oscillator network (Figure lB). 
The basic unit of the network is a single oscillator, which is defined as a reciprocally 
connected excitatory variable x and inhibitory variable y [7]. Since each layer of the 
network takes the form of a time-frequency grid, we index each oscillator according to its 
frequency channel (i) and time frame (j): 
3 
úij = 3xij - xij + 2 - Yij + lij + Sij + f) (4a) 
)ij = ú(y(1 + tanh(xij/[))-Yij) (4b) 
Here, Iij represents external input to the oscillator, Sij denotes the coupling from other 
oscillators in the network, ú, æ and  are parameters, and p is the amplitude of a Gaussian 
noise term. If coupling and noise are ignored and I O. is held constant, (4) defines a 
relaxation oscillator with two time scales. The x-nullcline, i.e. i: = 0, is a cubic function 
and the y-nullcline is a sigmoid function. If I O > 0, the two nullclines intersect only at a 
point along the middle branch of the cubic with  chosen small. In this case, the oscillator 
exhibits a stable limit cycle for small values of ú, and is referred to as enabled. The limit 
cycle alternates between silent and active phases of near steady-state behaviour. 
Compared to motion within each phase, the alternation between phases takes place 
rapidly, and is referred to as jumping. If li_. < 0, the two nullclines intersect at a stable fixed 
point. In this case, no oscillation occurs. ence, oscillations in (4) are stimulus-dependent. 
2.4 Neural oscillator network: segment layer 
In the first layer of the network, segments are formed - blocks of synchronised oscillators 
that trace the evolution of an acoustic component through time and frequency. The first 
layer is a two-dimensional time-frequency grid of oscillators with a global inhibitor (see 
Figure lB). The coupling term Sij in (4a) is defined as 
Sij = Z Wij,tlS(Xt l - Ox) - WzS(z - Oz) (5) 
kl ﬂ N(i, i) 
r > wi 
where H is the Heaviside function (i.e., H(x) = 1 fox _ 0, and zero other se), Wij, icl is the 
connection weight from an oscillator (id) to an oscillator (k,l) and N(id) is the four nearest 
neighbors of (id). The threshold 0 x is chosen so that an oscillator has no influence on its 
5000- 
2741- 
1457- 
729- 
315- 
80- 
110 
B 
Grouping 
Layer 
Segment 
Layer 
2'.5 5'.0 7'.5 1(.0 li.5 Global 
Autocorrelation Lag (ms) Inhibitor 
Figure 1: A. Correlogram of a mixture of speech and trill telephone, taken 450 ms after the 
start of the stimulus. The pooled correlogram is shown in the bottom panel, and the cross- 
correlation function is shown on the right. B. Structure of the two-layer oscillator network. 
750 G. J. Brown and D. L. Wang 
neighbors unless it is in the active phase. The weight of neighboring connections along the 
time axis is uniformly set to 1. The connection weight between an oscillator (ij) and its 
vertical neighbor (i+lj) is set to 1 if C(i) exceeds a threshold 0c; otherwise it is set to 0. 
W z is the weight of inhibition from the global inhibitor z, defined as 
 = ooo- z (6) 
where oo = 1 if xij > 0 z for at least one oscillator (id), and oo = 0 otherwise. Hence 0 z is a 
threshold. If o = 1, z -->1. 
Small segments may form which do not correspond to perceptually significant acoustic 
components. In order to remove these noisy fragments, we introduce a lateral potential Pij 
for oscillator (ij), defined as [11 ]' 
tgiJ = (1-Pij)H[ E H(Xkl-Ox)-Op]-úPij (7) 
kl  Np(i, j) 
Here, Op is a threshold. Np(id) is called the potential neighborhood of (ij), which is chosen 
to be (ij-1) and (i,/+1). If both neighbors of (ij) are active, Pij approaches 1 on a fast time 
scale; otherwise, Pij relaxes to 0 on a slow time scale determined by ú. 
The lateral potential plays its role by gating the input to an oscillator. More specifically, 
we replace (4a) with 
3 
2i/ = 3xij - xij + 2 --Yij + lijH(Pij - O) + Sij + p (4a') 
With Pij initialized to 1, it follows that Pij will drop below the threshold 0 unless the 
oscillator (ij) receives excitation from its entire potential neighborhood. Given our choice 
of neighborhood in (5), this implies that a segment must extend for at least three 
consecutive time frames. Oscillators that are stimulated but cannot maintain a high 
potential are relegated to a discontiguous 'background' of noisy activity. 
An oscillator (ij) is stimulated if its corresponding input lij > 0. Oscillators are stimulated 
only if the energy in their corresponding correlogram channel exceeds a threshold 0 a. It is 
evident from (1) that the energy in a correlogram channel i at time j corresponds to 
A(ij,0); thus we set Iij = 0.2 if A(i},0) > O a, and I = -5 otherwise. 
Figure 2A shows the segmentation of a mixture of speech and trill telephone. The network 
was simulated by the LEGION algorithm [8], producing 94 segments (each represented by 
a distinct gray level) plus the background (shown in black). For convenience we show all 
segments together in Figure 2A, but each actually arises during a unique time interval. 
1457  1457- 
729 ' 729- 
315  315- 
80, 80 
Time (seconds) Time (seconds) 
Figure 2: A. Segments formed by the first layer of the network for a mixture of speech and 
trill telephone. B. Categorization of segments according to F0. Gray pixels represent the set 
P, and white pixels represent regions that do not agree with the F0. 
Oscillatory Correlation for CASA 751 
2.5 Neural oscillator network: grouping layer 
The second layer is a two-dimensional network of laterally coupled oscillators without 
global inhibition. Oscillators in this layer are stimulated if the corresponding oscillator in 
the first layer is stimulated and does not form part of the background. Initially, all 
oscillators have the same phase, implying that all segments from the first layer are 
allocated to the same streamﬂ This initialization is consistent with psychophysical 
evidence suggesting that perceptual fusion is the default state of auditory organisation [2]. 
In the second layer, an oscillator has the same form as in (4), except that xij is changed to: 
'i/ = 3x(i -- Xij + 2 -- Yij + I0'[1 + gH(pij - 0)] + Sij + Q (4a") 
Here, It is a small positive parameter; this implies that an oscillator with a high lateral 
potential gets a slightly higher external inputﬂ We choose N(i,j) and 0n so that oscillators 
ﬂ / 1  
which correspond to the longest segment from the first layer are the first to jump to the 
active phase. The longest segment is identified by using the mechanism described in [9]. 
The coupling term in (4a") consists of two types of coupling: 
s 0 = s 0 + s 0 (8) 
Here, S. . represents mutual excitation between oscillators within each segment We set 
tJ ﬂ 
S/ = 4 if the active oscillators from the same segment occupy more than half of the 
lehgth of the segment; otherwise S/ = 0.1 if there is at least one active oscillator from the 
same segment. 
The coupling term S. denotes vertical connections between oscillators corresponding to 
different frequency cannels and different segments, but within the same time frame. At 
each time frame, an F0 is estimated from the pooled correlogram (2) and this is used to 
classify frequency channels into two categories: a set of channels, P, that are consistent 
with the F0, and a set of channels that are not (Figure 2B). Given the delay m at which the 
largest peak occurs in the pooled correlogram, for each channel i at time frame j, i  P if 
A(i, i, Xm)/A( i, J, O) > 0 d (9) 
Since A(ij,0) is the energy in correlogram channel i at time j, (9) amounts to classification 
on the basis of an energy thresholdﬂ We use 0 a = 0.95. The delay m can be found by using 
a winner-take-all network, although for simplicity we currently apply a maximum selector. 
2741  2741- 
1457  1457- 
729 729' 
315  315' 
8O 80' 
oo Time (seconds) 115 1)'.o Time (seconds) 
Figure 3: A. Snapshot showing the activity of the second layer shortly after the start of 
simulation. Active oscillators (white pixels) correspond to the speech stream. B. Another 
snapshot, taken shortly after A. Active oscillators correspond to the telephone stream. 
752 G. J.. Brown and D. L. Wang 
The F0 classification process operates on channels, rather than segments. As a result, 
channels within the same segment at a particular time frame may be allocated to different 
F0 categories. Since segments cannot be decomposed, we enforce a rule that all channels 
of the same frame within each segment must belong to the same F0 category as that of the 
majority of channels. After this conformational step, vertical connections are formed such 
that, at each time frame, two oscillators of different segments have mutual excitatory links 
if the two corresponding channels belong to the same F0 category; otherwise they have 
mutual inhibitory links. S. v. is set to -0.5 if (ij) receives an input from its inhibitory links; 
similarly, S is set to 0.5  (ij) receives an input from its vertical excitatory links. 
At present, our model has no mechanism for grouping segments that do not overlap in 
time. Accordingly, we limit operation of the second layer to the time span of the longest 
segment. After forming lateral connections and trimming by the longest segment, the 
network is numerically solved using the singular limit method [6]. 
Figure 3 shows the response of the second layer to the mixture of speech and trill 
telephone. The figure shows two snapshots of the second layer, where a white pixel 
indicates an active oscillator and a black pixel indicates a silent oscillator. The network 
quickly forms two synchronous blocks, which desynchronize from each other. Figure 3A 
shows a snapshot taken when the oscillator block (stream) corresponding to the segregated 
speech is in the active phase; Figure 3B shows a subsequent snapshot when the oscillator 
block corresponding to the trill telephone is in the active phase. Hence, the activity in this 
layer of the network embodies the result of ASA; the components of an acoustic mixture 
have been separated using F0 information and represented by oscillatory correlation. 
2.6 Resynthesis 
The last stage of the model is a resynthesis path. Phase-corrected output from the 
gammatone filterbank is divided into 20 ms sections, overlapping by 10 ms and windowed 
with a raised cosine. A weighting is then applied to each section, which is unity if the 
corresponding oscillator is in its active phase, and zero otherwise. The weighted filter 
outputs are summed across all channels to yield a resynthesized waveform. 
A 70 B oo 
60 
50 
40- 
30 
20 
I0- 
0 
-10 
NO N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 N6 N7 N8 N9 
Intmsion type 
90 
80 
70 
6O 
5O 
40 
30 
20 
I0 
0 
NO N1 
N2 N3 N4 N5 N6 N7 N8 N9 
Intrusion type 
Figure 4: A. SNR before (black bar) and after (grey bar) separation by the model. Results 
are shown for voiced speech mixed with ten intrusions (NO = 1 kHz tone; N1 = random 
noise; N2 = noise bursts; N3 = 'cocktail party' noise; N4 = rock music; N5 = siren; N6 = 
trill telephone; N7 = female speech; N8 = male speech; N9 = female speech). B. 
Percentage of speech energy recovered from each mixture after separation by the model. 
Oscillatory Correlation for CASA 753 
3 Evaluation 
The model has been evaluated using 100 mixtures of speech and noise [4]. The mixtures 
are obtained by adding the waveforms of ten voiced utterances to each of ten intrusive 
sounds. Since separate speech and noise waveforms are available, a signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) can be computed for each mixture. Also, the SNR can be estimated after processing 
by the model using separated speech and noise waveforms from the resynthesis path [10]. 
The SNR before and after separation by the model is shown in Figure 4A, averaged across 
the ten utterances for each noise condition. Dramatic improvements in SNR are obtained 
when the interfering noise is narrowband (1 kHz tone and siren); such intrusions tend to be 
represented as a single segment, which can be segregated very effectively from the speech 
source. Informal listening tests suggest that the intelligibility of the resynthesized speech 
is good. Also, we have quantified the percentage of speech energy that is recovered by the 
segregation process: typically, this is between 55% and 80% (Figure 4B). 
4 Discussion 
A significant feature of the model proposed here is that each stage has a neurobiological 
foundation. The peripheral auditory model is based upon the gammatone filter, which is 
derived from physiological measurement of auditory nerve impulse responses. Similarly, 
our mid-level auditory representations are consistent with the physiology of the higher 
auditory system [1]. Overall, the model is based on a framework - oscillatory correlation 
- which is supported by recent neurophysiological findings. 
The neural oscillator network performs ASA in a distributed manner; each oscillator 
behaves autonomously and in parallel with the other oscillators. Although there are issues 
regarding real-time implementation of the model that must be resolved [10], there is a real 
possibility that the oscillator network can be implemented in analog VLSI. This feature is 
very attractive, since the high speed and compact size of analog VLSI will be needed if 
CASA is to provide an effective front-end for automatic speech recognition systems. 
References 
[1] Brown, G. J. & Cooke, M. (1994) Computational auditory scene analysis. Computer Speech and 
Language, 8, pp. 297-336. 
[2] Bregman, A. S. (1990) Auditory scene analysis. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
[3] Brown, G. J. & Wang, D. L. (1997) Modelling the perceptual segregation of double vowels with 
a network of neural oscillators. Neural Networks, 10, pp. 1547-1558. 
[4] Cooke, M. (1993) Modelling auditory processing and organization. Cambridge U.K.: 
Cambridge University Press. 
[5] Ellis, D. P. W. (1996) Prediction-driven computational auditory scene analysis. Ph.D. 
Dissertation, MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. 
[6] Linsay, P.S. & Wang, D. L. (1998) Fast numerical integration of relaxation oscillator networks 
based on singular limit solutions. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 9, pp. 523-532. 
[7] Terman, D. & Wang, D. L. (1995) Global competition and local cooperation in a network of 
neural oscillators, Physica D, 81, pp. 148-176. 
[8] Wang, D. L. (1996) Primitive auditory segregation based on oscillatory correlation, Cognitive 
Science, 20, pp. 409-456. 
[9] Wang, D. L. (1999) Object selection based on oscillatory correlation, Neural Networks, 12, pp. 
579-592. 
[ 10] Wang, D. L. & Brown, G. J. (1999) Separation of speech from interfering sounds based on 
oscillatory correlation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 10, pp. 684-697. 
[ 11] Wang, D. L. & Terman, D. (1997) Image segmentation based on oscillatory correlation, Neural 
Computation, 9, pp. 805-836 (for errata see Neural Computation, 9, pp. 1623-1626, 1997). 
