Spectral Cues in Human Sound Localization 
Craig T. Jin 
Department of Physiology and 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Anna Corderoy 
Department of Physiology 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Simon Carlile 
Department of Physiology 
and Institute of Biomedical Research 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Andr6 van Schaik 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Abstract 
The differential contribution of the monaural and interaural spectral 
cues to human sound localization was examined using a combined psy- 
chophysical and analytical approach. The cues to a sound's location 
were correlated on an individual basis with the human localization re- 
sponses to a variety of spectrally manipulated sounds. The spectral cues 
derive from the acoustical filtering of an individual's auditory periphery 
which is characterized by the measured head-related transfer functions 
(HRTFs). Auditory localization performance was determined in virtual 
auditory space (VAS). Psychoacoustical experiments were conducted in 
which the amplitude spectra of the sound stimulus was varied indepen- 
dently at each ear while preserving the normal timing cues, an impossibil- 
ity in the free-field environment. Virtual auditory noise stimuli were gen- 
erated over earphones for a specified target direction such that there was 
a "false" flat spectrum at the left eardrum. Using the subject's HRTFs, 
the sound spectrum at the right eardrum was then adjusted so that either 
the true right monaural spectral cue or the true interaural spectral cue 
was preserved. All subjects showed systematic mislocalizations in both 
the true right and true interaural spectral conditions which was absent in 
their control localization performance. The analysis of the different cues 
along with the subjects' localization responses suggests there are signif- 
icant differences in the use of the monaural and interaural spectral cues 
and that the auditory system's reliance on the spectral cues varies with 
the sound condition. 
1 Introduction 
Humans are remarkably accurate in their ability to localize transient, broadband noise, an 
ability with obvious evolutionary advantages. The study of human auditory localization has 
a considerable and rich history (recent review [ 1]) which demonstrates that there are three 
general classes of acoustical cues involved in the localization process: (l) interaural time 
differences, ITDs; (2) interaural level differences, ILDs; and (3) the spectral cues resulting 
Spectral Cues in Human Sound Localization 769 
from the auditory periphery. It is generally accepted that for humans, the ITD and ILD 
cues only specify the location of the sound source to within a "cone of confusion" [1], 
i.e., a locus of points approximating the surface of a cone symmetric with respect to the 
interaural axis. It remains, therefore, for the localization system to extract a more precise 
sound source location from the spectral cues. 
The utilization of the outer ear spectral cues during sound localization has been analyzed 
both as a statistical estimation problem, (e.g., [2]) and as optimization problem, often using 
neural networks, (e.g., [3]). Such computational models show that sufficient localization 
information is provided by the spectral cues to resolve the cone of confusion ambiguity 
which corroborates the psychoacoustical evidence. Furthermore, it is commonly argued 
that the interaural spectral cue, because of its natural robustness to level and spectral vari- 
ations, has advantages over the monaural spectral cues alone. Despite these observations, 
there is still considerable contention as to the relative role or contribution of the monaural 
versus the interaural spectral cues. 
In this study, each subject's spectral cues were characterized by measuring their head re- 
lated transfer functions (HRTFs) for 393 evenly distributed positions in space. Measure- 
ments were carried out in an anechoic chamber and were made for both ears simultane- 
ously using a "blocked ear" technique [ 1 ]. Sounds filtered with the HRTFs and played over 
earphones, which bypass the acoustical filtering of the outer ear, result in the illusion of 
free-field sounds which is known as virtual auditory space (VAS). The HRTFs were used to 
generate virtual sound sources in which the spectral cues were manipulated systematically. 
The recorded HRTFs along with the Glasberg and Moore cochlear model [4] were also 
used to generate neural excitation patterns (frequency representations of the sound stim- 
ulus within the auditory nerve) which were used to estimate the different cues available 
to the subject during the localization process. Using this analysis, the interaural spectral 
cue was characterized and the different localization cues have been correlated with each 
subjects' VAS localization responses. 
2 VAS Sound Localization 
The sound localization performance of four normal hearing subjects was examined in VAS 
using broadband white noise (300 - 14 000 Hz). The stimuli were filtered under three 
differing spectral conditions. (1) control: stimuli were filtered with spectrally correct left 
and right ear HRTFs for a given target location, (2) veridical interaural: stimuli at the 
left ear were made spectrally flat with an appropriate dB sound level for the given target 
location, while the stimuli at the right ear were spectrally shaped to preserve the correct 
interaural spectrum, (3) veridical right monaural: stimuli at the left ear were spectrally 
flat as in the second condition, while the stimuli at the right ear were filtered with the 
correct HRTF for the given target location, resulting in an inappropriate interaural spectral 
difference. For each condition, a minimum-phase filter spectral approximation was made 
and the interaural time difference was modeled as an all-pass delay [5]. Sounds were 
presented at approximately 70 dB SPL and with duration 150 ms (with 10 ms raised-cosine 
onset and offset ramps). Each subject performed five trials at each of 76 test positions for 
each stimulus condition. Detailed sound localization methods can be found in [ 1 ]. A short 
summary is presented below. 
2.1 Sound Localization Task 
The human localization experiments were carded out in a darkened anechoic chamber. 
Virtual auditory sound stimuli were presented using earphones (ER-2, Etymbtic Research, 
with a flat frequency response, within 3 dB, between 200-16 000 Hz). The perceived 
location of the virtual sound source was indicated by the subject pointing his/her nose in 
770 C. T. din, A. Corderoy, S. Carlile and A. v. Schaik 
the direction of the perceived source. The subject's head orientation and position were 
monitored using an electromagnetic sensor system (Polhemus, Inc.). 
2.2 Human Sound Localization Performance 
The sound localization performance of two subjects in the three different stimulus condi- 
tions are shown in Figure 1. The pooled data across 76 locations and five trials is presented 
for both the left (L) and right (R) hemispheres of space from the viewpoint of an outside 
observer. The target location is shown by a cross and the centroid of the subjects responses 
for each location is shown by a black dot with the standard deviation indicated by an ellipse. 
Front-back confusions are plotted, although, they were removed for calculating the standard 
deviations. The subjects localized the control broadband sounds accurately (Figure 1 a). In 
contrast, the subjects demonstrated systematic mislocalizations for both the veridical inter- 
aural and veridical monaural spectral conditions (Figures lb,c). There is clear pulling of 
the localization responses to particular regions of space with evident intersubject variations. 
(a) Subject 1: Broadband Control 
Nose Cross: Target location 
(b) Subject 1: Veridical Interaural Spectrum 
(c) Subject 1: Veridical Right Monaural Spectrum 
Subject 2: Broadband Control 
Dot. Centtold location 
of Responses 
Ellipse: Standard Deviation 
K.: of Responses 
: R 
.... :._ _ .-'T.  ""'+' :, 
Subject 2: Veridical Interaural Spectrum 
Subject 2: Veridical Right Monaural Spectrum 
Figure 1: Localization performance for two subjects in the three sound conditions: (a) 
control broadband; (b) veridical interaural; (c) veridical monaural. See text for details. 
3 Extraction of Acoustical Cues 
With accurate measurements of each individual's outer ear filtering, the different acousti- 
cal cues can be compared with human localization performance on an individual basis. In 
order to extract the different acoustical cues in a biologically plausible manner, a model 
of peripheral auditory processing was used. A virtual source sound stimulus was prepared 
as described in Secion 2 for a particular target location. The stimulus was then filtered 
using a cochlear model based on the work of Glasberg and Moore [4]. This cochlear model 
consisted of a set of modified rounded-exponential auditory filters. The width and shape 
of the auditory filters change as a function of frequency (and sound level) in a manner 
Spectral Cues in Human Sound Localization 771 
consistent with the known physiological and psychophysical data. These filters were log- 
arithmically spaced on the frequency axis with a total of 200 filters between 300 Hz and 
14 kHz. The cochlea's compressive non-linearity was modelled mathematically using a 
logarithmic function. Thus the logarithm of the output energy of a given filter indicated the 
amount of neural activity in that particular cochlear channel. 
The relative activity across the different cochlear channels was representative of the neu- 
ral excitation pattern (EP) along the auditory nerve and it is from this excitation pattern 
that the different spectral cues were estimated. For a given location, the left and right EPs 
themselves represent the monaural spectral cues. The difference in the total energy (calcu- 
lated as the area under the curve) between the left and right EPs was taken as a measure 
of the interaural level difference and the interaural spectral shape cue was calculated as 
the difference between the left and right EPs. The fourth cue, interaural time difference, 
is a measure of the time lag between the signal in one ear as compared to the other and 
depends principally upon the geometrical relationship between the sound source and the 
human subject. This time delay was calculated using the acoustical impulse response for 
both ears as measured during the HRTF recordings. 
4 Correlation of Cues and Location 
For each stimulus condition and location, the acoustical cues were calculated as described 
above for all 393 HRTF locations. Locations at which a given cue correlates well with 
the stimulus cue for a particular target location were taken as analytical predictions of the 
subject's response locations according to that cue. As the spectral content of the signal is 
varied, the cue(s) available may strongly match the cue(s) normally arising from locations 
other than the target location. Therefore the aim of this analysis is to establish for which 
locations and stimulus conditions a given response most correlated with a particular cue. 
The following analyses (using a Matlab toolbox developed by the authors) hinge upon the 
calculation of"cue correlation values". To a large extent, these calculations follow the ex- 
amples described by [6] and are briefly described here. For each stimulus condition and 
target location, the subject performed five localizations trials. For each of the subject's five 
response locations, each possible cue was estimated (Section 3) assuming a flat-spectrum 
broadband Gaussian white noise as the stimulus. A mathematical quantity was then calcu- 
lated which would give a measure of the similarity of the response location cues with the 
corresponding stimulus cues. The method of calculation depended on the cue and several 
alternative methods were tried. Generally, for a given cue, these different methods demon- 
strated the same basic pattern and the term "cue correlation value" has been given to the 
mathematical quantity that was used to measure cue similarity. The methods are as follows. 
For the ITD cue, the negative of the absolute value of the difference between possible 
response location ITDs and the stimulus ITD was used as the ITD cue correlation values 
(the more positive a value, the higher its correlation). The ILD cue correlation value was 
calculated in a similar fashion. The cue correlation values for the left and right monaural 
spectral cues (in this case, the shape of the neural excitation pattern) was calculated by 
taking the difference between the stimulus EP and the possible response location EPs and 
then summing across frequency the variation of this difference about its mean value. For the 
interaural spectral cue, the vector difference between the left and right EPs was calculated 
for both the stimulus and the possible response locations. The dot product between the 
stimulus and the possible response location vectors gave the ISD cue correlation values. 
The cue correlation values were normalized in order to facilitate meaningful comparisons 
across the different acoustical cues. Following Middlebrooks [6], a "z-score normalized" 
cue value, for each response location corresponding to a given target location, was obtained 
by subtracting the mean correlation value (across all possible locations) and dividing by the 
772 C.T. din, A. Corderoy, S. Carlile and A. v. $chaik 
standard deviation. For these new cue values, termed the cue z-score values, a score of 1.0 
or greater indicates onod correlation. 
5 Relationship between the ISD and the Cone-of-Confusion 
The distribution of a given cue's z-score values around the sphere of space surrounding the 
subject reveals the spatial directions for that cue that correlate best with the given stimulus 
and target location being examined. An examination of the interaural spectral cue indicated 
that, unlike the other cues, the range of its cue z-score variation was relatively restricted on 
the ipsilateral hemisphere of space relative to the sound stimulus (values on the ipsilateral 
side were approximately 1.0, those on the contralateral side, -1.0). This was the first indi- 
cation of the more moderate variation of the ISD cue across space as compared with the 
monaural spectral cues. 
Closer examination of the ISD cue revealed more detailed variational properties. In order 
to facilitate meaningful comparisons with the other cues, the ISD cue z-score values were 
adjusted such that all negative values (i.e., those values at locations generally contralateral 
to the stimulus) were set to 0.0 and the cue z-score values recalculated. The spatial dis- 
tribution of the rescaled ISD cue z-score values, as compared with the cue z-score values 
for the other cues, is shown in Figure 2. The cone of confusion described by the ITD and 
ILD is clearly evident (Fig. 2a,b) and it can be seen that the ISD cue is closely aligned with 
these cues (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, the ISD cue demonstrates significant asymmetry along 
the front-back dimensions. These novel observations demonstrate that while previous work 
[3, 2] indicates that the ISD cue provides sufficient information to determine a sound's lo- 
cation exactly along the cone of confusion, the variation of the cue z-score values along 
the cone is substantially less than that for the monaural spectral cues (Fig. 2d), sugges*::'.g 
perhaps that this acts to make the monaural spectral cue a more salient cue. 
(a) Interaural Time Difference 
4O 
0 
: -40 
o 
> (b) Interaural Level Difference 
[] 40 
0 
-40 
0 90 
(c) 
4O 
0 
0 0 180 0 
(d) 
4O 
0 
-4O 
180 0 
Azimuth 
Interaural Spectrum 
90 180 
Ipsilateral Menaural Spectrum 
90 180 
1.5 
1.1 
Figure 2: Spatial plot of the cue z-score values for a single target location (46 ø azimuth, 
20 ø elevation) and broadband sound condition. Gray-scale color values indicate the cue's 
correlation in different spatial directions with the stimulus cue at the target location. (Z- 
score values for the ISD cue have been rescaled, see text.) 
6 Analysis of Sub|ects Responses using Cue Z-score Values 
A given cue's z-score values for the subject's responses across all 76 test locations and 
five trials were averaged. The mean and standard deviation are presented in a bar graph 
(Fig. 3). The subjects' response locations correlate highly with the ITD and ILD cue and 
Spectral Cues in Human Sound Localization 773 
the standard deviation of the correlation was low (Fig. 3a,b). In other words, subjects' re- 
sponses stayed on the cone of confusion of the target location. A similar analysis of the 
more restricted, rescaled version of the interaural spectral cue shows that despite the spec- 
tral manipulations and systematic mislocalizations, subject's were responding to locations 
which were highly correlated with the interaural spectral cue (Fig. 3c). The bar graphs 
for the monaural spectral cues ipsilateral and contralateral to the target location show the 
average correlation of the subjects' responses with these cues varied considerably with the 
stimulus condition (Fig. 3d-g) and to a lesser extent across subjects. 
2 (a) ITD 
I;':'!ii:! :%',<.'!' ::,ii,;: ;½x-< :i:? : !::; 
:':j,!::':'!!;'"'.-.."''.' :" (d) Left Contralateral 
ntml Veddl Veddl 
 ' (f) Left I psi lateral 
0 trol Veddil Veddil Spectrum 
Bmadba Intemuml Right Monauml 2 
Control Venial Veddil 
Bmadbd Iemural Right Mouml 
nt Veddil Veddil 
Bmad Intemural Rig Monaural 
(e) Right Contralateral 
Spectrum 
Control Veridical Veddical 
Bdnd Intemur Rht Monauml 
(g) Right Ipsilateml 
Spectrum 
ntl Veddil Veddil 
Bmadnd InterauBl Right omuml 
Figure 3' Correlation of the four subjects' (indicated by different gray bars) localization 
responses with the different acoustical cues for each stimulus condition. The bar heights 
indicates the mean cue z-score value, while the error bars indicate standard deviation. 
7 Spatial Plots of Correlation Regions 
As the localization responses tended to lie along the cone of confusion, the relative im- 
portance of the spectral cues along the cone of confusion was examined. The correlation 
values for the spectral cues associated with the subjects' responses were recalculated as a 
z-score value using only the distribution of values restricted to the cone of confusion. This 
demonstrates whether the spectral cues associated with the subjects' response locations 
were better correlated with the stimulus cues, than for any random location on the cone of 
confusion. 
Spatial plots of the recalculated response cue z-score values for the spectral cues of one 
subject (similar trends across subjects), obtained for each stimulus location and across the 
three different sound conditions, is shown in Figure 4. Spatial regions of both high and 
low correlation are evident that vary with the stimulus spectrum. The z-score values for the 
ISD cue shows greater bilateral correlation across space in the veridical interaural condi- 
tion (Fig. 4d) than for the veridical monaural condition (Fig. 4g), while the right monaural 
spectral cue demonstrates higher correlation in the right hemisphere of space for the veridi- 
cal monaural condition (Fig. 4i) as opposed to the veridical interaural condition (Fig. 4f). 
This result (although not surprising) demonstrates that the auditory system is extracting 
cues to source location in a manner dependent on the input sound spectrum and in a man- 
ner consistent with the spectral information available in the sound spectrum. Figures 4e,h 
clearly demonstrate that the flat sound spectrum in the left ear was strongly correlated with 
and influenced the subject's localization judgements for specific regions of space. 
774 C. T. din, A. Corderoy, S. Carlile and A. v. Schaik 
Broadband 
(a) 
-180 0 180 
(b) 
-180 0 180 
Veridical Interaural Veridical Mortaural 
(d) (g) 
-180 0 180 -180 0 
(e) (h) 
-180 0 180 -180 0 
180 
(c) (f) (i) 
-1so o 18o -18o o 18o -1so o 1so 
Azimuth 
2 
-0.5 
Figure 4: Spatial plot of the spectral cue z-score values for one subject's localization re- 
sponses across the three different sound conditions. 
8 Conclusions 
The correlation of human sound localization responses with the available acoustical cues 
across three spectrally. different sound conditions has provided insights into the human au- 
ditory system and its integration of cues to produce a coherent percept of spatial location. 
These data suggest an interrelationship between the interaural spectral cue and the cone 
of confusion. The ISD cue is front-back asymmetrical along the cone and its cue cor- 
relation values vary more moderately as a function of space than those of the monaural 
spectral cues. These data shed light on the relative role and importance of the interaural 
and monaural spectral cues. 
Acknowledgments 
This research was supported by the ARC, NHMRC, and Dora Lush Scholarship to CJ. 
References 
[1] S. Carlile, Virtual auditory space: Generation and applications. New York: Chapman and Hall, 
1996. 
[2] R. O. Duda, "Elevation dependence of the interaural transfer function," in Binaural and spatial 
hearing in real and virtual environments (R. H. Gilkey and T. R. Anderson, eds.), ch. 3, pp. 49- 
75, Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1997. 
[3] J. A. Janko, T. R. Anderson, and R. H. Gilkey, "Using neural networks to evaluate the viability 
of monaural and interaural cues for sound localization," in Binaural and Spatial Hearing in real 
and virtual environments (R. H. Gilkey and T. R. Anderson, eds.), ch. 26, pp. 557-570, Mahwah, 
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1997. 
[4] B. Glasberg and B. Moore, "Derivation of auditory filter shapes from notched-noise data," Hear- 
ingResearch, vol. 47, no. 1-2, pp. 103-138, 1990. 
[5] F. Wightman and D. Kistler, "The dominant role of low-frequency interaural time differences in 
sound localization," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 1648-1661, 1992. 
[6] J. Middlebrooks, "Narrow-band sound localization related to extemal ear acoustics," J. Acoust. 
Soc. Am., vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 2607-2624, 1992. 
