An Information-Theoretic Framework for 
Understanding Saccadic Eye Movements 
Tai Sing Lee * 
Department of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
tai@cs. cmu. edu 
Stella X. Yu 
Pobotics Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
stella@cnbc. cmu. edu 
Abstract 
In this paper, we propose that information maximization can pro- 
vide a unified framework for understanding saccadic eye move- 
ments. In this framework, the mutual information among the cor- 
tical representations of the retinal image, the priors constructed 
from our long term visual experience, and a dynamic short-term 
internal representation constructed from recent saccades provides 
a map for guiding eye navigation. By directing the eyes to loca- 
tions of maximum complexity in neuronal ensemble responses at 
each step, the automatic saccadic eye movement system greedily 
collects information about the external world, while modifying the 
neural representations in the process. This framework attempts 
to connect several psychological phenomena, such as pop-out and 
inhibition of return, to long term visual experience and short term 
working memory. It also provides an interesting perspective on 
contextual computation and formation of neural representation in 
the visual system. 
1 Introduction 
When we look at a painting or a visual scene, our eyes move around rapidly and 
constantly to look at different parts of the scene. Are there rules and principles that 
govern where the eyes are going to look next at each moment? In this paper, we 
sketch a theoretical framework based on information maximization to reason about 
the organization of saccadic eye movements. 
*Both authors are members of the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition - a joint 
center between University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University. Address: Rm 
115, Mellon Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. 
Information-Theoretic Framework for Understanding Saccadic Behaviors 835 
Vision is fundamentally a Bayesian inference process. Given the measurement by 
the retinas, the brain's memory of eye positions and its prior knowledge of the 
world, our brain has to make an inference about what is where in the visual scene. 
The retina, unlike a camera, has a peculiar design. It has a small foveal region 
dedicated to high-resolution analysis and a large low-resolution peripheral region 
for monitoring the rest of the visual field. At about 2.5 ø visual angle away from 
the center of the fovea, visual acuity is already reduced by a half. When we 'look' 
(foveate) at a certain location in the visual scene, we direct our high-resolution 
fovea to analyze information in that location, taking a snap shot of the scene using 
our retina. Figure 1A-C illustrate what a retina would see at each fixation. It 
is immediately obvious that our retinal image is severely limited - it is clear only 
in the fovea and is very blurry in the surround, posing a severe constraint on the 
information available to our inference system. Yet, in our subjective experience, the 
world seems to be stable, coherent and complete in front of us. This is a paradox 
that have engaged philosophical and scientific debates for ages. To overcome the 
constraint of the retinal image, during perception, the brain actively moves the eyes 
around to (1) gather information to construct a mental image of the world, and (2) 
to make inference about the world based on this mental image. Understanding the 
forces that drive saccadic eye movements is important to elucidating the principles 
of active perception. 
A B C D 
Figure 1. A-C: retinal images in three separate fixations. D: a mental mosaic created by 
integrating the retinal images from these three and other three fixations. 
It is intuitive to think that eye movements are used to gather information. Eye 
movements have been suggested to provide a means for measuring the allocation 
of attention or the values of each kind of information in a particular context [16]. 
The basic assumption of our theory is that we move our eyes around to maximize 
our information intake from the world, for constructing the mental image and for 
making inference of the scene. Therefore, the system should always look for and 
attentively fixate at a location in the retinal image that is the most unusual or the 
most unexplained - and hence carries the maximum amount of information. 
2 Perceptual Representation 
How can the brain decide which part of the retinal image is more unusual? First of 
all, we know the responses of V1 simple cells, modeled well by the Gabor wavelet 
pyramid [3,7], can be used to reconstruct completely the retinal image. It is also 
well established that the receptive fields of these neurons developed in such a way 
as to provide a compact code for natural images [8,9,13,14]. The idea of compact 
code or sparse code, originally proposed by Barlow [2], is that early visual neurons 
capture the statistical correlations in natural scenes so that only a small number 
836 T. S. Lee and S. X. Yu 
of cells out of a large set will be activated to represent a particular scene at each 
moment. Extending this logic, we suggest that the complexity or the entropy of 
the neuronal ensemble response of a hypercolumn in V1 is therefore closely related 
to the strangeness of the image features being analyzed by the machinery in that 
hypercolumn. A frequent event will have a more compact representation in the 
neuronal ensemble response. Entropy is an information measure that captures the 
complexity or the variability of signals. The entropy of a neuronal ensemble in a 
hypercolumn can therefore be used to quantify the strangeness of a particular event. 
A hypercolumn in the visual cortex contains roughly 200,000 neurons, dedicated 
to analyzing different aspects of the image in its 'visual window'. These cells are 
tuned to different spatial positions, orientations, spatial frequency, color disparity 
and other cues. There might also be a certain degree of redundancy, i.e. a number 
of neurons are tuned to the same feature. Thus a hypercolumn forms the funda- 
mental computational unit for image analysis within a particular window in visual 
space. Each hypercolumn contains cells with receptive fields of different sizes, many 
significantly smaller than the aggregated 'visual window' of the hypercolumn. The 
entropy of a hypercolumn's ensemble response at a certain time t is the sum of 
entropies of all the channels, given by, 
H(u(R, t)) = - y. y.p(u(R, v, , O, t)) log2p(u(R, v, , O, t)) 
where u(Re, t) denotes [he responses of all complex cell channels inside the visual 
window R5 of a hypercolumn at time t, computed within a 20 msec time window. 
u(, , 0, t) is the response of a V1 complex cell channel of a particular scale  and 
orientation  at spatial location  at t. p(u(R, v, , O, t)) is the probability of cells 
in that channel within the visual window R2 of the hypercolumn firing v number 
of spikes. v can be computed as 
cell channels, modeled by Gabor 
probability p(u(Re, v, r, O, t)) can 
the variations in spatial position 
the power modulus of the corresponding simple 
wavelets [see 7]. -p(u(_R2, v,r,O,t))-1. The 
be computed at each moment in time because of 
of the receptive fields of similar cell within the 
hypercolumn - hence the 'same' cells in the hypercolumn are analyzing different 
image patches, and also because of the redundancy of cells coding similar features. 
The neurons' responses in a hypercolumn are subject to contextual modulation from 
other hypercolumns, partly in the form of lateral inhibition from cells with similar 
tunings. The net observed effect is that the later part of V1 neurons' response, 
starting at about 80 msec, exhibits differential suppression depending on the spatial 
extent and the nature of the surround stimulus. The more similar the surround 
stimulus is to the center stimuli, and the larger the spatial extent of the 'similar 
surround', the stronger is the suppressive effect [e.g. 6]. Simoncelli and Schwartz 
[15] have proposed that the steady state responses of the cells can be modeled by 
dividing the response of the cell (i.e. modeled by the wavelet coefficient or its power 
modulus) by a weighted combination of the responses of its spatial neighbors in order 
to remove the statistical dependencies between the responses of spatial neighbors. 
These weights are found by minimizing a predictive error between the center signal 
from the surround signals. In our context, this idea of predictive coding [see also 14] 
is captured by the concept of mutual information between the ensemble responses 
of the different hypercolumns as given below, 
I(u(R,t);u(gi,t-dt)) - H(u(R,t))- H(u(R,t)lu(gi,t-dt) ) 
= y. y. (u(R,vt,a,O,t),u(gi,vr,a,O,t)) 
0'0 VR,V 
log2 p(u(R,vR, a,O,t),u(,vn,a,O,t)) 
O, t) ), O, t) )]' 
Information-Theoretic Framework for Understanding $accadic Behaviors 837 
where u(Re, t) is the ensemble response of the hypercolumn in question, and u(f2e, t) 
is the ensemble response of the surrounding hypercolumns. p(u(Re, vR, r, O, t)) is the 
probability that cells of a channel in the center hypercolumn assumes the response 
value vR and p(u(f2e, v, r, O, t)) the probability that cells of a similar channel in the 
surrounding hypercolumns assuming the response value vr. tx i the delay by which 
the surround information exerts its effect on the center hypercolumn. The mutual 
information I can be computed from the joint probability of ensemble responses of 
the center and the surround. 
The steady state responses of the V1 neurons, as a result of this contextual modula- 
tion, are said to be more correlated to perceptual pop-out than the neurons' initial 
responses [5,6]. The complexity of the steady state response in the early visual 
cortex is described by the following conditional entropy, 
H(u(R2, t)lu(g2,t- 6t)) = H(u(R2,t)) - I(u(R2,t); u(g22, t- 6tl)). 
However, the computation in V1 is not limited to the creation of compact repre- 
sentation through surround inhibition. In fact, we have suggested that V1 plays 
an active role in scene interpretation particularly when such inference involves high 
resolution details [6]. Visual tasks such as the inference of contour and surface likely 
involve V1 heavily. These computations could further modify the steady state re- 
sponses of V1, and hence the control of saccadic eye movements. 
3 Mental Mosaic Representation 
The perceptual representation provides the basic force for the brain to steer the high 
resolution fovea to locations of maximum uncertainty or maximum signal complex- 
ity. Foveation captures the maximum amount of available information in a location. 
Once a location is examined by the fovea, its information uncertainty is greatly re- 
duced. The eyes should move on and not to return to the same spot within a certain 
period of time. This is called the 'inhibition of return'. 
How can we model this reduction of interest? We propose that the mind creates 
a mental mosaic of the scene in order to keep track of the information that have 
been gathered. By mosaic, we mean that the brain can assemble successive reti- 
nal images obtained from multiple fixations into a coherent mental picture of the 
scene. Figure 1D provides an example of a mental mosaic created by combining 
information from the retinal images from 6 fixations. Whether the brain actually 
keeps such a mental mosaic of the scene is currently under debate. McConkie and 
Raynet [10] had suggested the idea of an integrafive visual buffer to integrate in- 
formation across multiple saccades. However, numerous experiments demonstrated 
we actually remember relatively little across saccades [4]. This lead to the idea 
that brain may not need an explicit internal representation of the world. Since the 
world is always out there, the brain can access whatever information it needs at the 
appropriate details by moving the eyes to the appropriate place at the appropriate 
time. The subjective feeling of a coherent and a complete world in front of us is a 
mere illusion [e.g. 1]. 
The mental mosaic represented in Figure 1D might resemble McConkie and Rayner's 
theory superficially. But the existence of such a detailed high-resolution buffer with 
a large spatial support in the brain is rather biologically implausible. Rather, we 
think that the information corresponding to the mental mosaic is stored in an in- 
terpreted and semantic form in a mesh of Bayesian belief networks in the brain 
(e.g. involving PO, IT and area 46). This distributed semantic representation of 
838 T. S. Lee and S. X.. Yu 
the mental mosaic, however, is capable of generating detailed (sometimes false) im- 
agery in early visual cortex using the massive recurrent convergent feedback from 
the higher areas to V1. However, because of the limited support provided by V1 
machinery, the instantiation of mental imagery in V1 has to be done sequentially 
one 'retinal image' frame at a time, presumably in conjunction with eye movement, 
even when the eyes are closed. This might explain why vivid visual dream is always 
accompanied by rapid eye movement in REM sleep. The mental mosaic accumu- 
lates information from the retinal images up to the last fixation and can provide 
prediction on what the retina will see in the current fixation. For each u(, , O) 
cell, there is a corresponding effective prediction signal m(, , O) fed back from the 
mental mosaic. 
This prediction signal can reduce the conditional entropy or complexity of the en- 
semble response in the perceptual representation by discounting the mutual infor- 
mation between the ensemble response to the retinal image and the mental mosaic 
prediction as follow, 
H(u(Re, t)lm(Re,t--St2)) = I(u(R2, t),m(R2, t-St2)) 
where 5t2 is the transmission delay from the mental mosaic back to V1. 
At places where the fovea has visited, the mental mosaic representation has high 
resolution information and m(œ, r, O, t - 5re) can explain u(œ, r, 0, t) fully. Hence, 
the mutual information is high at those hypercolumns and the conditional entropy 
H(u(Re, t)lm(Re, t- 5))is low, with two consequences: (1) the system will not 
get the eyes stuck at a particular location; once the information at œ is updated 
to the mental mosaic, the system will lose interest and move on; (2) the system 
will exhibit 'inhibition of return' as the information in the visited locations are 
fully predicted by the mental mosaic. Also, from this standpoint, the 'habituation 
dynamics' often observed in visual neurons when the same stimulus is presented 
multiple times might not be simply due to neuro-chemical fatigue, but might be 
understood in terms of mental mosaic being updated and then fed back to explain 
the perceptual representation in V1. The mental mosaic is in effect our short-term 
memory of the scene. It has a forgetting dynamics, and needs to be periodically 
updated. Otherwise, it will rapidly fade away. 
4 Overall Reactive Saccadic Behaviors 
Now, we can combine the influence of the two predictive processes to arrive at a 
discounted complexity measure of the hypercolumn's ensemble response: 
H(u(R2, t)lu(2, t-6tl),m(R2, t-6t2)) = H(u(Rs,t)) 
--'(u(., t); u(2, t -- 5tl)) 
-I(u(R2, t); m(R2, t - 6t2) ) 
+I(u(2, t - 6tx); m(R2, t - 6t2) ) 
If we can assume the long range surround priors and the mental mosaic short term 
memory are independent processes, we can leave out the last term, I(u(s,t- 
5t); m(Rs, t - 5t)), of the equation. 
The system, after each saccade, will evaluate the new retinal scene and select the 
location where the perceptual representation has the maximum conditional entropy. 
To maximize the information gain, the system must constantly search for and make 
a saccade to the locations of maximum uncertainty (or complexity) computed from 
Information- Theoretic Framework for Understanding Saccadic Behaviors 839 
the hypercolumn ensemble responses in V1 at each fixation. Unless the number of 
saccades is severely limited, this locally greedy algorithm, coupled the inhibition 
of return mechanism, will likely steer the system to a relatively optimal global 
sampling of the world - in the sense that the average information gain per saccade 
is maximized, and the mental mosaic's dissonance with the world is minimized. 
5 Task-dependent schema Representation 
However, human eye movements are not simply controlled by the generic informa- 
tion in a bottom-up fashion. Yarbus [16] has shown that, when staring at a face, 
subjects' eyes tend to go back to the same locations (eyes, mouth) over and over 
again. Further, he showed that when asked different questions, subjects exhibited 
different kinds of scan-paths when looking at the same picture. Norton and Stark 
[12] also showed that eye movements are not random, but often exhibit repetitive 
or even idiosyncratic path patterns. 
To capture these ideas, we propose a third representation, called task schema, to 
provide the necessary top-down information to bias the eye movement control. It 
specifies the learned or habitual scan-paths for a particular task in a particular 
context or assigns weights to different types of information. Given that we arenot 
mostly unconscious of the scan-path patterns we are making, these task-sensitive 
or context-sensitive habitual scan-patterns might be encoded at the levels of motor 
programs, and be downloaded when needed without our conscious control. These 
motor programs for scan-paths can be trained from reinforcement learning. For 
example, since the eyes and the mouths convey most of the emotional content of 
a facial expression, a successful interpretation of another person's emotion could 
provide the reward signal to reinforce the motor programs just executed or the fixa- 
tions to certain facial features. These unconscious scan-path motor programs could 
provide the additional modulation to automatic saccadic eye movement generation. 
6 Discussion 
In this paper, we propose that information maximization might provide a theoretical 
framework to understand the automatic saccadic eye movement behaviors in human. 
In this proposal, each hypercolumn in V1 is considered a fundamental computational 
unit. The relative complexity or entropy of the neuronal ensemble response in the 
V1 hypercolumns, discounted by the predictive effect of the surround, higher order 
representations and working memory, creates a force field to guide eye navigation. 
The framework we sketched here bridge natural scene statistics to eye movement 
control via the more established ideas of sparse coding and predictive coding in neu- 
ral representation. Information maximization has been suggested to be a possible 
explanation for shaping the receptive fields in the early visual cortex according to 
the statistics of natural images [8,9,13,14] to create a minimum-entropy code [2,3]. 
As a result, a frequent event is represented efficiently with the response of a few 
neurons in a large set, resulting in a lower hypercolumn ensemble entropy, while 
unusual events provoke ensemble responses of higher complexity. We suggest that 
higher complexity in ensemble responses will arouse attention and draw scrutiny by 
the eyes, forcing the neural representation to continue adapting to the statistics of 
the natural scenes. The formulation here also suggests that information maximiza- 
tion might provide an explanation for the formation of horizontal predictive network 
in V1 as well as higher order internal representations, consistent with the ideas of 
predictive coding [11, 14, 15]. Our theory hence predicts that the adaptation of the 
840 T. S. Lee and S. X. Yu 
neural representations to the statistics of natural scenes will lead to the adaptation 
of, saccadic eye movement behaviors. 
Acknowledgement s 
The authors have been supported by a grant from the McDonnell Foundation and 
a NSF grant (LIS 9720350). Yu is also being supported in part by a grant to Takeo 
Kanade. 
References 
[1] Ballard, D. Hayhoe, M.M. Pook, P.K. & Rao, R.P.N. (1997). Deictic codes for the 
embodiment of cognition. Behavioral and Brain Science, 20:4, December, 723-767. 
[2] Barlow, H.B. (1989). Unsupervised learning. Neural Computation, 1, 295-311. 
[3] Daugman, J.G. (1989). Entropy reduction and decorrelation in visual coding by ori- 
ented neural receptive fields. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 36:, 107-114. 
[4] Irwin, D. E, 1991. Information Integration across Saccadic Eye Movements. Cognitive 
Psychology, 23(3):420-56. 
[5] Knierim, J. & Van Essen, D.C. Neural response to static texture patterns in area V1 
of macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiology, 67: 961-980. 
[6] Lee, T.S., Mumford, D., Romero R. & Lamme, V.A.F. (1998). The role of primary 
visual cortex in higher level vision. Vision Research 38, 2429-2454. 
[7] Lee, T.S. (1996). Image representation using 2D Gabor wavelets. IEEE Transaction 
of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 18:10, 959-971. 
[8] Lewicki, M. & Olshausen, B. (1998). Inferring sparse, overcomplete image codes using 
an efficient coding framework. In Advances in Neural Information Processing System 10, 
M. Jordan, M. Kearns and S. Solla (eds). MIT Press. 
[9] Linsker, R. (1989). How to generate ordered maps by maximizing the mutual informa- 
tion between input and output signals. Neural Computation, 1: 402-411.o 
[10] McConkie, G.W. & Rayner, K. (1976). Identifying the span of effective stimulus in 
reading. Literature review and theories of reading. In H. Singer and R.B. Ruddell (Eds), 
Theoretical models and processes of reading, 137-162. Newark, D.E.: International Reading 
Association. 
[11] Mumford, D. (1992). On the computational architecture of the neocortex II. Biological 
cybernetics, 66, 241-251. 
[12] Norton, D. and Stark, L. (1971) Eye movements and visual perception. Scientific 
American, 224, 34-43. 
[13] Olshausen, B.A., & Field, D.J. (1996), Emergence of simple cell receptive field prop- 
erties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature, 381: 607-609. 
[14] Rao R., & Ballard, D.H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional 
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2:1 79- 
87. 
[15] Simoncelli, E.P. & Schwartz, O. (1999). Modeling surround suppression in V1 neu- 
rons with a statistically-derived normalization model. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 11, . M.S. Kearns, S.A. Solla, and D.A. Cohn (eds). MIT Press. 
[16] Yarbus, A.L. (1967). Eye movements and vision. Plenum Press. 
