Constructing Heterogeneous Committees 
Using Input Feature Grouping: 
Application to Economic Forecasting 
Yuansong Liao and John Moody 
Department of Computer Science, Oregon Graduate Institute, 
P.O.Box 91000, Portland, OR 97291-1000 
Abstract 
The committee approach has been proposed for reducing model 
uncertainty and improving generalization performance. The ad- 
vantage of committees depends on (1) the performance of individ- 
ual members and (2) the correlational structure of errors between 
members. This paper presents an input grouping technique for de- 
signing a heterogeneous committee. With this technique, all input 
variables are first grouped based on their mutual information. Sta- 
tistically similar variables are assigned to the same group. Each 
member's input set is then formed by input variables extracted 
from different groups. Our designed committees have less error cor- 
relation between its members, since each member observes different 
input variable combinations. The individual member's feature sets 
contain less redundant information, because highly correlated vari- 
ables will not be combined together. The member feature sets con- 
tain almost complete information, since each set contains a feature 
from each information group. An empirical study for a noisy and 
nonstationary economic forecasting problem shows that commit- 
tees constructed by our proposed technique outperform committees 
formed using several existing techniques. 
I Introduction 
The committee approach has been widely used to reduce model uncertainty and 
improve generalization performance. Developing methods for generating candidate 
committee members is a very important direction of committee research. Good 
candidate members of a committee should have (1) good (not necessarily excellent) 
individual performance and (2) small residual error correlations with other members. 
Many techniques have been proposed to reduce residual correlations between mem- 
bers. These include resampling the training and validation data [3], adding ran- 
domness to data [7], and decorrelation training [8]. These approaches are only 
effective for certain models and problems. Genetic algorithms have also been used 
to generate good and diverse members [6]. 
Input feature selection is one of the most important stages of the model learning 
process. It has a crucial impact both on the learning complexity and the general- 
922 Y. Liao andJ. Moody 
ization performance. It is essential that a feature vector gives sufficient information 
for estimation. However, too many redundant input features not only burden the 
whole learning process, but also degrade the achievable generalization performance. 
Input feature selection for individual estimators has received a lot of attention 
because of its importance. However, there has not been much research on feature 
selection for estimators in the context of committees. Previous research found 
that giving committee members different input features is very useful for improving 
committee performance [4], but is difficult to implement [9]. The feature selection 
problem for committee members is conceptually different than for single estimators. 
When using committees for estimation, as we stated previously, committee members 
not only need to have reasonable performance themselves, but should also make 
decisions independently. 
When all committee members are trained to model the same underlying function, 
it is difficult for committee members to optimize both criteria at the same time. In 
order to generate members that provide a good balance between the two criteria, we 
propose a feature selection approach, called input feature grouping, for commit- 
tee members. The idea is to give each member estimator of a committee a rich but 
distinct feature sets, in the hope that each member will generalize independently 
with reduced error correlations. 
The proposed method first groups input features using a hierarchical clustering 
algorithm based on their mutual information, such that features in different groups 
are less related to each other and features within a group are statistically similar 
to each other. Then the feature set for each committee member is formed by 
selecting a feature from each group. Our empirical results demonstrate that forming 
a heterogeneous committee using input feature grouping is a promising approach. 
2 Committee Performance Analysis 
There are many ways to construct a committee. In this paper, we are mainly 
interested in heterogeneous committees whose members have different input feature 
sets. Committee members are given different subsets of the available feature set. 
They are trained independently, and the committee output is either a weighted or 
unweighted combination of individual members' outputs. 
In the following, we analyze the relationship between committee errors and average 
member errors from the regression point of view and discuss how the residual cor- 
relations between members affect the committee error. We define the training data 
7) = {(XZ, YZ);/3 = 1,2,...N} and the test data 7- = {(X,Y);/ = 1,2,...o}, 
where both are assumed to be generated by the model: Y = t(X) + e , e 
A/'(0, rr 2) . The data 7) and 7- are independent, and inputs are drawn from an 
unknown distribution. Assume that a committee has K members. Denote the 
available input features as X = [Xl,X2,... ,Xm], the feature sets for the i th and 
jth members as Xi = [Xil,Xi2,...,Xm] and Xj = [Xjl,Xj2,...,Xmj] respectively, 
where Xi  X, Xj  X and Xi  Xj, and the mapping function of the i th and jta 
member models trained on data from 7) as fi(Xi) and fj(Xj). Define the model 
t,=t t,_fi(X,) for a11/-1,2,3, . oandi=l,2, K. 
efTof'e i , .. , ..., 
Constructing Heterogeneous Committees for Economic Forecasting 923 
The MSE of a committee is 
and the average MSE made by the committee members acting individually is 
K 
Eave = (2) 
i----1 
where œ[.] denotes the expectation over all test data T. Using Jensen's inequality, 
we get Ec _ Eave, which indicates that the performance of a committee is always 
equal to or better than the average performance of its members. 
We define the average model error correlation as C = 1 K [e i ej ] , and 
K(K--I) Eij œ1 I I 
then have 
Ec = Eave + C = ( + q)Eave , (3) 
c We consider the following four cases of q: 
where q = Eave . 
Case 1:  < q < 0. In this case, the model errors between members 
K--1 -- 
are anti-correlated, which might be achieved through decorrelation training. 
Case 2: q = 0. In this case, the model errors between members are 
__ I Eave. That is to say, a committee can 
uncorrelated, and we have: Ec -  
do much better than the average performance of its members. 
Case 3:0 < q < 1. If Eave is bounded above, when the committee size 
K > o, we have Ec -- qEave ß This gives the asymptotic limit of a 
committee's performance. As the size of a committee goes to infinity, the 
committee error is equal to the average model error correlation C. The 
difference between Ec and Eave is determined by the ratio q. 
Case 4: q = 1. In this case, Ec is equal to Eave. This happens only when 
½i -- e j, for all i,j = 1,..., K. It is obvious that there is no advantage to 
combining a set of models that act identically. 
It is clear from the analyses above that a committee shows its advantage when 
the ratio q is less than one. The smaller the ratio q is, the better the committee 
performs compared to the average performance of its members. For the commit- 
tee to achieve substantial improvement over a single model, committee members 
not only should have small errors individually, but also should have small residual 
correlations between each other. 
3 Input Feature Grouping 
One way to construct a feature subset for a committee member is by randomly 
picking a certain number of features from the original feature set. The advantage 
of this method is that it is simple. However, we have no control on each member's 
performance or on the residual correlation between members by randomly selecting 
subsets. 
924 Y. Liao andJ. Moody 
Instead of randomly picking a subset of features for a member, we propose an input 
feature grouping method for forming committee member feature sets. The input 
grouping method first groups features based on a relevance measure in a way such 
that features between different groups are less related to one another and features 
within a group are more related to one another. 
After grouping, there are two ways to form member feature sets. One method 
is to construct the feature set for each member by selecting a feature from' each 
group. Forming a member's feature set in this way, each member will have enough 
information to make decision, and its feature set has less redundancy. This is the 
method we use in this paper. 
Another way is to use each group as the feature set for a committee member. In this 
method each member will only have partial information. This is likely to hurt in- 
dividual member's performance. However, because the input features for different 
members are less dependent, these members tend to make decisions more inde- 
pendently. There is always a trade-off between increasing members' independence 
and hurting individual members' performance. If there is no redundancy among 
input feature representations, removing several features may hurt individual mem- 
bers' performance badly, and the overall committee performance will be hurt even 
though members make decisions independently. This method is currently under 
investigation. 
The mutual information I(xi; xj) between two input variables xi and xj is used as 
the relevance measure to group inputs. The mutual information I(x; xj), which is 
defined in equation 4, measures the dependence between the two random variables. 
I(xi;xj) = H(xi) - H(xilxj) -  p(xi,yi)log 
p(xi,xj) 
p(xi)p(xj) 
(4) 
If features xi and xj are highly dependent, I(Xi; Xj) will be large. Because the 
mutual information measures arbitrary dependencies between random variables, it 
has been effectively used for feature selections in complex prediction tasks [1], where 
methods bases on linear relations like the correlation are likely to make mistakes. 
The fact that the mutual information is independent of the coordinates chosen 
permits a robust estimation. 
4 Empirical Studies 
We apply the input grouping method to predict the one-month rate of change of the 
Index of Industrial Production (IP), one of the key measures of economic activity. 
It is computed and published monthly. Figure 4 plots monthly IP data from 1967 
to 1993. 
Nine macroeconomic time series, whose names are given in Table 1, are used 
for forecasting IP. Macroeconomic forecasting is a difficult task because data are 
usually limited, and these series are intrinsically very noise and nonstationary. 
These series are preprocessed before they are applied to the forecasting mod- 
els. The representation used for input series is the first difference on one month 
time scales of the logged series. For example, the notation IP.L.D1 represents 
IP.L.D1 =/n(IP(t)) -/n(IP(t-1)). The target series is IP.L.FD1, which is defined 
as IP.L.FD1 -- /n(IP(t+l)) -/n(IP(t)). The data set has been one of our bench- 
marks for various studies [5, 10]. 
Constructing Heterogeneous Committees for Economic Forecasting 925 
Index of Industrial Production: 1967 - 1993 
1970 1980 1990 
Year 
Figure 1: U.S. Index of Industrial Production (IP) for the period 1967 to 1993. Shaded 
regions denote official recessions, while unshaded regions denote official expansions. The 
boundaries for recessions and expansions are determined by the National Bureau of Eco- 
nomic Research based on several macroeconomic series. As is evident for IP, business 
cycles are irregular in magnitude, duration, and structure, making prediction of IP an 
interesting challenge. 
Series Description 
IP Index of Industrial Production 
SP Standard &: Poor's 500 
DL Index of Leading Indicators 
M2 Money Supply 
CP Consumer Price Index 
CB Moody's Aaa Bond Yield 
HS Housing Starts 
TB3 3-month Treasury Bill Yield 
Tr Yield Curve Slope: (10-Year Bond Composite)-(3-Month Treasury Bill) 
Table 1: Input data series. Data are taken from the Citibase database. 
During the grouping procedure, measures of mutual information between all pairs 
of input variables are computed first. A simple histogram method is used to calcu- 
late these estimates. Then a hierarchical clustering algorithm [2] is applied to these 
values to group inputs. Hierarchical clustering proceeds by a series of successive 
fusions of the nine input variables into groups. At any particular stage, the pro- 
cess fuses variables or groups of variables which are closest, base on their mutual 
information estimates. The distance between two groups is defined as the average 
of the distances between all pairs of individuals in the two groups. The result is 
presented by a tree which illustrates the fusions made at each successive level (see 
Figure 2). From the clustering tree, it is clear that we can break the input variables 
into four groups: (IP.L.D1, DL.L.D1) measure recent economic changes, (SP.L.D1) 
reflects recent stock market momentum, (CB.D1, TB3.D1, Tr.D1) give interest rate 
information, and (M2.L.D1, CP.L.D1, HS.L.D1) provide inflation information. The 
grouping algorithm meaningfully clusters the nine input series. 
926 Y. Lao andJ. Moody 
Figure 2: Variable grouping based on mutual information. Y label is the distance. 
Eighteen different subsets of features can be generated from the four groups by 
selecting a feature from each group. Each subset is given to a committee mem- 
ber. For example, the subsets (IP.L.D1, SP.L.D1, CB.D1, M2.L.D1) and (DL.L.D1, 
SP.L.D1, TB3.D1, M2.L.D1) are used as feature sets for different committee mem- 
bers. A committee has totally eighteen members. Data from Jan. 1950 to Dec. 
1979 is used for training and validation, and from Jan. 1980 to Dec. 1989 is used for 
testing. Each member is a linear model that is trained using neural net techniques. 
We compare the input grouping method with three other committee member gen- 
erating methods: baseline, random selection, and bootstrapping. The baseline 
method is to train a committee member using all the input variables. Members 
are only different in their initial weights. The bootstrapping method also trains 
a member using all the input features, but each member has different bootstrap 
replicates of the original training data as its training and validation sets. The ran- 
dom selection method constructs a feature set for a member by randomly picking a 
subset from the available'features. For comparison with the grouping method, each 
committee generated by these three methods has 18 members. 
Twenty runs are performed for each of the four methods in order to get reliable per- 
formance measures. Figure 3 shows the boxplots of normalized MSE for the four 
methods. The grouping method gives the best result, and the performance improve- 
ment is significant compared to other methods. The grouping method outperforms 
the random selection method by meaningfully grouping of input .features. It is in- 
teresting to note that the heterogeneous committee methods, grouping and random 
selection, perform better than homogeneous methods for this data set. One of the 
reasons for this is that giving different members different input sets increases their 
model independence. Another reason could be that the problem becomes easier to 
model because of smaller feature sets. 
5 Conclusions 
The performance of a committee depends on both the performance of individual 
members and the correlational structure of errors between members. An empirical 
study for a noisy and nonstationary economic forecasting problem has demonstrated 
that committees constructed by input variable grouping outperform committees 
formed by randomly selecting member input variables. They also outperform com- 
mittees without any input variable manipulation. 
Constructing Heterogeneous Committees for Economic Forecasting 927 
0.82 
0.8 
0.78 
0.76 
0.74 
Committee Psdonanc$ Comparison (20 runs) 
1 2 3 4 
1:Grouping. 2:Random selection. 3.Bas$1in$. 4.Bootstrapping 
Figure 3: Comparison between four different committee member generating methods. 
The proposed grouping method gives the best result, and the performance improvement 
is significant compared to the other three methods. 
References 
[1] R. Battiti. Using mutual information for selecting features in supervised neural net 
learning. IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks, 5(4), July 1994. 
[2] B.Everitt. Cluster Analysis. Heinemann Educational Books, 1974. 
[3] L. Breimam. Bagging predictors. Machine Learning, 24(2):123-40, 1996. 
[4] 
K.J. Cherkauer. Human expert-level performance on a scientific image analysis task 
by a system using combined artifical neural networks. In P. Chan, editor, Working 
Notes of the AAAI Workshop on Integrating Multiple Learned Models, pages 15-21. 
1996. 
[5] 
J. Moody, U. Levin, and S. Rehfuss. Predicting the U.S. index of industrial pro- 
duction. In proceedings of the 1993 Parallel Applications in Statistics and Economics 
Conference, Zeist, The Netherlands. Special issue of Neural Network World, 3(6):791- 
794, 1993. 
[6] 
D. Opitz and J. Shavlik. Generating accurate nd diverse members of a neural- 
network ensemble. In D. Touretzky, M. Mozer, and M. Hasselmo, editors, Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 8. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996. 
[7] Y. Raviv and N. Intrator. Bootstrapping with noise: An effective regularization 
technique. Connection Science, 8(3-4):355-72, 1996. 
[8] B. E. Rosen. Ensemble learning using decorrelated neural networks. Connection 
Science, 8(3-4):373-83, 1996. 
[9] K. Tumer and J. Ghosh. Error correlation and error reduction in ensemble classifiers. 
Connection Science, 8(3-4):385-404, December 1996. 
[10] L. Wu and J. Moody. A smoothing regularizer for feedforward and recurrent neural 
networks. Neural Computation, 8.3:463-491, 1996. 
