From Coexpression to Coregulation: An 
Approach to Inferring Transcriptional 
Regulation among Gene Classes from 
Large-Scale Expression Data 
Eric Mjolsness 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena CA 91109-8099 
mjolsness @jp I. nasa. go v 
Tobias Mann 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena CA 91109-8099 
mannaig.jpl. nasa.gov 
Rebecca Castafio 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena CA 91109-8099 
beckyaig.jpl. nasa. gov 
Barbara Wold 
Division of Biology 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena CA 91125 
woldb(its. caltech. edu 
Abstract 
We provide preliminary evidence that existing algorithms for 
inferring small-scale gene regulation networks from gene 
expression data can be adapted to large-scale gene expression data 
coming from hybridization microarrays. The essential steps are (1) 
clustering many genes by their expression time-course data into a 
minimal set of clusters of co-expressed genes, (2) theoretically 
modeling the various conditions under which the time-courses are 
measured using a continious-time analog recurrent neural network 
for the cluster mean time-courses, (3) fitting such a regulatory 
model to the cluster mean time courses by simulated annealing 
with weight decay, and (4) analysing several such fits for 
commonalities in the circuit parameter sets including the 
connection matrices. This procedure can be used to assess the 
adequacy of existing and future gene expression time-course data 
sets for determining transcriptional regulatory relationships such as 
coregulation. 
1 Introduction 
In a cell, genes can be turned "on" or "off" to varying degrees by the protein 
products of other genes. When a gene is "on" it is transcribed to produce messenger 
RNA (mRNA) which can subsequently be translated into protein molecules. Some 
of these proteins are transcription factors which bind to DNA at specific sites and 
thereby affect which genes are transcribed and how often. This trancriptional 
Inferring Transcriptional Regulation among Gene Classes 929 
regulation feedback circuitry provides a fundamental mechanism for information 
processing in the cell. It governs differentiation into diverse cell types and many 
other basic biological processes. 
Recently, several new technologies have been developed for measuring the 
"expression" of genes as mRNA or protein product. Improvements in conventional 
fluorescently labeled antibodies against proteins have been coupled with confocal 
microscopy and image processing to partially automate the simultaneous 
measurement of small numbers of proteins in large numbers of individual nuclei in 
the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster [1]. In a complementary way, the mRNA 
levels of thousands of genes, each averaged over many cells, have been measured by 
hybridization arrays for various species including the budding yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae [2]. 
The high-spatial-resolution protein antibody data has been quantitatively modeled 
by "gene regulation network" circuit models [3] which use continuous-time, analog, 
recurrent neural networks (Hopfield networks without an objective function) to 
model transcriptional regulation [4][5]. This approach requires some machine 
learning technique to infer the circuit parameters from the data, and a particular 
variant of simulated annealing has proven effective [6][7]. Methods in current 
biological use for analysing mRNA hybridization data do not infer regulatory 
relationships, but rather simply cluster together genes with similar patterns of 
expression across time and experimental conditions [8][9]. In this paper, we explore 
the extension of the gene circuit method to the mRNA hybridization data which has 
much lower spatial resolution but can currently assay a thousand times more genes 
than immunofluorescent image analysis. 
The essential problem with using the gene circuit method, as employed for 
immunoflourescence data, on hybridization data is that the number of connection 
strength parameters grows between linearly and quadratically in the number of 
genes (depending on sparsity assumptions) . This requires more data on each gene, 
and even if that much data is available, simulated annealing for circuit inference 
does not seem to scale well with the number of unknown parameters. Some form of 
dimensionality reduction is called for. Fortunately dimensionality reduction is 
available in the present practice of clustering the large-scale time course expression 
data by genes, into gene clusters. In this way one can derive a small number of 
cluster-mean time courses for "aggregated genes", and then fit a gene regulation 
circuit to these cluster mean time courses. We will discuss details of how this 
analysis can be performed and then interpreted. A similar approach using somewhat 
different algorithms for clustering and circuit inference has been taken by Hertz 
[10]. 
In the following, we will first summarize the data models and algorithms used, and 
then report on preliminary experiments in applying those algorithms to gene 
expression data for 2467 yeast genes [9][11]. Finally we will discuss prospects for 
and limitations of the approach. 
2 Data Models and Algorithms 
The data model is as follows. We imagine that there is a small, hidden regulatory 
network of "aggregate genes" which regulate one another by the analog neural 
network dynamics [3] 
z'i = g T'"ivJ + h,. - ,ivi 
930 E. Mjolsness, T. Mann, R. Castao and B. WoM 
in which ¾i is the continuous-valued state variable for gene product i, r/ is the 
matrix of positive, zero, or negative connections by which one transcription factor 
can enhance or repress another, and gO is a nonlinear monotonic sigmoidal 
activation function. When a particular matrix entry r is nonzero, there is a 
regulatory "connection" from gene productj to gene i. The regulation is enhancing 
if T is positive and repressing if it is negative. If r is zero there is no connection. 
This network is run forwards from some initial condition and time-sampled to 
generate a wild-type time course for the aggregate genes. In addition, various other 
time courses can be generated under alternative experimental conditions by 
manipulating the parameters. For example an entire aggregate gene (corresponding 
to a cluster of real genes) could be removed from the circuit or otherwise modified 
to represent mutants. External input conditions could be modeled as modifications 
to h. Thus we get one or several time courses (trajectories) for the aggregate genes. 
From such aggregate time courses, actual gene data is generated by addition of 
Gaussian-distributed noise to the logarithms of the concentration variables. Each 
time point in each cluster has its own scalar standard deviation parameter (and a 
mean arising from the circuit dynamics). Optionally, each gene's expression data 
may also be multiplied by a time-independent proportionality constant. 
Regulatory aggregate genes 
(large circles) and cluster 
member genes (small 
circles). 
Given this data generation model and suitable gene expression data, the problem is 
to infer gene cluster memberships and the circuit parameters for the aggregate 
genes' regulatory relationships. Then, we would like to use the inferred cluster 
memberships and regulatory circuitry to make testable biological predictions. 
This data model departs from biological reality in many ways that could prove to be 
important, both for inference and for prediction. Except for the Gaussian noise 
model, each gene in a cluster is models as fully coregulated with every other one - 
they are influenced in the same ways by the same regulatory connection strengths. 
Also, the nonlinear circuit model must not only reflect transcriptional regulation, 
but all other regulatory circuitry affecting measured gene expression such as kinase- 
phosphatase networks. 
Under this data model, one could formulate a joint Bayesian inference problem for 
the clustering and circuit inference aspects of fitting the data. But given the highly 
provisional nature of the model, we simply apply in sequence an existing mixture- 
of-Gaussians clustering algorithm to preprocess the data and reduce its 
dimensionality, and then an existing gene circuit inference algorithm. Presumably a 
joint optimization algorithm could be obtained by iterating these steps. 
2.1 Clustering 
A widely used clustering algorithm for mixure model estimation is Expectation- 
Maximization (EM)[12]. We use EM with a diagonal covariance in the Gaussian, so 
that for each feature vector component a (a combination of experimental condition 
Inferring Transcriptional Regulation among Gene Classes 931 
and time point in a time course) and cluster Ot there is a standard deviation 
parameter O',, a. In preprocessing, each concentration data point is divided by its 
value at time zero and then a logarithm taken. The log ratios are clustered using 
EM. Optionally, each gene's entire feature vector may be normalized to unit length 
and the cluster centers likewise normalized during the iterative EM algorithm. 
In order to choose the number of clusters, k, we use the cross-validation algorithm 
described by Smyth [13]. This involves computing the likelihood of each optimized 
fit on a test set and averaging over runs and over divisions of the data into training 
and test sets. Then, we can examine the likelihood as a function of k in order to 
choose k. Normally one would pick k so as to maximize cross-validated likelihood. 
However, in the present application we also want to reward small values of k which 
lead to smaller circuits for the circuit inference phase of the algorithm. The choice 
of k will be discussed in the next section. 
2.2 Circuit Inference 
We use the Lam-Delosme variant of simulated annealing (SA) to derive connection 
strengths T, time constants x, and decay rates ), as in previous work using this gene 
circuit method [4][5]. We set h to zero. The score function which SA optimizes is 
S(T,r,A) = A(vi(t;T,r,A ) - Oi(t))2 + 2 
it ij 
+ exp[B(_ T,../2 + + 1 
ij i i 
The first term represents the fit to data i' The second term is a standard weight 
decay term. The third term forces solutions to stay within a bounded region in 
weight space. We vary the weight decay coefficient W in order to encourage 
relatively sparse connection matrix solutions. 
3 Results 
3.1 Data 
We used the Saccharomyces cerevisiae data set of [9]. It includes three longer time 
courses representing different ways to synchronize the normal cell cycle [11], and 
five shorter time courses representing altered conditions. We used all eight time 
courses for clustering, but just 8 time points of one of the longer time courses (alpha 
factor synchronized cell cycle) for the circuit inference. It is likely that multiple 
long time courses under altered conditions will be required before strong biological 
predictions can be made from inferred regulatory circuit models. 
3.2 Clustering 
We found that the most likely number of classes as determined by cross validation 
was about 27, but that there is a broad plateau of high-likelihood cluster numbers 
from 15 to 35 (Figure 1). This is similar to our results with another gene expression 
data set for the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans supplied by Stuart Kim; 
these more extensive clustering experiments are summarized in Figure 2. Clustering 
experiments with synthetic data is used to understand these results. These 
experiments show that the cross-validated log likelihood curve can indicate the 
number of clusters present in the data, justifying the use of the curve for that 
932 E. Mjolsness, T. Mann, R. Castao and B. WoM 
purpose. In more detail, synthetic data generated from 14 20-dimensional spherical 
Gaussian clusters were clustered using the EM/CV algorithm. The likelihoods 
showed a sharp peak at k=14 unlike Figures 1 or 2. In another experiment, 14 20- 
dimensional spherical Gaussian superclusters were used to generate second-level 
clusters (3 subclusters per supercluster), which in turn generated synthetic data 
points. This two-level hierarchical model was then clustered with the EM/CV 
method. The likelihood curves (not shown) were quite similar to Figures 1 and 2, 
with a higher-likelihood plateau from roughly 14 to 40. 
x o 4 
Figure 1. Cross-validated log-likelihood scores, displayed and averaged over 5 runs, for EM 
clustering of S. cerevisiae gene expression data [9]. Horizontal axis: k, the "requested" or 
maximal number of cluster centers in the fit. Some cluster centers go unmatched to data. 
Vertical axis: log likelihood score for the fit, scatterplotted and averaged. Likelihoods have 
not been integrated over any range of parameters for hypothesis testing. k ranges from 2 to 
40 in increments of 1. Solid line shows average likelihood value for each k. 
Number of Clusters 
'!' .i. '1' '1' .i..i..i..i.q. 
. '1' .i. '1' '1' .i.q..i ' 
++ +++x,,,++++ 
4- 
++,+ 
Number of Clusters 
From Figures 1 and 2 and the synthetic data experiments mentioned above, we can 
guess at appropriate values for k which take into account both the measured 
likelihood of clustering and the requirements for few parameters in circuit-fitting. 
For example choosing k=-15 clusters would put us at the beginning of the plateau, 
losing very little cluster likelihood in return for reducing the aggregate genes circuit 
size from 27 to 15 players. The interpretation would be that there are about 15 
superclusters in hierarchically clustered data, to which we will fit a 15-player 
Figure 2. Cross-validated log-likelihood scores, averaged over 13 runs, for EM clustering of 
C. elegans gene expression data from S. Kim's lab. Horizontal axis: k, the "requested" or 
maximal number of cluster centers in the fit. Some cluster centers go unmatched to data. 
Vertical axis: log likelihood score for the fit, as an average over 13 runs plus or minus one 
standard deviation. (Left) Fine-scale plot, k =2 to 60 in increments of 2. (Right) Coarse- 
scale plot, k=2 to 202 in increments of 10. Both plots show an extended plateau of relatively 
likely fits between roughly k =14 and k =40. 
Inferring Transcriptional Regulation among Gene Classes 933 
regulatory circuit. Much more aggressive would be to pick k=-7 or 8 clusters, for a 
relatively significant drop in log-likelihood in return for a further substantial 
decrease in circuit size. An acceptable range of cluster numbers (and circuit sizes) 
would seem to be k=-8 to 15. 
3.3 Gene Circuit Inference 
It proved possible to fit the k=15 time course using weight decay W=I but without 
using hidden units. W=0 and W=3 gave less satisfactory results. Four of the 15 
clusters are shown in Figure 3 for one good run (W=I). Scores for our first few 
(unselected) runs at the current parameter settings are shown in Table 1. Each run 
took between 24 and 48 hours on one processor of an Sun Ultrasparc 60 computer. 
Even with weight decay, it is possible that successful fits are really overfits with 
this particular data since there are about twice as many parameters as data points. 
Weight 
Decay W 
<Score> 
<Simulated Annealing Number of runs 
Moves>/10/'6 
0 1.536 +/- 0.134 
1 0.787 +/- 0.394 
3 1.438 +/- 0.037 
2.803 +/- 0.437 3 
2.782 +/- 0.200 10 
2.880 +/- 0.090 4 
Table 1. Score function parameters were A=I.0. B---0.01. Annealing runs statistics are 
reported when the temperature dropped below 0.0001. All the best scores and visually 
acceptable fits occurred in W=I runs. 
The average values of the data fit, weight decay, and penalty terms in the score 
function for W=I were {0.378, 0.332, 0.0667} after slightly more annealing. 
There were a few significant similarities between the connection matrices computed 
in the two lowest-scoring runs. The most salient feature in the lowest-scoring 
network was a set of direct feedback loops among its strongest connections: cluster 
8 both excited and was inhibited by cluster 10, and cluster 10 excited and was 
inhibited by cluster 15. This feature was preserved in the second-best run. A 
systematic search for "concensus circuitry" shows convergence towards a unique 
connection matrix for the 8-point time series data used here, but more complete 16- 
time-point data gives multiple "clusters" of connection matrices. From parameter- 
counting one might expect that making robust and unique regulatory predictions will 
require the use of more trajectory data taken under substantially different 
conditions. Such data is expected to be forthcoming. 
4 Discussion 
We have illustrated a procedure for deriving regulatory models from large-scale 
gene expression data. As the data becomes more comprehensive in the number and 
nature of conditions under which comparable time courses are measured, this 
procedure can be used to determine when biological hypotheses about gene 
regulation can be robustly derived from the data. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the Whittier Foundation, the Office of Naval 
Research under contract N00014-97-1-0422, and the NASA Advanced Concepts 
Program. Stuart Kim (Stanford University) provided the C. elegans gene expression 
array data. The GRN simulation and inference code is due in part to Charles Garrett 
and George Marnellos. The EM clustering code is due in part to Roberto Manduchi. 
934 E. Mjolsness, T. Mann, R. Castao and B. Wold 
0'1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
 C  --  0 " 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
onglnaJ dala marked wh an x, grn fd marked wfih an o 
Figure 3. Four clusters (numbers 9-12) of a 15-cluster mixture of Gausstans model of 2467 
genes each assayed over an eight-point time course; cluster means (shown as x) are fit to a 
gene regulation network model (shown as o). 
References 
[1] D. Kosman, J. Reinitz, and D. H. Sharp, "Automated Assay of Gene Expression at 
Cellular Resolution" Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing '98. Eds. R. Altman, A. K. 
Dunker, L. Hunter, and T. E. Klein,, World Scientific 1998. 
[2] J. L. DeRisi, V. R. lyer, and P.O. Brown, "Exploring the Metabolic and Genetic Control 
of Gene Expreession on a Genomic Scale". Science 278, 680-686. 
[3] A Connectionist Model of Development, E. Mjolsness, D. H. Sharp, and J. Reinitz, 
Journal of Theoretical Biology 152:429-453, 1991. 
[4] J. Reinitz, E. Mjolsness, and D. H. Sharp, "Model for Cooperative Control of Positional 
Information in Drosophila by Bicoid and Maternal Hunchback". J. Experimental Zoology 
271:47-56, 1995. Los Alamos National Laboratory Technical Report LAUR-92-2942 1992. 
[5] J. Reinitz and D. H. Sharp, "Mechanism of eve Stripe Formation". Mechanisms of 
Development 49:133-158, 1995. 
[6] [7] J. Lam and J. M. Delosme. "An Efficient Simulated Annealing Schedule: Derivation" 
and "... Implementation and Evaluation". Technical Reports 8816 and 8817, Yale University 
Electrical Engineering Department, New Haven CT 1988. 
[8] X. Wen, S. Fuhrman, G. S. Michaels, D. B. Carr, S. Smith, J. L. Barker, and R. Somogyi, 
"Large-Scale Temporal Gene Expression Mapping of Central Nervous System 
Development", Proc. Natl. Acal. Sci. USA 95:334-339, January 1998. 
[9] M. B. Eisen, P. T. Spellman, P.O. Brown, and D. Botstein, "Cluster Analysis and 
Display of Genome-Wide Expression Patterns", Proc. Natl. Acad. Scie. USA 95:14863- 
14868, December 1998. 
[10] J. Hertz, lecture at Krogerrup Denmark computational biology summer school, July 
1998. 
[11] Spellman PT, Sherlock G, Zhang MQ, et al., "Comprehensive identification of cell 
cycle-regulated genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray hybridization", 
Mol. Bio. Cell. 9: (12) 3273-3297 Dec 1998. 
[12] Dempster, A. P., Laird, N.M. and Rubin, D. B. "Maximum likelihood from incomplete 
data via the EM algorithm," J. Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 39:1-38, 1977. 
[13] P. Smyth, "Clustering using Monte Carlo Cross-Validation", Proceedings of the 2 nd 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, AAAI Press, 1996. 
