Generalized Model Selection For Unsupervised 
Learning In High Dimensions 
Shivakumar Vaithyanathan 
IBM Almaden Research Center 
650 Harry Road 
San Jose, CA 95136 
Shiv @ almaden.ibm. com 
Byron Dom 
IBM Almaden Research Center 
650 Harry Road 
San Jose, CA 95136 
dom @ almaden.ibm.com 
Abstract 
We describe a Bayesian approach to model selection in unsupervised 
learning that determines both the feature set and the number of 
clusters. We then evaluate this scheme (based on marginal likelihood) 
and one based on cross-validated likelihood. For the Bayesian 
scheme we derive a closed-form solution of the marginal likelihood 
by assuming appropriate forms of the likelihood function and prior. 
Extensive experiments compare these approaches and all results are 
verified by comparison against ground truth. In these experiments the 
Bayesian scheme using our objective function gave better results than 
cross-validation. 
1 Introduction 
Recent efforts define the model selection problem as one of estimating the number of 
clusters[10, 17]. It is easy to see, particularly in applications with large number of 
features, that various choices of feature subsets will reveal different structures 
underlying the data. It is our contention that this interplay between the feature subset 
and the number of clusters is essential to provide appropriate views of the data. We thus 
define the problem of model selection in clustering as selecting both the number of 
clusters and the feature subset. Towards this end we propose a unified objective 
function whose arguments include the both the feature space and number of clusters. 
We then describe two approaches to model selection using this objective function. The 
first approach is based on a Bayesian scheme using the marginal likelihood for model 
selection. The second approach is based on a scheme using cross-validated likelihood. 
In section 3 we apply these approaches to document clustering by making assumptions 
about the document generation model. Further, for the Bayesian approach we derive a 
closed-form solution for the marginal likelihood using this document generation model. 
We also describe a heuristic for initial feature selection based on the distributional 
clustering of terms. Section 5 describes the experiments and our approach to validate 
the proposed models and algorithms. Section 6 reports and discusses the results of our 
experiments and finally section 7 provides directions for future work. 
Model Selection for Unsupervised Learning in High Dimensions 971 
2 Model selection in clustering 
Model selection approaches in clustering have primarily concentrated on determining 
the number of components/clusters. These attempts include Bayesian approaches 
[7,10], MDL approaches [15] and cross-validation techniques [17]. As noticed in [17] 
however, the optimal number of clusters is dependent on the feature space in which the 
clustering is performed. Related work has been described in [7]. 
2.1 A generalized model for clustering 
Let D be a data-set consisting of "patterns" {d,..,dv}, which we assume to be 
represented in some feature space T with dimension M. The particular problem we 
address is that of clustering D into groups such that its likelihood described by a 
probability model p(Drlf), is maximized, where D r indicates the representation of D 
in feature space T and f is the structure of the model, which consists of the number of 
clusters, the partitioning of the feature set (explained below) and the assignment of 
patterns to clusters. This model is a weighted sum of models {p(Drlf,)l  m} 
where  is the set of all parameters associated with f. To define our model we begin 
by assuming that the feature space T consists of two sets: U - useful features and N - 
noise features. Our feature-selection problem will thus consist of partitioning T (into U 
and N ) for a given number of clusters. 
Assumption 1 The feature sets represented by U and N are conditionally 
independent 
P(DrI.Q,) = P(D v I.Q,) P(D t I_Q,) (1) 
where D N indicates data represented in the noise feature space and D u indicates data 
represented in useful feature space. 
Using assumption 1 and assuming that the data is independently drawn, we can rewrite 
equation (1) as 
P(Drlf,)= lSI p(d I N) ß II II p(d: I ) (2) 
i=1 /c=-I jDt 
where vis the number of patterns in D, p(dy I c) is the probability of d/ given 
the parameter vector  and p(d I is the probability of d given the parameter 
vector v . Note that while the explicit dependence on f has been removed in this 
notation, it is implicit in the number of clusters K and the partition of T into N and U. 
2.2 Bayesian approach to model selection 
The objective function, represented in equation (2) is not regularized and attempts to 
optimize it directly may result in the set N becoming empty - resulting in overfitting. 
To overcome this problem we use the marginal likelihood[2]. 
K 
Assumption 2 All parameter vectors are independent.  () =  (is) ß I--I  () 
k=-I 
where the (...) denotes a Bayesian prior distribution. The marginal likelihood, using 
assumption 2, can be written as 
[i:Il ] K u [iID 1 ] 
p(orlf)  P(dfl v) n(V)dN I-I p(dyl)  s 
= ß ( )d (3) 
972 S. Vaithyanathan and B. Dom 
where =v =t are integral limits appropriate to the particular parameter spaces. These 
will be omitted to simplify the notation. 
3.0 Document clustering 
Document clustering algorithms typically start by representing the document as a 
"bag-of-words" in which the features can number ~ 104to 105. Ad-hoc dimensionality 
reduction techniques such as stop-word removal, frequency based truncations [ 16] and 
techniques such as LSI [5] are available. Once the dimensionality has been reduced, the 
documents are usually clustered into an arbitrary number of clusters. 
3.1 Multinomial models 
Several models of text generation have been studied[3]. Our choice is multinomial 
models using term counts as the features. This choice introduces another parameter 
indicating the probability of the N and U split. This is equivalent to assuming a 
generation model where for each document the number of noise and useful terms are 
determined by a probability O s and then the terms in a document are "drawn" with a 
probability (0 n or 0: ). 
3.2 Marginal likelihood / stochastic complexity 
To apply our Bayesian objective function we begin by substituting multinomial models 
into (3) and simplifying to obtain 
P(D IFS)=(tv+tv) y[(Os)tN (1- Os)tU]n(OS)dO s . 
t v J 
iz>k {ti,uluU}]I[u(O)t""] (O)dO' (4) 
where ((.'.'.'}) is the multinomial coefficient, t i,u is the number of occuences of the 
feature term u in document i, tis the total number of all useful features (terms) in 
document i (t =  ti,u, t, and ti,n are to be interpreted similar to above but for 
noise features, ()  
n _ (n-), tis the total number of all noise features in all patterns 
and tSis the total number of all useful features in all patterns. 
To solve (4) we still need a form for the priors {(...)}. The Beta family is conjugate 
to the Binomial family [2] and we choose the Dirichlet distribution (multiple Beta) as 
the form for both z(0) and z(0v) and the Beta distribution for n(Os). Substituting 
these into equation (8) and simplifying yields 
P(DI)= F(y+y) F(t+y,)F(t+y)] [ F) Fn+t)] 
F(y,)F(y) F(tV+t+y,+y) ' F+t )  
r(fi) 
F(a) F(aa+lD&l) .  F(a+tS(a)) H F(a) 
F(a + v)  F(IDel)  uu 
(5) 
Model Selection for Unsupervised Learning in High Dimensions 973 
where ,8, and au are the hyper-parameters of the Dirichlet prior for noise and useful 
features respectively, ,8 =  ,sn, a =  au, a =  akand FO is the "gamma" function. 
nN u U /c=- 1 
Further, ?,,, ?t, are the hyper parameters of the Beta prior for the split probability, ID,I is 
the number of documents in cluster k and tt(, is computed as  t. The results 
iDk 
reported for our evaluation will be the negative of the log of equation (5), which 
(following Rissanen [14]) we refer to as Stochastic Complexity (SC). In our 
experiments all values of the hyper-parameters ji ,6[i O'k, Ta and 7t, are set equal to 1 
yielding uniform priors. 
3.3 Cross-Validated likelihood 
To compute the cross validated likelihood using multinomial models we first substitute 
the multinomial functional forms, using the MLE found using the training set. This 
results in the following equation 
Ite.t -. K 
P(CV r 112p ) [(')t. (1-')tgl , p(cv? IO N) 1-I 1-I p(cv? I  
= ' ' Ok(i) ) ß p(c) (6) 
'= 1 jD t 
where 0 s, 0  and Oi) e the MLE of the appropriate parameter vectors. For our 
implementation of MCCV, following the suggestion in [17], we have used a 50% split 
of the training and test set. For the vCV criterion although a value of v = 10 was 
suggested therein, for computational reasons we have used a value of v = 5. 
3.4 Feature subset selection algorithm for document clustering 
As noted in section 2.1, for a feature-set of size M there are a total of 2 u partitions and 
for large M it would be computationally intractable to search through all possible 
partitions to find the optimal subset. In this section we propose a heuristic method to 
obtain a subset of tokens that are topical (indicative of underlying topics) and can be 
used as features in the bag-of-words model to cluster documents. 
3.4.1 Distributional clustering for feature subset selection 
Identifying content-bearing and topical terms, is an active research area [9]. We are less 
concerned with modeling the exact distributions of individual terms as we are with 
simply identifying groups of terms that are topical. Distributional clustering (DC), 
apparently first proposed by Pereira et al [13], has been used for feature selection in 
supervised text classification [1] and clustering images in video sequences [9]. We 
hypothesize that function, content-bearing and topical terms have different distributions 
over the documents. DC helps reduce the size of the search space for feature selection 
from 2 u to 2 c, where C is the number of clusters produced by the DC algorithm. 
Following the suggestions in [9], we compute the following histogram for each token. 
The first bin consists of the number of documents with zero occurrences of the token, 
the second bin is the number of documents consisting of a single occurrence of the 
token and the third bin is the number of documents that contain more two or more 
occurrences of the term. The histograms are clustered using relative entropy A(. II .) as 
974 S. Vaithyanathan and B. Dom 
a distance measure. For two terms with probability distributions p(.) and p2(.), this is 
given by [4]: 
P'(') (7) 
A(p(t) II p2(t)) ---  pl(t)log p2(t) 
t 
We use a k-means-style algorithm in which the histograms are normalized to sum to 
one and the sum in equation (7) is taken over the three bins corresponding to counts of 
0,1, and >_ 2. During the assignment-to-clusters step of k-means we compute 
A(pw II pc) (where pw is the normalized histogram for term w and pc(t) is the centroid 
of cluster k) and the term w is assigned to the cluster for which this is minimum [ 13,8]. 
4.0 Experimental setup 
Our evaluation experiments compared the clustering results against human-labeled 
ground truth. The corpus used was the AP Reuters Newswire articles from the TREC-6 
collection. A total of 8235 documents, from the routing track, existing in 25 classes 
were analyzed in our experiments. To simplify matters we disregarded multiple 
assignments and retained each document as a member of a single class. 
4.1 Mutual information as an evaluation measure of clustering 
We verify our models by comparing our clustering results against pre-classified text. 
We force all clustering algorithms to produce exactly as many clusters as there are 
classes in the pre-classified text and we report the mutual information[4] (MI) between 
the cluster labels and pre-classified class labels 
5.0 Results and discussions 
After tokenizing the documents and discarding terms that appeared in less than 3 
documents we were left with 32450 unique terms. We experimented with several 
numbers of clusters for DC but report only the best (lowest SC) for lack of space. For 
each of these clusters we chose the best of 20 runs corresponding to different random 
starting clusters. Each of these sets includes one cluster that consists of high-frequency 
words and upon examination were found to contain primarily function words, which we 
eliminated from further consideration. The remaining non-function-word clusters were 
used as feature sets for the clustering algorithm. Only combinations of feature sets that 
produced good results were used for further document clustering runs. 
We initialized the EM algorithm using k-means algorithm - other initialization schemes 
are discussed in [11]. The feature vectors used in this k-means initialization were 
generated using the pivoted normal weighting suggested in [16]. All parameter vectors 
0 and O N were estimated using Laplace's Rule of Succession[2]. Table 1 shows the 
best results of the SC criterion, the vCV and MCCV using the feature subsets selected 
by the different combinations of distributional clusters. The feature subsets are coded as 
FSXP where X indicates the number of clusters in the distributional clustering and P 
indicates the cluster number(s) used as U. For SC and MI all results reported are 
averages over 3 runs of the k-means+EM combination with different initialization fo 
k-means. For clarity, the MI numbers reported are normalized such that the theoretical 
maximum is 1.0. We also show comparisons against no feature selection (NF) and LSI. 
Model Selection for Unsupervised Learning in High Dimensions 975 
For LSI, the principal 165 eigenvectors were retained and k-means clustering was 
performed in the reduced dimensional space. While determining the number of clusters, 
for computational reasons we have limited our evaluation to only the feature subset that 
provided us with the highest MI, i.e., FS41-3. 
Feature Useful SC vCV MCCV MI 
Set Features X 107 X 107 X 107 
FS41-3 6,157 2.66 0.61 1.32 0.61 
FS52 386 2.8 0.3 0.69 0.51 
NF 32,450 2.96 1.25 2.8 0.58 
LSI 32450/165 NA NA NA 0.57 
Table 1 Comparison Of Results 
o.s 
Figuro 2 
5.3 Discussion 
The consistency between the MI and SC (Figure 1) is striking. The monotonic trend is 
more apparent at higher SC indicating that bad clusterings are more easily detected by 
SC while as the solution improves the differences are more subtle. Note that the best 
value of SC and MI coincide. Given the assumptions made in deriving equation (5), this 
consistency and is encouraging. The interested reader is referred to [18] for more 
details. Figures 2 and 3 indicate that there is certainly a reasonable consistency 
between the cross-validated likelihood and the MI although not as striking as the SC. 
Note that the MI for the feature sets picked by MCCV and vCV is significantly lower 
than that of the best feature-set. Figures 4,5 and 6 show the plots of SC, MCCV and 
vCV as the number of clusters is increased. Using SC we see that FS41-3 reveals an 
optimal structure around 40 clusters. As with feature selection, both MCCV and vCV 
obtain models of lower complexity than SC. Both show an optimum of about 30 
clusters. More experiments are required before we draw final conclusions, however, the 
full Bayesian approach seems a practical and useful approach for model selection in 
document clustering. Our choice of likelihood function and priors provide a 
closed-form solution that is computationally tractable and provides meaningful results. 
6.0 Conclusions 
In this paper we tackled the problem of model structure determination in clustering. 
The main contribution of the paper is a Bayesian objective function that treats optimal 
model selection as choosing both the number of clusters and the feature subset. An 
important aspect of our work is a formal notion that forms a basis for doing feature 
selection in unsupervised learning. We then evaluated two approaches for model 
selection: one using this objective function and the other based on cross-validation. 
976 S. Vaithyanathan and B. Dom 
Both approaches performed reasonably well - with the Bayesian scheme outperforming 
the cross-validation approaches in feature selection. More experiments using different 
parameter settings for the cross-validation schemes and different priors for the Bayesian 
scheme should result in better understanding and therefore more powerful applications 
of these approaches. 
Figure 2 
Figure 4 
Igure S 
Figure 6 
References 
[1] Baker, D., et al, Distributional Clustering of Words for Text Classification, SIGIR 1998. 
[2] Bernardo, J. M. and Smith, A. F. M., Bayesian Theory, Wiley, 1994. 
[3] Church, K.W. et al, Poisson Mixtures, Natural Language Engineering, I(12), 1995. 
[4] Cover, T.M. and Thomas, J.A. Elements of Information Theory. Wiley-lnterscience, 1991. 
[5] Deerwester, S. et al, Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis,JASIS, 1990. 
[6] Dempster, A.et al., Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data Via the EM Algorithm, 
JRSS, 39,1977. 
[7] Hanson,R., et al, Bayesian Classification with Correlation and Inheritance, IJCAI,1991. 
[8] Iyengar, G., Clustering images using relative entropy for efficient retrieval, VLBV, 1998. 
[9] Katz, S.M., Distribution of content words and phrases in text and language modeling, NLE, 
2, 1996. 
[10] Kontkanen, P.T. et al, Comparing Bayesian Model Class Selection Criteria by Discrete 
Finite Mixtures, ISIS'96 Conference, 1996. 
[11] Meila, M., Heckerman, D., An Experimental Comparison of Several Clustering and 
Initialization Methods, MSR-TR-98-06. 
[12] Nigam, K et al, Learning to Classify Text from Labeled and Unlabeled Documents, AAAI, 
1998. 
[13] Pereira, F.C.N. et al, Distributional clustering of English words, ACL,1993. 
[14] Rissanen, J., Stochastic Complexity in Statistical Inquiry. World\ Scientific, 1989. 
[15] Rissanen, J., Ristad E., Unsupervised classification with stochastic complexity." The 
US/Japan Conference on the Frontiers of Statistical Modeling, 1992. 
[16] Singhal A. et al, Pivoted Document Length Normalization, SIGIR, 1996. 
[ 17] Smyth, P., Clustering using Monte Carlo cross-validation, KDD, 1996. 
[18] Vaithyanathan, S. and Dom, B. Model Selection in Unsupervised Learning with 
Applications to Document Clustering. IBM Research Report RJ- 10137 (95012) Dec. 14, 1998. 
