Hoeffding Races: Accelerating Model 
Selection Search for Classification and 
Function Approximation 
Oded Maron 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
Andrew W. Moore 
lobotics Institute 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
Abstract 
Selecting a good model of a set of input points by cross validation 
is a computationally intensive process, especially if the number of 
possible models or the number of training points is high. Tech- 
niques such as gradient descent are helpful in searching through 
the space of models, but problems such as local minima, and more 
importantly, lack of a distance metric between various models re- 
duce the applicability of these search methods. Hoeffding Races is 
a technique for finding a good model for the data by quickly dis- 
carding bad models, and concentrating the computational effort at 
differentiating between the better ones. This paper focuses on the 
special case of leave-one-out cross validation applied to memory- 
based learning algorithms, but we also argue that it is applicable 
to any class of model selection problems. 
1 Introduction 
Model selection addresses "high level" decisions about how best to tune learning 
algorithm architectures for particular tasks. Such decisions include which function 
approximator to use, how to trade smoothness for goodness of fit and which fea- 
tures are relevant. The problem of automatically selecting a good model has been 
variously described as fitting a curve, learning a function, or trying to predict future 
60 Maron and Moore 
0.22 
0.2 
0.18 
0.16 
0.14 
o. x2 
1 3 5 7 9 
k Nearest Neighbors Used 
Figure 1: A space of models consisting of local-weighted-regression models with 
different numbers of nearest neighbors used. The global minimum is at one-nearest- 
neighbor, but a gradient descent algorithm would get stuck in local minima unless 
it happened to start in in a model where k < 4. 
instances of the problem. One can think of this as a search through the space of 
possible models with some criterion of "goodness" such as prediction accuracy, com- 
plexity of the model, or smoothness. In this paper, this criterion will be prediction 
accuracy. Let us examine two common ways of measuring accuracy: using a test 
set and leave-one-out cross validation (Wahba and Wold, 1975). 
ß The test set method arbitrarily divides the data into a training set and a 
test set. The learner is trained on the training set, and is then queried with 
just the input vectors of the test set. The error for a particular point is the 
difference between the learner's prediction and the actual output vector. 
ß Leave-one-out cross validation trains the learner N times (where N is 
the number of points), each time omitting a different point. We attempt to 
predict each omitted point. The error for a particular point is the difference 
between the learner's prediction and the actual output vector. 
The total error of either method is computed by averaging all the error instances. 
The obvious method of searching through a space of models, the brute force ap- 
proach, finds the accuracy of every model and picks the best one. The time to find 
the accuracy (error rate) of a particular model is proportional to the size of the test 
set ITESTI, or the size of the training set in the case of cross validation. Suppose 
that the model space is discretized into a finite number of models IMODELSI -- 
then the amount of work required is O(IMODELS I x [TESTI) , which is expensive. 
A popular way of dealing with this problem is gradient descent. This method can 
be applied to find the parameters (or weights) of a model. However, it cannot be 
used to find the structure (or architecture) of the model. There are two reasons for 
Hoeffding Races: Accelerating Model Selection 61 
this. First, we have empirically noted many occasions on which the search space is 
peppered with local minima (Figure 1). Second, at the highest level we are selecting 
from a set of entirely distinct models, with no numeric parameters over which to 
hill-climb. For example, is a neural net with 100 hidden units closer to a neural net 
with 50 hiden units or to a memory-based model which uses 3 nearest neighbors? 
There is no viable answer to this question since we cannot impose a viable metric 
on this model space. 
The algorithm we describe in this paper, Hoeffding Races, combines the robustness 
of brute force and the computational feasibility of hill climbing. We instantiated the 
algorithm by specifying the set of models to be memory-based algorithms (Stan- 
fill and Waltz, 1986) (Atkeson and Reinkensmeyer, 1989) (Moore, 1992) and the 
method of finding the error to be leave-one-out cross validation. We will discuss 
how to extend the algorithm to any set of models and to the test set method in the 
full paper. We chose memory-based algorithms since they go hand in hand with 
cross validation. Training is very cheap - simply keep all the points in memory, and 
all the algorithms of the various models can use the same memory. Finding the 
leave-one-out cross validation error at a point is cheap as making a prediction: sim- 
ply "cover up" that point in memory, then predict its value using the current model. 
For a discussion of how to generate various memory-based models, see (Moore et 
al., 1992). 
2 Hoeffding Races 
The algorithm was inspired by ideas from (Haussler, 1992) and (Kaelbling, 1990) 
and a similar idea appears in (Greiner and Jurisica, 1992). It derives its name from 
Hoeffding's formula (Hoeffding, 1963), which concerns our confidence in the sample 
mean of n independently drawn points Xl, ..., x. The probability of the estimated 
1 
mean Ees =  Y']i<i< xi being more than epsilon far away from the true mean 
Et,.,e after n independently drawn points is bounded by: 
where B bounds the possible spread of point values. 
We would like to say that with confidence 1 - 5, our estimate of the mean is within 
e of the true mean; or in other words, Pr(lEtre - Eest[ > e) < 5. Combining the 
two equations and solving for e gives us a bound on how close the estimated mean 
is to the true mean after n points with confidence 1 - 5: 
os(2/, ) 
(' V 2n 
The algorithm starts with a collection of learning boxes. We call each model a 
learning box since we are treating the models as if they were black boxes. We 
are not looking at how complex or time-consuming each prediction is, just at the 
input and output of the box. Associated with each learning box are two pieces of 
information: a current estimate of its error rate and the number of points it has 
been tested upon so far. The algorithm also starts with a test set of size N. For 
leave-one-out cross validation, the test set is simply the training set. 
62 Maron and Moore 
F_.RROR 
learning le.,ning learning learning learning learning le..a.,nin g 
box #0 box #1 box  box #3 box 1 box t; box #6 
Figure 2: An example where the best upper bound of learning box 2 eliminates 
learning boxes l and 5. The size of e varies since each learning box has its own 
upper bound on its error range, B. 
At each point in the algorithm, we randomly select a point from the test set. We 
compute the error at that point for all learning boxes, and update each learning 
box's estimate of its own total error rate. In addition, we use Hoeffding's bound 
to calculate how close the current estimate is to the true error for each learning 
box. We then eliminate those learning boxes whose best possible error (their lower 
bound) is still greater than the worst error of the best learning box (its upper 
bound); see Figure 2. The intervals get smaller as more points are tested, thereby 
"racing" the good learning boxes, and eliminating the bad ones. 
We repeat the algorithm until we are left with just one learning box, or until we 
run out of points. The algorithm can also be stopped once e has reached a certain 
threshhold. The algorithm returns a set of learning boxes whose error rates are 
insignificantly (to within e) different after N test points. 
3 Proof of Correctness 
The careful reader would have noticed that the confidence 5 given in the previous 
section is incorrect. In order to prove that the algorithm indeed returns a set of 
learning boxes which includes the best one, we'll need a more rigorous approach. 
We denote by A the probability that the algorithm eliminates what would have 
been the best learning box. The difference between A and 5 which was glossed over 
in the previous section is that I -A is the confidence for the success of the entire 
algrithm, while 1 - 5 is the confidence in Hoeffding's bound for one learning box 
Hoeffding Races: Accelerating Model Selection 63 
during one iteration of the algorithm. 
We would like to make a formal connection between A and 5. In order to do that, let 
us make the requirement of a correct algorithm more stringent. We'll say that the 
algorithm is correct if every learning box is within e of its true error at every iteration 
of the algorithm. This requirement encompasses the weaker requirement that we 
don't eliminate the best learning box. An algorithm is correct with confidence A if 
Pt{ all learning boxes are within e on all iterations} _ 1 - A. 
We'll now derive the relationship between 5 and A by using the disjunctive proba- 
bility inequality which states that Pr{A V B} _ Pr{A} + Pr{B}. 
Let's assume that we have n iterations (we have n points in our test set), and that 
we have m learning boxes (LB1 ... LB,). By Hoeffding's inequality, we know that 
Pt{ a particular LB is within e on a particular iteration} _ I - 5 
Flipping that around we get: 
Pr{a particular LB is wrong on a particular iteration} < 5 
Using the disjunctive inequality we can say 
Pt{ a particular LB is wrong on iteration 1 
a particular LB is wrong on iteration 2 
a particular LB is 
Let's rewrite this as: 
Pt{ a particular LB is wrong on any iteration} _ 5 ß n 
Now we do the same thing for all learning boxes: 
Pr( LB1 is wrong on 
LBs is wrong on 
LB. is wrong on 
or in other words: 
V 
V 
wrong on iteration n) _< 5 ß n 
Pr{ some LB is wrong in some iteration) _ 5 ß n ß m 
We flip this to get: 
Pt{all LBs are within e on all iterations} _ 1 - 5 ß n ß m 
Which is exactly what we meant by a correct algorithm with some confidence. 
Therefore, 5 - a . When we plug this into our expression for e from the previous 
section, we find that we have only increased it by a constant factor. In other words, 
by pumping up e, we have managed to ensure the correctness of this algorithm with 
confidence A. The new e is expressed as: 
e -- /B'(løg(2nnm)--løg(A)) 
any iteration V 
any iteration V 
any iteration} _ 5 ß n ß m 
64 Maron and Moore 
Table 1: Test problems 
Problem 
Description 
ROBOT 
PROTEIN 
ENERGY 
POWER 
POOL 
DISCONT 
10 input attributes, 5 outputs. Given an initial and a final description 
of a robot arm, learn the control needed in order to make the robot 
perform devil-sticking (Schaal and Atkeson, 1993). 
3 inputs, output is a classification into one of three classes. This is the 
famous protein secondary structure database, with some preprocessing 
(Zhang et al., 1992). 
Given solar radiation sensing, predict the cooling load for a building. 
This is taken from the Building Energy Predictor Shootout. 
Market data for electricity generation pricing period class for the new 
United Kingdom Power Market. 
The visually perceived mapping from pool table configurations to shot 
outcome for two-ball collisions (Moore, 1992). 
An artificially constructed set of points with many discontinuities. Lo- 
cal models should outperform global ones. 
Clearly this is an extremely pessimistic bound and tighter proofs are possible (Omo- 
hundro, 1993). 
4 Results 
We ran Hoeffding Races on a wide variety of learning and prediction problems. 
Table I describes the problems, and Table 2 summarizes the results and compares 
them to brute force search. 
For Table 2, all of the experiments were run using A - .01. The initial set of possible 
models was constructed from various memory based algorithms: combinations of 
different numbers of nearest neighbors, different smoothing kernels, and locally 
constant vs. locally weighted regression. We compare the algorithms relative to 
the number of queries made, where a query is one learning box finding its error at 
one point. The brute force method makes [TEST] x ]LEARNING BOXES[ queries. 
Hoeffding Races eliminates bad learning boxes quickly, so it should make fewer 
queries. 
5 Discussion 
Hoeffding Races never does worse than brute force. It is least effective when all 
models perform equally well. For example, in the POOL problem, where there 
were 75 learning boxes left at the end of the race, the number of queries is only 
slightly smaller for Hoeffding Races than for brute force. In the ROBOT problem, 
where there were only 6 learning boxes left, a significant reduction in the number of 
queries can be seen. Therefore, Hoeffding Races is most effective when there exists 
a subset of clear winners within the initial set of models. We can then search over 
a very broad set of models without much concern about the computational expense 
Hoeffding Races: Accelerating Model Selection 65 
Table 2: Results of Brute Force vs. Hoeffding Races. 
Problem 
points 
Initial  queries queries 
with with learning 
learning boxes 
boxes Brute Hoeffding 
Force Races left 
ROBOT 
PROTEIN 
ENERGY 
POWER 
POOL 
DISCONT 
972 95 92340 15637 6 
4965 95 471675 349405 60 
2444 189 461916 121400 40 
210 95 19950 13119 48 
259 95 24605 22095 75 
500 95 47500 25144 29 
0000 
50000 
0000 
0000 
Figure 3: The x-axis is the size of a set of initial learning boxes (chosen randomly) 
and the y-axis is the number of queries to find a good model for the ROBOT 
problem. The bottom line shows performance by the Hoeffding Race algorithm, 
and the top line by brute force. 
66 Maron and Moore 
of a large initial set. Figure 3 demonstrates this. In all the cases we have tested, 
the learning box chosen by brute force is also contained by the set returned from 
Hoeffding Races. Therefore, there is no loss of performance accuracy. 
The results described here show the performance improvement with relatively small 
problems. Preliminary results indicate that performance improvements will increase 
as the problems scale up. In other words, as the number of test points and the 
number of learning boxes increase, the ratio of the number of queries made by 
brute force to the number of queries made by Hoeffding Races becomes larger. 
However, the cost of each query then becomes the main computational expense. 
Acknowledgement s 
Thanks go to Chris Atkeson, Marina Meila, Greg Galperin, 
Stephen Omohundro for helpful and stimulating discussions. 
Holly Yanco, and 
References 
[Atkeson and Reinkensmeyer, 1989] C. G. Atkeson and D. J. Reinkensmeyer. Using asso- 
ciative content-addressable memories to control robots. In W. T. Miller, R. S. Sutton, 
and P. J. Werbos, editors, Neural Networks for Control. MIT Press, 1989. 
[Greiner and Jurisica, 1992] R. Greiner and I. Jurisica. A statisticaJ approach to solv- 
ing the EBL utility problem. In Proceedings of the Tenth International conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-9œ). MIT Press, 1992. 
[Haussler, 1992] D. Haussler. Decision theoretic generaJizations of the pac model for neural 
net and other learning applications. Information and Computation, 100:78-150, 1992. 
[Hoeffding, 1963] WassHy Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random 
variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58:13-30, 1963. 
[Kaelbling, 1990] L. P. Kaelbling. Learning in Embedded Systems. PhD. Thesis; TechnicaJ 
Report No. TR-90-04, Stanford University, Department of Computer Science, June 1990. 
[Moore et al., 1992] A. W. Moore, D. J. Hill, and M.P. Johnson. An empiricaJ inves- 
tigation of brute force to choose features, smoothers and function approximators. In 
S. Hanson, S. Judd, and T. Petsche, editors, Computational Learning Theory and Nat- 
ural Learning Systems, Volume 3. MIT Press, 1992. 
[Moore, 1992] A. W. Moore. Fast, robust adaptive control by learning only forward mod- 
els. In J. E. Moody, S. J. Hanson, and R. P. Lippman, editors, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems . Morgan Kaufmann, April 1992. 
[Omohundro, 1993] Stephen Omohundro. Private communication, 1993. 
[Pollard, 1984] David Pollard. Convergence of Stochastic Processes. Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
[SchaaJ and Atkeson, 1993] S. SchaaJ and C. G. Atkeson. Open loop stable control strate- 
gies for robot juggling. In Proceedings of IEEE conference on Robotics and Automation, 
May 1993. 
[Stanfill and WaJtz, 1986] C. Stanfill and D. WaJtz. Towards memory-based reasoning. 
Communications of the A CM, 29(12):1213-1228, December 1986. 
[Wahba and Wold, 1975] G. Wahba and S. Wold. A completely automatic french curve: 
Fitting spline functions by cross-validation. Communications in Statistics, 4(1), 1975. 
[Zhang et al., 1992] X. Zhang, J.P. Mesirov, and D.L. WaJtz. Hybrid system for protein 
secondary structure prediction. Journal of Molecular Biology, 225:1049-1063, 1992. 
