Grammatical Inference by 
Attentional Control of Synchronization 
in an Oscillating Elman Network 
Bill Baird 
Dept Mathematics, 
U.C.Berkeley, 
Berkeley, Ca. 94720, 
baird@math.berkeley. edu 
Todd Troyer 
Dept of Phys., 
U.C.San Francisco, 
513 Parnassus Ave. 
San Francisco, Ca. 94143, 
todd@phy. ucsf. edu 
Frank Eeckman 
Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory, 
P.O. Box 808 (L-270), 
Livermore, Ca. 94550, 
eeckman@.llnl.gov 
Abstract 
We show how an "Ehnan" network architecture, constructed from 
recurrently connected oscillatory associative memory network mod- 
ules, can employ selective "attentional" control of synchronization 
to direct the flow of communication and computation within the 
architecture to solve a grammatical inference problem. 
Previously we have shown how the discrete time "Ehnan" network 
algorithm can be implemented in a network completely described 
by continuous ordinary differential equations. The time steps (ma- 
chine cycles) of the system are implemented by rhythmic variation 
(clocking) of a bifurcation parameter. In this architecture, oscilla- 
tion amplitude codes the information content or activity of a mod- 
ule (unit), whereas phase and frequency are used to "softwire" the 
network. Only synchronized modules communicate by exchang- 
ing amplitude information; the activity of non-resonating modules 
contributes incoherent crosstalk noise. 
Attentional control is modeled as a special subset of the hidden 
modules with ouputs which affect the resonant frequencies of other 
hidden modules. They control synchrony among the other mod- 
ules and direct the flow of computation (attention) to effect transi- 
tions between two subgraphs of a thirteen state automaton which 
the system emulates to generate a Reber grammar. The internal 
crosstalk noise is used to drive the required random transitions of 
the automaton. 
67 
68 Baird, Troyer, and Eeckman 
1 Introduction 
Recordings of local field potentials have revealed 40 to 80 Hz oscillation in vertebrate 
cortex [Freeman and Baird, 1987, Gray and Singer, 1987]. The amplitude patterns 
of such oscillations have been shown to predict the olfactory and visual pattern 
recognition responses of a trained animal. There is further evidence that although 
the oscillatory activity appears to be roughly periodic, it is actually chaotic when 
exainined in detail. This preliminary evidence suggests that oscillatory or chaotic 
network modules may form the cortical substrate for many of the sensory, motor, 
and cognitive functions now studied in static networks. 
It remains be shown how networks with more complex dynamics can performs these 
operations and what possible advantages are to be gained by such complexity. We 
have therefore constructed a parallel distributed processing architecture that is in- 
spired by the structure and dynalnics of cerebral cortex, and applied it to the prob- 
lem of grammatical inference. The construction views cortex as a set of coupled 
oscillatory associative memories, and is guided by the principle that attractors must 
be used by macroscopic systems for reliable computation in the presence of noise. 
This system must function reliably in the midst of noise generated by crosstalk from 
it's own activity. Present day digital computers are built of flip-flops which, at the 
level of their transistors, are continuous dissipative dynamical systems with differ- 
ent attractors underlying the symbols we call "0" and "1". In a similar manner, the 
network we have constructed is a symbol processing system, but with analog input 
and oscillatory snbsymbolic representations. 
The architecture operates as a thirteen state finite automaton that generates the 
symbol strings of a Reber grammar. It is designed to demonstrate and study the 
following issues and principles of neural computation: (1) Sequential computation 
with coupled associative memories. (2) Computation with attractors for reliable 
operation in the presence of noise. (3) Discrete time and state symbol processing 
arising from continuum dynamics by bifurcations of attractors. (4) Attention as 
selective synchronization controling conmmnication and temporal program flow. (5) 
chaotic dynamics in some network modules driving randoran choice of attractors in 
other network modules. The first three issues have been fully addressed in a previous 
paper [Baird et al., 1993], and are only briefly reviewed. We focus here on the last 
two. 
1.1 Attentional Processing 
An important element of intra-cortical communication in the brain, and between 
modules in this architecture, is the ability of a module to detect and respond to 
the proper input signal from a particular module, when inputs from other modules 
irrelevant to the present computation are contributing crosstalk noise. This is smilar 
to the problem of coding messages in a computer architecture like the Connection 
Machine so that they can be picked up from the common comnmnication buss line 
by the proper receiving module. 
Periodic or nearly periodic (chaotic) variation of a signal introduces additional de- 
grees of freedom that can be exploited in a computational architecture. We investi- 
gate the principle that selective control of synchronization, which we hypopthesize 
to be a model of "attention", can be used to solve this coding problem and control 
communication and program flmv in an architecture with dynamic attractors. 
The architecture illustrates the notion that synchronization not only "binds" sen- 
Grammatical Inference by Attentional Control of Synchronization 69 
sory inputs into "objects" [Gray and Singer, 1987], but binds the activity of selected 
cortical areas into a functional whole that directs behavior. It is a model of "at- 
tended activity" as that subset which has been included in the processing of the 
moment by synchronization. This is both a spatial and temporal binding. Only the 
inputs which are synchronized to the internal oscillatory activity of a module can 
effect previously learned transitions of attractors within it. For example, consider 
two objects in the visual field separately bound in primary visual cortex by synchro- 
nization of their components at different phases or frequencies. One object may be 
selectively attended to by its entralmnent to oscillatory processing at higher levels 
such as V4 or IT. These in turn are in synchrony with oscillatory activity in motor 
areas to select the attractors there which are directing motor output. 
In the architecture presented here, we have constrained the network dynamics so 
that there exist well defined notions of amplitude, phase, and frequency. The net- 
work has been designed so that amplitude codes the information content or activity 
of a module, whereas phase and frequency are used to "softwire" the network. An 
oscillatory network module has a passband outside of which it will not synchro- 
nize with an oscillatory input. Modules can therefore easily be desynchronized 
by perturbing their resonant frequencies. Furthermore, only synchronized modules 
communicate by exchanging amplitude information; the activity of non-resonating 
modules contributes incoherant crosstalk or noise. The flow of communication be- 
tween modules can thus be controled by controlling synchrony. By changing the 
intrinsic frequency of modules in a patterned way, the effective connectivity of the 
network is changed. The same hardware and connection matrix can thus subserve 
many different computations and patterns of interaction between modules without 
crosstalk problems. 
The crosstalk noise is actually essential to the function of the system. It serves as 
the noise source for making random choices of output symbols and automaton state 
transitions in this architecture, as we discuss later. In cortex there is an issue as to 
what may constitute a source of randomness of sufficient magnitude to perturb the 
large ensemble behavior of neural activity at the cortical network level. It does not 
seem likely that the well known molecular fluctuations which are easily averaged 
within one or a few neurons can do the job. The architecture here models the 
hypothesis that deterministic chaos in the macroscopic dynamics of a network of 
neurons, which is the same order of magnitude as the coherant activity, can serve 
this purpose. 
In a set of modules which is alesynchronized by perturbing the resonant frequencies 
of the group, coherance is lost and "random" phase relations result. The character 
of the model time traces is irregular as seen in real neural ensemble activity. The be- 
havior of the time traces in different modules of the architecture is similar to the tem- 
porary appearance and sxvitching of synchronization between cortical areas seen in 
observations of cortical processing during sensory/motor tasks in monkeys and hu- 
mans [Bressler and Nakanmra, 1993]. The structure of this apparently chaotic sig- 
nal and its use in network learning and operation are currently under investigation. 
2 Normal Form Associative Memory Modules 
The mathenmtical foundation for the construction of network inodules is contained 
in the normal form projection algorithm [Baird and Eeckman, 1993]. This is a 
learning algorithm for recurrent analog neural networks which allows associative 
memory storage of analog patterns, continuous periodic sequences, and chaotic 
70 Baird, Troyer, and Eeckman 
attractors in the same network. An N node module can be shown to function 
as an associative memory for up to N/2 oscillatory, or N/3 chaotic memory at- 
tractors [Baird and Eeckman, 1993]. A key feature of a net constructed by this 
algorithm is that the underlying dynamics is explicitly isomorphic to any of a 
class of standard, well understood nonlinear dynamical systems - a normal .form 
[Guckenheimer and Holmes, 1983]. 
The network modules of this architecture were developed previously as models of 
olfactory cortex with distributed patterns of activity like those observed experimen- 
tally [Baird, 1990, Freeman and Baird, 1987]. Such a biological network is dynami- 
cally equivalent to a network in normal form and may easily be designed, simulated, 
and theoretically evaluated in these coordinates. When the intramodule competi- 
tion is high, they are "memory" or winner-take-all cordinates where attractors have 
one oscillator at maximum amplitude, with the other amplitudes near zero. In fig- 
ure two, the input and output modules are demonstrating a distributed amplitude 
pattern ( the symbol "T"), and the hidden and context modules are two-attractor 
modules in normal form coordinates showing either a right or left side active. 
In this paper all networks are discussed in normal form coordinates. By analyz- 
ing the network in these coordinates, the amplitude and phase dynamics have a 
particularly simple interaction. When the input to a module is synchronized with 
its intrinsic oscillation, the amplitude of the periodic activity may be considered 
separately from the phase rotation. The module may then be viewed as a static 
network with these amplitudes as its activity. 
To illustrate the behavior of individual network modules, we examine a binary (two- 
attractor) module; the behavior of modules with more than two attractors is similar. 
Such a unit is defined in polar normal form coordinates by the following equations 
of the Hopf normal form: 
i'll '-- ?l, irli -- crlai + (d - bsin(Wclockt))rliro2i + Z wi Ij cøs(05 - 01i) 
J 
i'oi = uiroi - croai + (d- bsin(Wctockt))roir2i + Z wIicøs(05 - Ooi) 
li -" Odi -]- Z W '(Ijl?'li) Sin(Oj -- Oil) 
OOi ---- Wi q- y w(Ij/roi)siu(Oj -- Ooi) 
J 
The clocked parameter bsin(wctockt) is used to implement the discrete time machine 
cycle of the Ehnan architecture as discussed later. It has lower frequency (1/10) 
than the intrinsic frequency of the unit wi. 
Examination of the phase equations shows that a unit has a strong tendency 
to synchronize with an input of similar frequency. Define the phase difference 
c)=0o-Oi=0o-wlt between a unit 00 and it's input 0i. For either side of a 
nnit driven by an input of the same frequency, wt = w0, There is an attractor 
at zero phase difference 6 = 00 - 0t = 0 and a repellor at 6 = 180 degrees. In 
simulations, the interconnected network of these units described below synchro- 
nizes robustly within a few cycles following a perturbation. If the frequencies of 
some modules of the architecture are randomly dispersed by a significant amount, 
wt - w0  0, phase-lags appear first, then synchronization is lost in those units. An 
oscillating module therefore acts as a band pass filter for oscillatory inputs. 
Grammatical Inference by Attentional Control of Synchronization 71 
When the oscillators are sychronized with the input, Oj - Oi - 0, the phase terms 
cos(0j - Oi) = cos(O) = i dissappear. This leaves the amplitude equations 
and i'oi with static inputs '.j wiI j and '.j wIj. Thus we have network modules 
which emulate static network units in their amplitude activity when fully phase- 
locked to their input. Amplitude information is transmitted between modules, with 
an oscillatory carrier. 
For fixed values of the competition, in a completely synchronized system, the in- 
ternal amplitude dynamics define a gradient dynamical system for a fourth order 
energy function. External inputs that are phase-locked to the module's intrinsic 
oscillation simply add a linear tilt to the landscape. 
For low levels of competition, there is a broad circular valley. When tilted by 
external input, there is a unique equilibrium that is determined by the bias in tilt 
along one axis over the other. Thinking of rli as the "acitivity" of the unit, this 
acitivity becomes a monotonically increasing function of input. The module behaves 
as an analog connectionist unit whose transfer function can be approximated by a 
sigmoid. We refer to this as the "analog" mode of operation of the module. 
With high levels of competition, the unit will behave as a binary (bistable) digital 
flip-flop element. There are two deep potential wells, one on each axis. Hence the 
module performs a winner-take-all choice on the coordinates of its initial state and 
maintains that choice "clamped" and independent of external input. This is the 
"digital" or "quantized" mode of operation of a module. We think of one attractor 
within the unit as representing "1" (the right side in figure two) and the other as 
representing"0". 
3 Elman Network of Oscillating Associative Memories 
As a benchmark for the capabilities of the system, and to create a point of con- 
tact to standard network architectures, we have constructed a discrete-time recur- 
rent "Ehnan" network [Ehnan, 1991] from oscillatory modules defined by ordinary 
differential equations. Previously we con- 
structed a system which functions as the six 
state finite automaton that perfectly recog- 
nizes or generates the set of strings defined by 
the Reber grammar described in Cleeremans 
et. al. [Cleeremans et al., 1989]. We found 
the connections for this network by using the 
backpropagation algorithm in a static network 
that approxilnates the behavior of the ampli- 
tudes of oscillation in a fully synchronized dy- 
namic network [Baird et al., 1993]. 
Here we construct a system that emulates 
the larger 13 state automata similar (less one 
state) to the one studied by Cleermans, et al 
in the second part of their paper. The graph 
of this automaton consists of two subgraph 
branches each of which has the graph struc- 
ture of the automaton learned as above, but 
with different assignments of transition out- 
put symbols (see fig. 1). 
Figure 1. x 
Subgraph 1 
StaState 3 
Subgraph 2 
P T 
72 Baird, Troyer, and Eeckman 
We use two types of modules in implementing the Elman network architecture shown 
in figure two below. The input and output layer each consist of a single associative 
memory module with six oscillatory attractors (six competing oscillatory modes), 
one for each of the six symbols in the grammar. The hidden and context layers 
consist of the binary "units" above composed of a two oscillatory attractors. The 
architecture consists of 14 binary modules in the hidden and context layers - three 
of which are special frequency control modules. The hidden and context layers are 
divided into four groups: the first three correspond to each of the two subgraphs plus 
the start state, and the fourth group consists of three special control modules, each 
of which has only a special control output that perturbs the resonant frequencies of 
the modules (by changing their values in the program) of a particular state coding 
group when it is at the zero attractor, as illustrated by the dotted control lines in 
figure two. This figure shows control unit two is at the one attractor (right side 
of the square active) and the hidden units coding for states of subgraph two are 
in synchrony with the input and output modules. Activity levels oscillate up and 
down through the plane of the paper. Here in midcycle, competition is high in all 
modules. 
Figure 2. 
INPUT 
OSCILLATING ELMAN NETWORK 
OUTPUT 
, , .' /.  .,,. /, ? ..'. 
':?''  subgraph2states ste  ... . 
subgranh I states      .: ./'::'?j;; CONTEXT 
- - .............. - ..... SYNCHRIZATION 
CONTROL UNITS 
The discrete machine cycle of the Ehnan algorithm is implemented by the sinusoidal 
variation (clocking) of the bifurcation parameter in the normal form equations that 
determines the level of intramodule competition [Baird et al., 1993]. At the begin- 
ning of a machine cycle, when a network is generating strings, the input and context 
layers are at high competition and their activity is clamped at the bottom of deep 
basins of attraction. The hidden and output modules are at low competition and 
therefore behave as a traditional feedforward network free to take on analog values. 
In this analog mode, a real valued error can be defined for the hidden and output 
units and standard learning algorithms like backpropagation can be used to train 
the connections. 
Then the situation reverses. For a Reber grammar there are always two equally pos- 
sible next symbols being activated in the output layer, and we let the crosstalk noise 
Grammatical Inference by Attentional Control of Synchronization 73 
break this symmetry so that the winner-take-all dynamics of the output module can 
chose one. High competition has now also "quantized" and clamped the activity in 
the hidden layer to a fixed binary vector. Meanwhile, competition is lowered in the 
input and context layers, freeing these modules from their attractors. An identity 
mapping from hidden to context loads the binarized activity of the hidden layer 
into the context layer for the next cycle, and an additional identity mapping from 
the output to input module places the chosen output symbol into the input layer 
to begin the next cycle. 
4 Attentional control of Synchrony 
We introduce a model of attention as control of program flow by selective synchro- 
nization. The attentional controler itself is modeled in this architecture as a special 
set of three hidden modules with ouputs that affect the resonant frequencies of the 
other corresponding three subsets of hidden modules. Varying levels of intramodule 
competition control the large scale direction of information flow between layers of the 
architecture. To direct information flow on a finer scale, the attention mechanism 
selects a subset of modules within each layer whose output is effective in driving the 
state transition behavior of the system. 
By controling the patterns of synchronization within the network we are able to 
generate the grammar obtained from an automaton consisting of two subgraphs 
connected by a single transition state (figure 1). During training we enforce a seg- 
regation of the hidden layer code for the states of the separate subgraph branches of 
the automaton so that different sets of synchronized modules learn to code for each 
subgraph of the automaton. Then the entire automaton is hand constructed with 
an additional hidden module for the start state between the branches. Transitions 
in the system from states in one subgraph of the automaton to the other are made 
by "attending" to the corresponding set of nodes in the hidden and context layers. 
This switching of the focus of attention is accomplished by changing the patterns 
of synchronization within the network which changes the flow of communication 
betxveen modules. 
Each control module modulates the intrinsic frequency of the units coding for the 
states a single subgraph or the unit representing the start state. The control modules 
respond to a particular input symbol and context to set the intrinsic frequency of 
the proper subset of hidden units to be equal to the input layer frequency. As 
described earlier, modules can easily be desynchronized by perturbing their resonant 
frequencies. By perturbing the frequencies of the remaining modules away from the 
input frequency, these modules are no longer communicating with the rest of the 
network. Thus coherent information flows from input to output only through one 
of three channels. Viewing the automata as a behavioral program, the control 
of synchrony constitutes a control of the program flow into its subprograms (the 
subgraphs of the automaton). 
When either exit state of a subgraph is reached, the "B" (begin) symbol is then 
emitted and fed back to the input where it is connected through the first to second 
layer weight matrix to the attention control modules. It turns off the synchrony 
of the hidden states of the subgraph and allows entrainment of the start state to 
begin a new string of symbols. This state in turn activates both a "T" and a "P' in 
the output module. The symbol selected by the crosstalk noise and fed back to the 
input module is now connected to the control modules through the weight matrix. 
It desynchronizes the start state module, synchronizes in the subset of hidden units 
74 Baird, Troyer, and Eeckman 
coding for the states of the appropriate subgraph, and establishes there the start 
state pattern for that subgraph. 
Future xvork will investigate the possibilities for self-organization of the patterns of 
synchrony and spatially segregated coding in the hidden layer during learning. The 
weights for entire automata, including the special attention control hidden units, 
should be learned at once. 
4.1 Acknowledgments 
Supported by AFOSR-91-0325, and a grant from LLNL. It is a pleasure to acknowl- 
edge the invaluable assistance of Morris Hirsch, and Walter Freeman. 
References 
[Baird, 1990] Baird, B. (1990). Bifurcation and learning in network models of oscil- 
lating cortex. In Forest, S., editor, Emergent Computation, pages 365-384. North 
Holland. also in Physica D, 42. 
[Baird and Eeckman, 1993] Baird, B. and Eeckman, F. H. (1993). A normal form 
projection algorithm for associative memory. In Hassoun, M. H., editor, Asso- 
ciative Neural Memories: Theory and Implementation, New York, NY. Oxford 
University Press. 
[Baird et al., 1993] Baird, B., Troyer, T., and Eeckman, F. H. (1993). Synchro- 
nization and gramatical inference in an oscillating ehnan network. In Hanson, 
S., Cowan, J., and Giles, C., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processin9 
Systems 5, pages 236-244. Morgan Kaufman. 
[Bressler and Nakamura, 1993] Bressler, S. and Nakamura. (1993). Interarea syn- 
chronization in Macaque neocortex during a visual discrimination task. In Eeck- 
man,F. H., and Bower, J., editors, Computation and Neural Systems, page 515. 
Kluwer. 
[Cleeremans et al., 1989] Cleeremans, A., Servan-Schreiber, D., and McClelland, J. 
(1989). Finite state automata and simple recurrent networks. Neural Computa- 
tion, 1(3):372-381. 
[Ehnan, 1991] Ehnan, J. (1991). Distributed representations, simple recurrent net- 
works and grammatical structure. Machine Learnin9, 7(2/3):91. 
[Freeman and Baird, 1987] Freeman, W. and Baird, B. (1987). Relation of olfactory 
EEG to behavior: Spatial analysis. Behavioral Neuroscience, 101:393-408. 
[Gray and Singer, 1987] Gray, C. M. and Singer, W. (1987). Stimulus dependent 
neuronal oscillations in the cat visual cortex area 17. Neuroscience [Suppl], 
22:1301P. 
[Guckenheimer and Hohnes, 1983] Guckenheimer, J. and Holmes, D. (1983). Non- 
linear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields. 
Springer, New York. 
