A 
Connectionist Model of the Owls 
Sound Localization System 
Daniel J. Rosen* 
Department of Psychology 
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA 94305 
David E. Rumelhart 
Department of Psychology 
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA 94305 
Eric. I. Knudsen 
Department of Neurobiology 
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA 94305 
Abstract 
We do not have a good understanding of how theoretical principles 
of learning are realized in neural systems. To address this problem 
we built a computational model of development in the owl's sound 
localization system. The structure of the model is drawn from 
known experimental data while the learning principles come from 
recent work in the field of brain style computation. The model 
accounts for numerous properties of the owl's sound localization 
system, makes specific and testable predictions for future experi- 
ments, and provides a theory of the developmental process. 
I INTRODUCTION 
The barn owl, Tyro Alba, has a remarkable ability to localize sounds in space. In 
complete darkness it catches mice with nearly flawless precision. The owl depends 
upon this skill for survival, for it is a nocturnal hunter who uses audition to guide 
*Current address: Keck Center for Integrafive Neuroscience, UCSF, 513 Parnassus 
Ave., San Francisco, CA 94143-0444. 
606 
A Connectionist Model of the Owl's Sound Localization System 607 
its search for prey (Payne, 1970; Knudsen, Blasdel and Konishi, 1979). Central to 
the owl's localization system are the precise auditory maps of space found in the 
owl's optic tectum and in the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICx). 
The development of these sensory maps poses a difficult problem for the nervous 
system, for their accuracy depends upon changing relationships between the animal 
and its environment. The owl encodes information about the location of a sound 
source by the phase and amplitude differences with which the sound reaches the 
owl's two ears. Yet these differences change dramatically as the animal matures 
and its head grows. The genome cannot "know" in advance precisely how the 
animal's head will develop - many environmental factors affect this process - so it 
cannot encode the precise development of the auditory system. Rather, the genome 
must design the auditory system to adapt to its environment, letting it learn the 
precise interpretation of auditory cues appropriate for its head and ears. 
In order to understand the nature of this developmental process, we built a connec- 
tionist model of the owl's sound localization system, using both theoretical principles 
of learning and knowledge of owl neurophysiology and neuroanatomy. 
2 THE ESSENTIAL SYSTEM TO BE MODELED 
The owl calculates the horizontal component of a sound source location by mea- 
suring the interaural time difference (ITD) of a sound as it reaches the two ears 
(Knudsen and Konishi, 1979). It computes the vertical component of the signal by 
determining the interaural level difference (ILD) of that same sound (Knudsen and 
Konishi, 1979). The animal processes these signals through numerous sub-cortical 
nuclei to form ordered auditory maps of space in both the ICx and the optic tectum. 
Figure i shows a diagram of this neural circuit. 
Neurons in both the ICx and the optic tectum are spatially tuned to auditory 
stimuli. Cells in these nuclei respond to sound signals originating from a restricted 
region of space in relation to the owl (Knudsen, 1984). Neurons in the ICx respond 
exclusively to auditory signals. Cells in the optic tectum, on the other hand, encode 
both audito?y and visual sensory maps, and drive the motor system to orient to the 
location of an auditory or visual signal. 
Researchers study the owl's development by systematically altering the animal's 
sensory experience, usually in one of two ways. They may fit the animal with a 
sound attenuating earplug, altering its auditory experience, or they may fit the owl 
with displacing prisms, altering its visual experience. 
Disturbance of either auditory or visual cues, during a period when the owl is de- 
veloping to maturity, causes neural and behavioral changes that bring the auditory 
map of space back into alignment with the visual nmp, and/or tune the auditory sys- 
tem to be sensitive to the appropriate range of binaural sound signals. The earplug 
induced changes take place at the level of the VLVp, where ILD is first computed 
(Mogdans and Knudsen, 1992). The visually induced adjustment of the auditory 
maps of space seems to take place at the level of the ICx (Brainard and Knudsen, 
1993b). The ability of the owl to adjust to altered sensory signals diminishes over 
time, and is greatly restricted in adulthood (Knudsen and Knudsen, 1990). 
608 Rosen, Rumelhart, and Knudsen 
OVERVIEW of the BARN OWL's 
SOUND LOCALIZATION SYSTEM 
I OPTIC TECTUM 1 
MullI-Medal 
SPACE MAP 
SHELL ol IC ITD ITD SHELLoi IC 
ITD & I..D ITD & I..D 
Figure 1: A chart describing the flow of auditory information in the owl's sound 
localization system. For simplicity, only the connections leading to the one of the 
bilateral optic tecta are shown. Nuclei labeled with an asterisk (*) are included in 
the model. Nuclei that process ILD and/or ITD information are so labeled. 
3 THE NETWORK MODEL 
The model has two major components: a network architecture based on the neuro- 
biology of the owl's localization system, as shown in Figure 1, and a learning rule 
derived from computational learning theory. The elements of the model are stan- 
dard connectionist units whose output activations are sigmoidal functions of their 
weighted inputs. The learning rule we use to train the model is not standard. In 
the following section we describe how and why we derived this rule. 
3.1 DEFINING THE GOAL OF THE NETWORK 
The goal of the network, and presumably the owl, is to accurately map sound signals 
to sound source locations. The network must discover a model of the world which 
best captures the relationship between sound signals and sound source locations. 
Recent work in connectionist learning theory has shown us ways to design networks 
that search for the model that best fits the data at hand (Buntine and Weigend, 
1991; MacKay, 1992; Rumelhart, Durbin, Golden and Chauvin, in press). In this 
section we apply such an analysis to the localization network. 
A Connectionist Model of the Owl's Sound Localization System 609 
Table 1: A table showing the mathematical terms used in the analysis. 
TERM MEANING 
.h4 The Model 
) The Data 
P(.AdlD) Probability of the Model given the Data 
< , ff >i The set of i input/target training pairs 
 Th e input vector for training trial i 
 The target vector for training trial i 
Yi The output vector for training trial i 
ij The value of output unit j on training trial i 
wi d The weight from unit j to unit i 
/j The netinput to unit j 
'(/j) The activation function of unit j evaluated at its netinput 
½ The term to be maximized by the network 
3.2 DERIVING THE FUNCTION TO BE MAXIMIZED 
The network should maximize the probability of the model given the data. Using 
Bayes' rule we write this probability as: 
p(Mil ) = 
P(V) 
Ilere M represents the model (the units, weights and associated biases) and D 
represents the data. We define the data as a set of ordered pairs, [< sound - 
signal, location-signal >i], which represent the cues and targets normally used to 
train a conncctionist network. In the owl's case the cues are the auditory signals, 
and the target information is provided by the visual system. (Table I lists the 
mathematical terms we use in this section.) 
We simplify this equation by taking the natural logarithm of each side giving: 
In P(MtV) - In P(VIM) + In P(M) - In 
Since the natural logarithm is a monotonic transformation, if the network maximizes 
the second equation it will also maximize the first. 
The final term in the equation, In P(D), represents the probability of the ordered 
pairs the network observes. Regardless of which model the network settles upon, 
this term remains the same - the data are a constant during training. Therefore we 
can ignore it when choosing a model. 
The second term in the equation, In P(.A4), represents the probability of the model. 
This is the prior term in Bayesian analysis and is our estimation of how likely it 
is that a particular model is true, regardless of the data. We will discuss it below. 
For now we will concentrate on maximizing In P(Dt./4 ). 
610 Rosen, Rumelhart, and Knudsen 
3.3 ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE NETWORK'S ENVIRONMENT 
We assume that the training data - pairs of stylized auditory and visual signals - 
are independent of one another and re-write the previous term as: 
lnP(Z)tA4 ) = y]lnP(< 7, ff>i 
i 
The i subscript denotes the particular data, or training, pair. We further expand 
this term to: 
In P(DI.A4 ) =  In P(.lœi A .,M) + E In P(:r'i). 
i i 
We ignore the last term, since the sound signals are not dependent on the model. 
Ve are left, then, with the task of maximizing ]iln P(li A .A4). It is important 
to note that ffi represents a visual signal, not a localization decision. The network 
attempts to predict its visual experience given its auditory experience. It does not 
predict the probability of making an accurate localization decision. If we assume 
that visual signals provide the target values for the network, then this analysis shows 
that the auditory map will always follow the visual map, regardless of whether this 
leads to accurate localization behavior or not. Our assumption is supported by 
experiments showing that, in the owl, vision does guide the formation of auditory 
spatial maps (Knudsen and Knudsen, 1985; Knudsen, 1988). 
Next, we must clarify the relationship between the inputs, 'i and the targets, . 
We know that the real world is probabilistic - that for a given input there exists 
some distribution of possible target values. We need to estimate the shape of this 
distribution. In this case we assume that the target values are binomially distributed 
- that given a particular sound signal, the visual system did or did not detect a 
sound source at each point in owl-centered space. 
Having made this assumption, we can clarify our interpretation of the network 
output array, . Each element, .Oij, of this vector represents the activity of output 
unit j on training trial i. We assume that the output activation of each of these 
units represents the expected value of its corresponding target, Yij. In this case 
the expected value is the mean of a binomial distribution. So the value of each 
output unit ij represents the probability that a sound signal originated from that 
particular location. Ve now write the probability of the data given the model as: 
P(ta AM) = H ',¾:' (1- .Oi.i) -u'5 
Taking the natural log of the probability and summing over all data pairs we get: 
C =  Eyij ln.0ij + (1 - yij)ln(1- Oij) 
i j 
where C is the term we want to maximize. This is the standard cross-entropy term. 
3.4 DERIVING THE LEARNING RULE 
Having defined our goal we derive a learning rule appropriate to achieving that goal. 
oc where is the net input to a unit. (In these 
To determine this rule we compute  r/ 
A Connectionist Model of the Owl's Sound Localization System 611 
equations we have dropped the i subscript, which denotes the particular training 
trial, since this analysis is identical for all trials.) We write this as: 
oc 
(y./- `0./) 
`0i(1 - `0j ) 
where O.T'(?./) is the derivative of a unit's activation function evaluated at its net 
input. 
Next we choose an appropriate activation function for the output units. The logistic 
 is a good choice for two reasons. First, it is bounded by 
function,-'O?j) = (+e-"J)' 
zero and one. This makes sense since we assume that the probability that a sound 
signal originated at any one point in space is bounded by zero and one. Second, 
when we compute the derivative of the logistic function we get the following result: 
O.T(r/./) = '(r/./)(1 - .,/'(L)) = ,0./(1 - `0.j ). 
This term is the variance of a binomial distribution and when we return to the 
derivative of our cost function, we see that this variance term is canceled by the 
denominator. The final derivative we use to compute the weight changes at the 
output units is therefore: 
o½ 
07./ 
The weights to other units in the network are updated according to the standard 
backpropagation learning algorithm. 
3.5 SPECIFYING MODEL PRIORS 
There are two types of priors in this model. First is the architectural one. We design 
a fixed network architecture, described in the previous section, based upon our 
knowledge of the nuclei involved in the owl's localization system. This is equivalent 
to setting the prior probability of this architecture to 1, and all others to 0. 
We also use a weight elimination prior. This and similar priors may be interpreted 
as ways to reduce the complexity of a network (Weigend, Huberman and Rumelhart, 
1990). The network, therefore, maximizes an expression which is a function of both 
its error and complexity. 
3.6 TRAINING 
We train the model by presenting it with input to the core of the inferior colliculus 
(ICc), which encodes interaural phase and time differences (IPD/ITD), and the 
angular nuclei, which encode sound level. The outputs of the network are then 
compared to target values, presumed to come from the visual system. The weights 
are adjusted in order to minimize this difference. We mimic plug training by varying 
the average difference between the two angular input values. We mimic prism 
training by systematically changing the target values associated with an input. 
612 Rosen, Rumelhart, and Knudsen 
Figure 2: The activity level of ICx units in response to a particular auditory in- 
put immediately after simulated prism training was begun (left), midway through 
training (middle) and after training was completed (right). 
4 RESULTS and DISCUSSION 
The trained network localizes accurately, shows appropriate auditory tuning curves 
in each of the modeled nuclei, and responds appropriately to manipulations that 
mimic experiments such as blocking inhibition at the level of the ICx. The network 
also shows appropriate responses to changing average binaural intensity at the level 
of the VLVp, the lateral shell and the ICx. 
Furthermore, the network exhibits many properties found in the developing owl.. 
The model appropriately adjusts its auditory localization behavior in simulated 
earplug experiments and this plasticity takes place at the level of the VLVp. As 
earplug simulations are begun progressively later in training, the network's ability 
to adapt to plug training gradually diminishes, following a time course of plasticity 
qualitatively similar to the sensitive and critical periods described in the owl. 
The network adapts appropriately in simulated prism studies and the changes in 
response to these simulations primarily take place along the lateral shell to ICx 
connections. As with the plug studies, the network's ability to adapt to prisms 
diminishes over time. However, unlike the mature owl, a highly trained network 
retains the ability to adapt in a simulated prism experiment. 
We also discovered that the principally derived learning rule better models interme- 
diate stages of prism adjustment than does a standard back-propagation network. 
Brainard and Knudsen (1993a) report observing two peaks of activity across the rec- 
tum in response to an auditory stimulus during prism training- one corresponding 
to the pre-training response and one corresponding to the newly learned response. 
Over time the pre-trained response diminishes while the newly learned one grows. 
As shown in Figure 2, the network exhibits this same pattern of learning. Networks 
we trained under a standard back-propagation learning algorithm do not. Such a 
A Connectionist Model of the Owl's Sound Localization System 613 
result lends support to the idea that the owl's localization system is computing a 
function similar to the one the network was designed to learn. 
In addition to accounting for known data, the network predicts results of experi- 
ments it was not designed to mimic. Specifically, the network accurately predicted 
that removal of the animal's facial ruff, which causes ILD to vary with azimuth 
instead of elevation, would have no effect on the animal's response to varying ILD. 
The network accomplishes the goals for which it was designed. It accounts for much, 
though not all, of the developmental data, it makes testable predictions for future 
experiments, and since we derived the learning rule in a principled fashion, the 
network provides us with a specific theory of the owl's sound localization system. 
References 
Brainard, M. S., &: Knudsen, E. I. (1993a). Dynamics of the visual calibration of 
the map of interaural time difference in the barn owl's optic tectum. Society 
for Neuroscience Abstracts, 19, 369.8. 
Brainard, M. S., &: Knudsen, E. I. (1993b). Experience-dependent plasticity in the 
inferior colliculus: a site for visual calibration of the neural representation of 
auditory space in the barn owl. The Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 4589-4608. 
Buntine, W. L., &: Weigend, A. S. (1991). Bayesian back-propagation. Complezc 
Systems, 5, 603-612. 
Knudsen, E. (1984). Auditory properties of space-tuned units in owl's optic tectum. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 5œ(4), 709-723. 
Knudsen, E. (1988). Early blindness results in a degraded auditory map of space 
in the optic tectum of the barn owl. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science, U.S.A., 85, 6211-6214. 
Knudsen, E., Blasdel, G., &: Konishi, M. (1979). Sound localization by the barn 
owl (tyto alba) measured with the search coil technique. The Journal of Com- 
parative Physiology A, 133, 1-11. 
Knudsen, E., & Knudsen, P. (1985). Vision guides the adjustment of auditory 
localization in young barn owls. Science, 230, 545-548. 
Knudsen, E., & Knudsen, P. (1990). Sensitive and critical periods for visual calibra- 
tion of sound localization by barn owls. The Journal of Neuroscience, 10(1), 
222-232. 
MacKay, D. J. (1992). Bayesian Methods for Adaptive Models. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California. 
Mogdans, J., &: Knudsen, E. I. (1992). Adaptive adjustment of unit tuning to 
sound localization cues in response to monaural occlusion in developing owl 
optic tectum. The Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 3473-3484. 
Payne, R. S. (1970). Acoustic location of prey by barn owls (tyto alba). The Journal 
of Ezcperimental Biology, 53, 535-573. 
Rumelhart, D. E., Durbin, R., Golden, R., &: Chauvin, Y. (in press). Backpropaga- 
tion: The theory. In Y. Chauvin &: D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Backpropagation: 
Theory, Architectures and Applications. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Earlbaum 
Associates. 
Weigend, A. S., Huberman, B. A., &: Rumelhart, D. E. (1990). Predicting the 
future: A connectionist approach. International Journal of Neural Systems, 1, 
193-209. 
