Illumination-Invariant Face Recognition with a 
Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina 
Joachim M. Buhmann 
Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universitfit 
Institut ftir Informatik II, R6merstrage 164 
D-53117 Bonn, Germany 
Martin Lades 
Ruhr-Universitfit Bochum 
Institut ftir Neuroinformatik 
D-44780 Bochum, Germany 
Frank Eeckman 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
ISCR, P.O.Box 808, L-426 
Livermore, CA 94551 
Abstract 
Changes in lighting conditions strongly effect the performance and reli- 
ability of computer vision systems. We report face recognition results 
under drastically changing lighting conditions for a computer vision sys- 
tem which concurrently uses a contrast sensitive silicon retina and a con- 
ventional, gain controlled CCD camera. For both input devices the face 
recognition system employs an elastic matching algorithm with wavelet 
based features to classify unknown faces. To assess the effect of analog 
on-chip preprocessing by the silicon retina the CCD images have been 
"digitally preprocessed" with a bandpass filter to adjust the power spec- 
trum. The silicon retina with its ability to adjust sensitivity increases 
the recognition rate up to 50 percent. These comparative experiments 
demonstrate that preprocessing with an analog VLSI silicon retina gen- 
erates image data enriched with object-constant features. 
1 Introduction 
Neural computation as an information processing paradigm promises to enhance artificial 
pattern recognition systems with the learning capabilities of the cerebral cortex and with the 
769 
770 Buhmann, Lades, and Eeckman 
adaptivity of biological sensors. Rebuilding sensory organs in silicon seems to be particu- 
larly promising since their neurophysiology and neuroanatomy, including the connections 
to cortex, are known in great detail. This knowledge might serve as a blueprint for the design 
of artificial sensors which mimic biological perception. Analog VLSI retinas and cochleas, 
as designed by Carver Mead (Mead, 1989; Mahowald, Mead, 1991) and his collaborators 
in a seminal research program, will ultimately be integrated in vision and communication 
systems for autonomous robots and other intelligent information processing systems. 
The study reported here explores the influence of analog retinal preprocessing on the 
recognition performance of a face recognition system. Face recognition is a challenging 
classification task where object inherent distortions, like facial expressions and perspective 
changes, have to be separated from other image variations like changing lighting conditions. 
Preprocessing with a silicon retina is expected to yield an increased recognition rate since the 
first layers of the retina adjust their local contrast sensitivity and thereby achieve invariance 
to variations in lighting conditions. 
Our face recognizer is equipped with a silicon retina as an adaptive camera. For comparison 
purposes all images are registered simultaneously by a conventional CCD camera with 
automatic gain control. Galleries with images of 109 different test persons each are taken 
under three different lighting conditions and two different viewing directions (see Fig. 1). 
These different galleries provide separate statistics to measure the sensitivity of the system 
to variations in light levels or contrast and image changes due to perspective distortions. 
Naturally, the performance of an object recognition system depends critically on the classifi- 
cation strategy pursued to identify unknown objects in an image with the models stored in a 
database. The matching algorithm selected to measure the performance enhancing effect of 
retinal preprocessing deforms prototype faces in an elastic fashion (Buhmann et al., 1989; 
Buhmann et al., 1990; Lades et al., 1993). Elastic matching has been shown to perform 
well on the face classification task recognizing up to 80 different faces reliably (Lades et al., 
1993) and in a translation, size and rotation invariant fashion (Buhmann et al., 1990). The 
face recognition algorithm was initially suggested as a simplified version of the Dynamic 
Link Architecture (von der Malsburg, 1981), an innovative neural classification strategy with 
fast changes in the neural connectivity during recognition stage. Our recognition results 
and conclusions are expected to be qualitatively typical for a whole range of face/object 
recognition systems (Turk, Pentland, 1991; Yuille, 1991; Brunelli, Poggio, 1993), since any 
image preprocessing with emphasis on object constant features facilitates the search for the 
correct prototype. 
2 The Silicon Retina 
The silicon retina used in the recognition experiments models the interactions between 
receptors and horizontal cells taking place in the outer plexiform layer of the vertebrate 
retina. All cells and their interconnections are explicitly represented in the chip so that 
the following description simultaneously refers to both biological wetware and silicon 
hardware. Receptors and horizontal cells are electrically coupled to their neighbors. The 
weak electrical coupling between the receptors smoothes the image and reduces the in- 
fluence of voltage offsets between adjacent receptors. The horizontal cells have a strong 
lateral electrical coupling and compute a local background average. There are reciprocal 
excitatory-inhibitory synapses between the receptors and the horizontal cells. The horizon- 
tal cells use shunting inhibition to adjust the membrane conductance of the receptors and 
Illumination-Invariant Face Recognition with a Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina 771 
thereby adjust their sensitivity locally. This feedback interaction produces an antagonistic 
center/surround organization of receptive fields at the output. The center is represented 
by the weakly coupled excitatory receptors and the surround by the more strongly coupled 
inhibitory horizontal cells. The center/surround organization removes the average intensity 
and expands the dynamic range without response compression. Furthermore, it enhances 
edges. 
In contrast to this architecture, a conventional CCD camera can be viewed as a very primitive 
retina with only one layer of non-interacting detectors. There is no DC background removal, 
causing potential over- and underexposure in parts of the image which reduces the useful 
dynamic range. A mechanical iris has to be provided to adjust the mean luminance level 
to the appropriate setting. Since cameras are designed for faithful image registration rather 
than vision, on-chip pixel processing, if provided at all, is used to improve the camera 
resolution and signal-to-noise ratio. 
Three adjustable parameters allow us to fine tune the retina chip for an object recognition 
experiment: (i) the diffusivity of the cones (ii) the diffusivity of the horizontal cells (iii) the 
leak in the horizontal cell membrane. Changes in the diffusivities affect the shape of the 
receptive fields, e.g., a large diffusivity between cones smoothes out edges and produces a 
blurred image. The other extreme of large diffusivity between horizontal cells pronounces 
edges and enhances the contrast gain. The retina chip has a resolution of 90 x 92 pixels, 
it was designed by (Boahen, Andreou, 1992) and fabricated in 2/tm n-well technology by 
MOSIS. 
3 Elastic Matching Algorithm for Face Recognition 
Elastic matching is a pattern classification strategy which explicitly accounts for local 
distortions. A prototype template is elastically deformed to measure local deviations from a 
new, unknown pattern. The amount of deformation and the similarity of local image features 
provide us with a decision criterion for pattern classification. The rubbersheet-like behavior 
of the prototype transformation makes elastic matching a particularly attractive method for 
face recognition where ubiquitous local distortions are caused for example by perspective 
changes and different facial expressions. Originally, the technique was developed for 
handwritten character recognition (Burr, 1981). The version of elastic matching employed 
for our face recognition experiments is based on attributed graph matching. A detailed 
description with a plausible interpretation in neural networks terms is published in (Lades 
et al., 1993). Each prototype face is encoded as a planar graph with feature vectors attached 
to the vertices of the graph and metric information attached to the edges. The feature vectors 
extract local image information at pixel :i in a multiscale fashion, i.e., they are functions 
of wavelet coefficients. Each feature vector establishes a correspondence between a vertex 
i of a prototype graph and a pixel gi in the image. The components of a feature vector are 
defined as the magnitudes of the convolution of an image with a set of two-dimensional, 
DC free Gaussian kernels centered at pixel gi. The kernels with the form 
( 
p; ( =  exp 
2rr 2 
[exp (ig)- exp (-cr2/2)] 
(1) 
are parameterized by the wave vector/ defining their orientations and their sizes. To 
construct a self-similar set of filter functions we select eight different orientations and five 
772 Burmann, Lades, and Eeckman 
different scales according to 
7r 2_/2 (cos(-/t), ' 7r 
(v,/t) =  7r s,n(/t)) (2) 
with v E {0,...,4};/t E {0,..., 7}. The multi-resolution data format represents local 
distortions in a robust way, i.e., only feature vectors in the vicinity : of an image distortion 
are altered by the changes. The edge labels encode metric information, in particular we 
choose the difference vectors Agij ---- gi - gj as edge labels. 
To generate a new prototype graph for the database, the center of a new face is determined 
by matching a generic face template to it. A 7 x 10 rectangular grid with 10 pixel spacing 
between vertices and edges between adjacent vertices is then centered at that point. The 
saliency of image points is taken into account by deforming that generic grid so that each 
vertex is moved to the nearest pixel with a local maximum in feature vector length. 
The classification of an unknown face as one of the models in the database or its rejection 
as an unclassified object is achieved by computing matching costs and distortion costs. 
The matching costs are designed to maximize the similarity between feature vector M of 
vertex i in the model graph (M) and feature vector Jr(7i) associated with pixel :i in the 
new image (I). The cosine of the angle between both feature vectors 
= 
IIP(dll IIMII (3) 
is suited as a similarity function for elastic matching since global contrast changes in images 
only scale feature vectors but do not rotate them. Besides maximizing the similarity between 
feature vectors the elastic matching algorithm penalizes large distortions. The distortion 
cost term is weighted by a factor  which can be interpreted as a prior for expected 
distortions. The combined matching cost function which is used in the face recognition 
system compromises between feature similarity and distortion, i.e, it minimizes the cost 
function 
)2¾ 
5 5; - 
(i,) ' 
(4) 
for the model M in the face database with respect to the correspondence points {: ). (i, j) 
in Eq. (4) denotes that index j runs over the neighborhood of vertex i and index i runs 
over all vertices. By minimizing Eq. (4) the algorithm assigns pixel : in the new image 
I to vertex i in the prototype graph M. Numerous classification experiments revealed that 
a steepest descent algorithm is sufficient to minimize cost function (4) although it is non- 
convex and local minima may cause non-optimal correspondences with reduced recognition 
rates. 
During a recognition experiment all prototype graphs in the database are matched to the 
new image. A new face is classified as prototype A if H 4 is minimal and if the significance 
criterion 
7g = - > o. (5) 
is fulfilled. The average costs {7-/) and their standard deviation EH are calculated excluding 
match A. This heuristic is based on the assumption that a new face image strongly 
Illumination-Invariant Face Recognition with a Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina 773 
Datacube 
Figure 1: Laboratory setup of the face recognition experiments. 
correlates with the correct prototype but the matching costs to all the other prototype faces 
is approximately Gaussian distributed with mean (7-t) and standard deviation Zu. The 
threshold parameter E} is used to limit the rate of false positive matches, i.e., to exclude 
significant matches to wrong prototypes. 
4 Face Recognition Results 
To measure the recognition rate of the face recognition system using a silicon retina or a 
CCD camera as input devices, pictures of 109 different persons are taken under 3 different 
lighting conditions and 2 different viewing directions. This setup allows us to quantify the 
influence of changes in lighting conditions on the recognition performance separate from 
the influence of perspective distortions. Figure 2 shows face images of one person taken 
under two different lighting setups. The images in Figs. 2a,c with both lights on are used 
as the prototype images for the respective input devices. To test the influence of changing 
lighting conditions the left light is switched off. The faces are now strongly illuminated 
from the right side. The CCD camera images (Figs. 2a,b) document the drastic changes of 
the light settings. The corresponding responses of the silicon retina shown in Figs. 2c,d 
clearly demonstrate that the local adaptivity of the silicon retina enables the recognition 
system to extract object structure from the bright and the dark side of the face. For control 
purposes all recognition experiments have been repeated with filtered CCD camera images. 
The filter was adjusted such that the power spectra of the retina chip images and the filtered 
CCD images are identical. The images (e,f) are filtered versions of the images (a,b). It 
is evident that information in the dark part of image (b) has been erased due to saturation 
effects of the CCD camera and cannot be recovered by any local filtering procedure. 
We first measure the performance of the silicon retina under uniform lighting conditions, 
b 
Figure 2: (a) Conventional CCD camera images (a,b) and silicon retina image (c,d) under 
different lighting conditions. The images (e,f) are filtered CCD camera images with a 
power spectrum adjusted to the images in (c,d). The images (a,c) are used to generate the 
Illumination-Invariant Face Recognition with a Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina 775 
Table 1: (a) Face recognition results in a well illuminated environment and (b) in an 
environment with drastic changes in lighting conditions. 
f. p. rate silicon retina conv. CCD flit. CCD 
100% 83.5 86.2 85.3 
10% 81.7 83.5 84.4 
5% 76.2 82.6 80.7 
1% 71.6 79.8 75.2 
100% 96.3 80.7 78.0 
10% 96.3 76.2 75.2 
5% 96.3 72.5 72.5 
1% 93.6 64.2 62.4 
a 
i.e., both lamps are on and the person looks 20-30 degrees to the right. The recognition 
system has to deal with perspective distortions only. A gallery of 109 faces is matched 
to a face database of the same 109 persons. Table la shows that the recognition rate 
reaches values between 80 and 90 percent if we accept the best match without checking 
its significance. Such a decision criterion is unpractical for many applications since it 
corresponds to a false positive rate (f.p. ram) of 100 percent. If we increase the threshold O 
to limit false positive matches to less than 1 percent the face recognizer is able to identify 
three out of four unknown faces. Filtering the CCD imagery does not hurt the recognition 
performance as the third column in Table l a demonstrates. All necessary information for 
recognition is preserved in the filtered CCD images. 
The situation changes dramatically when we switch off the lamp on the left side of the 
test person. We compare a test gallery of persons looking straight ahead, but illuminated 
only from the right side, to our model gallery. Table 1 b summarizes the recognition results 
for different false positive rates. The advantage of using a silicon retina are 20 to 45 
percent higher recognition rates than for a system with a CCD camera. For a false positive 
rate below one percent a silicon retina based recognition system identifies two third more 
persons than a conventional system. Filtering does not improve the recognition rate of a 
system that uses a CCD camera as can be seen in the third column. 
Our comparative face recognition experiment clearly demonstrates that a face recognizer 
with a retina chip is performing substantially better than conventional CCD camera based 
systems in environments with uncontrolled, substantially changing lighting conditions. 
Retina-like preprocessing yields increased recognition rates and increased significance 
levels. We expect even larger discrepancies in recognition rams if object without a bilateral 
symmetry have to be classified. In this sense the face recognition task does not optimally 
explore the potential of adaptive preprocessing by a silicon retina. Imagine an object 
recognition task where the most significant features for discrimination are hardly visible 
or highly ambiguous due to poor illumination. High error rams and very low significance 
levels are an inevitable consequence of such lighting conditions. 
The limited resolution and poor signal-to-noise ratio of silicon retina chips are expected to 
be improved by a new generation of chips fabricated in 0.7/tm CMOS technology with a 
776 Buhmann, Lades, and Eeckman 
potential resolution of 256 x 256 pixels. Lighting conditions as simulated in our recognition 
experiment are ubiquitous in natural environments. Autonomous robots and vehicles or 
surveillance systems are expected to benefit from the silicon retina technology by gaining 
robustness and reliability. Silicon retinas and more elaborate analog VLSI chips for low 
level vision are expected to be an important component of an Adaptive Vision System. 
Acknowledgement: It is a pleasure to thank K. A. Boahen for providing us with the 
retina chips. We acknowledge stimulating discussions with C. von der Malsburg and C. 
Mead. This work was supported by the German Ministry of Science and Technology 
(ITR-8800-H 1) and by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (W-7405-Eng-48). 
References 
Boahen, K., Andreou, A. 1992. A Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina with Reciprocal 
Synapses. Pages 764-772 of.' NIPS91 Proceedings. IEEE. 
Brunelli, R., Poggio, T. (1993). Face Recognition: Features versus Templates. IEEE Trans. 
on Pattern Analysis Machine Intelligence, 15, 1042-1052. 
Buhmann, J., Lange, J., von der Malsburg, C. 1989. Distortion Invariant Object Recognition 
by Matching Hierarchically Labeled Graphs. Pages I 155-159 of.' Proc. IJCNN, 
Washington. IEEE. 
Buhmann, J., Lades, M., von der Malsburg, C. 1990. Size and Distortion Invariant Object 
Recognition by Hierarchical Graph Matching. Pages H 411-416 of.' Proc. IJCNN, 
SanDiego. IEEE. 
Burr, D. J. (1981). Elastic Matching of Line Drawings. IEEE Trans. on Pat. An. Mach. 
Intel., 3, 708-713. 
Lades, M., Vorbriiggen, J.C., Buhmann, J., Lange, J., von der Malsburg, C., Wfirtz, R.P., 
Konen, W. (1993). Distortion Invariant Object Recognition in the Dynamic Link 
Architecture. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 42, 300-311. 
Mahowald, M., Mead, C. (1991). The Silicon Retina. Scientific American, 264(5), 76. 
Mead, C. (1989). Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. New York: Addison Wesley. 
Turk, M., Pentland, A. (1991). Eigenfaces for Recognition. J. Cog. Sci., 3, 71-86. 
von der Malsburg, Christoph. 1981. The Correlation Theory of Brain Function. Internal 
Report. Max-Planck-Institut, Biophys. Chem., G6ttingen, Germany. 
Yuille, A. (1991). Deformable Templates for Face Recognition. J. Cog. Sci., 3, 60-70. 
