A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer 
and Its Applications 
Steven S. Watkins 
ECE Department 
UCSD 
La Jolla, CA. 92093 
Paul M. Chau 
ECE Department 
UCSD 
La Jolla, CA. 92093 
Raoul Tawel 
JPL 
Caltech 
Pasadena, CA. 91109 
Bjorn Lambrigtsen 
JPL 
Caltech 
Pasadena, CA. 91109 
Mark Plutowski 
CSE Department 
UCSD 
La Jolla, CA. 92093 
Abstract 
A neurocomputer was implemented using radial basis functions and a 
combination of analog and digital VLSI cimuits. The hybrid system 
uses custom analog circuits for the input layer and a digital signal 
processiag board for the hidden and output layers. The system combines 
the advantages of both analog and digital cimuits, featuring low power 
consumption while minimizing overall system error. The analog circuits 
have been fabricated and tested, the system has been built, and several 
applications have been executed on the system. One application 
provides significantly better results for a remote sensing problem than 
have been previously obtained using ½onvelltional methods. 
1.0 Introduction 
This paper describes a neurocomputer development system that uses a radial basis 
function as the transfer function of a neuron rather than the traditional sigmoid function. 
This neurocomputer is a hybrid system which has been implemented with a combination 
of analog and digital VLSI technologies. It offers the low-power advantage of analog 
circuits operating in the subthreshold region and the high-precision advantage of digital 
circuits. The system is targeted for applications that require low-power operation and use 
input data in analog form. particularly remote sensing and portable computing 
applications. It has already provided significantly better results for a remote sensing 
850 
A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer and Its Applications 851 
NEURON 
(el k ' k )' 
I 0 I 1 
EXPONENTIAL 
I k 
INPUT 
OUTPUTS 
YO Yl Y 
MULTIPLY AND ACCUMULATE 
Figure 1: Radial Basis Famction Network 
NEURON 
OILBERT MULTIPLIERS 
I 0 11 12 13 
I 0 1 t 12 13 
Yo Y,i Y2 Y3 
BOA FID 
Yo Yt Y2 Y3 
Figure 2: Mapping of RBF Network to Hardware 
Analog Board 
/ 
DIA Board 
Figure 3: The RBF Neurocomputer Development System 
852 Watkins, Chau, Tawel, Lambrigsten, and Plutowski 
climate problem than have been previously obts_ined using conventional methods. 
Figure 1 illustrates a radial basis functien (RBF) network. Radial basis functions have 
been used to solve mapping and function estimation problems with positive results 
(Moody and Darken, 1989; Lipproart, 1991). When coupled with a dynamic neuron 
allocation algorithm such as Platt's RANN (Platt, 1991), RBF networks can usually be 
trained much more quickly than a traditional sigmoidal, back-propagation network. 
RBF networks have been implemented with completely-analog (Platt, Anderson and Kirk, 
1993), completely-digital (Watkins, Chau and Tawel, Nov., 1992), and with hybrid analog/ 
digital approaches (Watkins, Chau and Tawel, Oct., 1992). The hybrid approach is optimal 
for applications which require low power consumption and use input data that is naturally 
in the analog domain while also requiring the high precision of the digital domain. 
2.0 System Architecture and Benefits 
Figure 2 shows the mapping of the RBF network to hardware. Figure 3 shows the 
neurocomputex development system. The system consists of a PC controller, a DSP board 
with a Motorola 56000 DSP chip and a board with analog multipliers. The benefits of the 
hybrid approach are lower-cost parallelism than is possible with a completely-digital 
system, and more precise computation than is possible with a completely-analog system. 
The parallelism is available for low cost in terms of area and power, when the inputs are in 
the analog domain. When comparing a single analog multiplier to a 10-bit fixed point 
digital multiplier, the analog cell uses less than one-quarter the area and approximately 
five orders of magnitude less power. When comparing an array of analog multipliers to a 
Motorola 56000 DSP chip, 1000 Gilbert multipliers can fit in an area about haft the size of 
the DSP chip, while consuming .003% of the power. 
The restriction of requiring analog inputs is placed on the system, because if the inputs 
were digital, the high cost of D to A conversion would remove the low cost benefit of the 
system. This restriction causes the neurocomputer to be targeted for applications using 
inputs that are in the analog domain, such as remote sensing applications that use 
microwave or infrared sensors and speech recognition applications that use analog filters. 
The hybrid system reduces the overall system error when compared with a completely- 
analog solution. The digital circuits compute the hidden and output layers with 24 bits of 
precision while analog circuits are limited to about 8 bits of precision. Also the RANN 
algorithm requires a large range of width variation for the Gaussian function and this is 
more easily achieved with digital computation. Completely analog solutions to this 
problem are severely limited by the voltage rails of the chip. 
3.0 Circuits 
Several different analog circuit approaches were explored as possible implementations of 
the network. After the dust settled, we chose to implement only the input layer with analog 
circuits because it offers the greatest oppommity for parallelism, providing parallel 
performance benefits at a low cost in terms of area and power. The input layer requires 
more than O (N 2) computations (where N is the number of neurons), while the hidden and 
output layers require only O(N)computafions (because there is one hidden layer 
computation per neuron and the number of outputs is either one or very small). 
A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer and Its Applications 853 
The analog circuits used in the input layer are Gilbert multipliers (Mead, 1989).'The 
circuits were fabricated with 2.0 micron, double-poly, P-well, CMOS technology. The 
Gilbert cell performs the operation of multiplying two voltage differences: (V1-V2)x(VY 
V4). In this system, V1 =V3 and V2=V4, which causes the circuit to compute the square of 
the difference between a stored weight and the input. The current outputs of the Gilbert 
cells in a row are wired together to sum their currents, giving a sum of squared errors. This 
current is converted to a voltage, fed to an A to D converter and then passed to the DSP 
board where the hidden and output layers are computed. The radial basis function 
(Gaussian) of the hidden layer is computed by using a lookup table. The system uses the 
fast multiply/accumulate operation of the DSP chip to compute the output layer. 
4.0 Applications 
The low-power feature of the hybrid system makes it attractive for applications where 
power consumption is a prime consideration, such as satellite-based applications and 
portable computing (using battery power). The neurocomputer has been applied to three 
problems: a remote sensing climate problem, the Mackey-Glass chaotic time series 
estimation and speech phoneme mco.tmitict. The remote sensing application falls into the 
satellite category. The Mackey-Glass and speech recognition applications are potentially 
portable. Systems for these applications are likely to have inputs in the analog domain 
(eliminating the need for D to A conversion, as already discussed) making it feasible to 
execute them on the hybrid neurocomputer. 
4.1 The Remote Sensing Application 
The remote sensing problem is an inverse mapping problem that uses microwave energy 
in different bands as input to predict the water vapor content of the atmosphere at different 
altitudes. Water vapor content is a key parameter for predicting weather in the tropics and 
mid-latitudes (Kakar and Lambrigtsen, 1984). The application uses 12 inputs and 1 output. 
The system input is naturally in analog form, the result of amplified microwave signals, so 
no D to A conversion of input data is required. Others have used neural networks with 
success to perform a similar inverse mapping to predict the temperature gradient of the 
atmosphere (Motteler et al., 1993). Section 5 details the improved restfits of the RBF 
network over conventional methods. Since water vapor content is a very important 
comptment of climate models, improved results in predicted water vapor content means 
improved climate models. 
Remote sensing problems require satellite hardware where power consumptioxt is always a 
major constraint. The low-power nature of the hybrid network would allow the network to 
be placed on board a satellite. With future EOS missions requiring several thousand 
sensors, the on-board network would reduce the bandwidth requirements of the data being 
sent back to earth, allowing the reduced water vapor content data to be transmitted rather 
than the raw sensor data. This data bandwidth reduction could be used either to send back 
more meaningful data to further improve climate models, or to reduce the mount of data 
transmitted, saving energy. 
4.2 The Mackey-Glass Application 
The Mackey-Glass chaotic time series application uses several previous time sample 
values to predict the current value of a time series which was generated by the Mackey- 
Glass delay-difference equation. It was used because it has proved to be difficult for 
854 Watkins, Chau, Tawel, Lambrigsten, and Plutowski 
sigmoidal neural networks (Platt, 1991). The application uses 4 inputs and 1 output. The 
Mackey-Glass time series is representative of time series found in medical apphcations 
such as detecting arrh_hmias in heartbeats. It could be advantageous to implement this 
application with portable hardware. 
4.3 The Speech Phoneme Recognition Application 
The speech phoneme recognition problem used the same data as Waibel (Waibel et al., 
1989) to learn to recognize the acoustically similar phoneroes of b, d and g. The 
application uses 240 inputs and 3 outputs. The speech phoneme recognition problem 
represents a sub problem of the more difficult continuous speech recogtion problem. 
Speech recognition applications also represent opportjnities for portable computing. 
5.0 Results 
5.1 The Remote Sensing Application 
Using the RBF neural network on the remote sensing climate problem produced 
significantly better results than had been previously obtained using conventional statistical 
methods (Kakar and Lambrigtsen, 1984). The input layer of the RBF network was 
implemented in two different ways: 1) it was simulated with 32-bit floating point precision 
to represent a digital input layer, and 2) it was implemented with the analog Gilbert 
multipliers as the input layer. Both implementations produced similar results. 
At an altitude corresponding to 570 mb pressure, the RBF neural network with a digital 
input layer produced results with .33 absolute rms error vs..42 rms error for the best 
results using conventional methods. This is an improvement of 21%. Figure 4 shows the 
plot of retrieved rs. actual water vapor content for both the RBF network and the 
conventional method. Using the hybrid neurocompnter with the analog input layer for the 
data at 570 mb pressure produced results with .338 rms error. This is an improvement of 
19.5% over the conventional method. Using the analog input layer produced nearly as 
much improvement as a completely-digital system, demonstrating the feasibility of 
placing the network on board a satellite. Similar results were obtained for other altitudes. 
The RBF network also was compared to a sigmoidal network using back propagation 
learning enhanced with line-search capability (to automatically set step-size). Both 
networks used eight neurons in the hidden layer. As Figure 5 shows, the RBF network 
learned much faster than the sigmoidal network. 
Key' 
+ w stariatieal mthod + o 
J o + 
0 I 2 ' --- 
Actual Specific Humtdd 
Figure 4: Comparison of Retrieved vs. Acm_a_l Water Vapor Content for 570 mb Pressure 
for RBF Network and Conventional Statistical Method 
A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer and Its Applications 855 
solid - rbf software 
08 dash .ed = rbf analog hardwine 
dottea - sigmoid bckprop 
06 
o ..........  *--,  ......... 
1 2 4 $ 7 8 g 
number of passes through training pattern. x 104 
Figram 5: Comparison of T_aming Curves for R.BF and SimoidaJ Networks for Water 
Vapor Application 
0 25 
02 
015 
01 
Key' 
solid = rbf software 
dashed = rbf analog hardware 
dotted - sigmoid backpop 
number of passes through training patterns x 104 
Figure 6: Comparison of Learning Curves for RBF and Sigmoidal Networks for Mackey- 
Glass Application 
5.2 The Mackey-Glass Application 
The RBF network was not compared to any non-neural network method for the Mackey- 
Glass time series estimation. It was only compared to a traditional sis, moidal network 
using back propagation learning enhanced with line search. Both networks used four neu- 
rons. As Figure 6 shows, applying the RBF neural network to the Mackey-Glass chaotic 
time series estimation produced much faster learning than the sigmoidal network. The 
RBF network with a digital input layer and the RBF hybrid network with an analog input 
layer both produced similar results in droppiag to an rms error of about .025 after only 5 
minutes of training on a PC using a 486 CPU. 
Using the digital input layer, the RBF network reached a minimum absolute rats error of 
.017, while the sigmoidal network reached a minimum absolute rrns error of .025. This is 
an improvement of 32% over the sigmoidal network. Using the hybrid neuroctmaputer 
with the analog input layer produced a minim_m absolute rms error of .022. This is an 
improvement of 12% over the sis, moidal network 
856 Watkins, Chau, Tawel, Lambrigsten, and Plutowski 
5.3 The Speech Phoneme Recognition Application 
The RBF network was not compared to any non-neural network method for the speech 
phoneme recognition problem. It was only compared to Waibel's Time Delay Neural 
Network (TDNN) (Waibel et al., 1989). The TDNN uses a topology matched to the time- 
varying nature of speech with two hidden layers of eight and three neurons respectively. 
The RBF network used a single hidden layer with the number of neurons varying between 
eight and one hundred. 
The TDNN achieved a 98% accuracy on the test set discriminating between the phoneroes 
b, d and g. The RBF network achieved over 99% accuracy in training, but was only able to 
achieve an 86% accuracy on the test set. To obtain better results, it is clear that the 
topology of the RBF network needs to be altered to more closely match Waibel's TDNN. 
However, this topology will complicate the VLSI implementation. 
5.4 The Feasibility of Using the Analog Input Layer 
One potential problem with using an analog input layer is that every individual hybrid 
RBF neurocomputer might need to be trained on a problem, rather than being able to use a 
common set of weights obtained from another RBF neurocomputer (which had been 
previously trained). This potential problem exists because every analog circuit is unique 
due to variation in the fabrication process. A set of experiments was designed to test this 
possibility. 
The remote sensing application and the Mackey-Glass application were trained and tested 
two different ways: 1) hardware-trained/hardware-tested, that is, the analog input layer 
was used for both training and testing; 2) software-trained/hardware-tested, that is the 
analog input layer was simulated with 32-bit floating point precision for training and then 
the analog hardware was used for testing..The hardware/hardware restfits provided a 
benchmark. The software/hardware results demonstrated the feasibility of having a 
standard set of weights that are not particular to a given set of analog hardware. For both 
the remote sensing and the Mackey-Glass applications, the rms error performance was 
only slightly degraded by using weights learned during software simulation. The remote 
sensing results degraded by only .011 in terms of absolute rms error, and the Mackey- 
Glass results degraded by only .002 in terms of absolute rms error. The results of the 
experiment indicate that each individual hybrid RBF neurocomputer only needs to be 
calibrated, not trained. 
6.0 Conclusions 
A low-power, hybrid analog/digital neurocomputer development system was constructed 
using custom hardware. The system implements a radial basis function (RBF) network 
and is targeted for applications that require low power consumption and use analog data as 
their input, particularly remote sensing and portable applications. Several applications 
were executed and results were obtained for a remote sensing application that are superior 
to any previous results. Comparison of the restfits of a completely-digital simulation of the 
RBF network and the hybrid analog/digital RBF network demonstrated the feasibility of 
the hybrid approach. 
A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer and Its Applications 857 
Acknowledgments 
The research described in this paper was performed at the Center for Space 
Microelectronics Technology, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, and was sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
One of the authors, Steven S. Watkins, acknowledges the receipt of a Graduate Student 
Researcher's Center Fellowship from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
Useful discussions with Silvio Ebedt, Ron Fellman, Eric Fossnm, Doug Kerns, 
Fernando Pined& John Platt, and Anil Thakoor are also gratefully acknowledged. 
References 
Rsmesh Kakar and Bjom Lambrigtsen, "A Statistical Correlation Method for the Retrieval 
of Atmospheric Moisture Profiles by Microwave Radiomerry," Journal of Climate and 
Applied Meteorology, vol. 23, no. 7, July 1984, pp. 1110-1114. 
R. P. Lippman, "A Critical Overview of Neural Network Pattern Classifiers," Proceedings 
of the IEEE Neural Networks for Signal Processing Workshop, 1991, Princeton, N3., pp. 
266-275. 
Carver Mead, Analog VLSI and Neural Systems, Addison-Wesley, 1989, pp. 90-94. 
J. Moody and C. Darken, "Fast Learning in Networks of Locally-Tuned Precessing 
Units," Neural Computation, vol. 1, no. 2, Summer 1989, pp. 281-294. 
Howard Motteler, J.A. Gualtieri, L.L. Strow and Larry McMillin, "Neural Networks for 
Atmospheric Retrievals," NASA Goddard Conference on Space Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence, 1993, pp. 155-167. 
John Hart, "A Resource-Allocating Neural Network for Function Interpolation," Neural 
Computation, vol. 3, no. 2, Summer 1991, pp. 213-225. 
John Platt, Janeen Anderson and David B. Kirk, "An Analog VLSI Chip for Radial Basis 
Functions," NIPS 5, 1993, pp. 765-772. 
Alexander Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Binton, K. Shikano and K. Lang, "Phoneme 
Recognition Using Tune-Delay Neural Networks," IEEE International Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, May 1989, pp. 393-404. 
Steve Watkins, Paul Chau and Raoul Tawel, "A Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer 
with an Analog Input Layer," Proceedings of the IJCNN, Beijing, China, November 1992, 
pp. n1225-230. 
Steve Watkins, Paul Chau and Raoul Tawel, "Different Approaches to Implementing A 
Radial Basis Function Neurocomputer," RNNS/IEEE Symposium on Neuroinformatics 
and Neurocomputing, Rostov-on-Don, Russia, October 1992, pp. 1149-1155. 
