A Dynamical Model of Context Dependencies for the 
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 
O!ivier J.M.D. Coenen* 
Terrence J. Sejnowskit 
Computational Neurobiology Laboratory 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road 
La Jolla, CA 92037, U.S.A. 
Departments of tBiology and **Physics 
University of California, San Diego 
La Jolla, CA 92093, U.S.A 
{olivier, terry}@salk. edu 
Abstract 
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) stabilizes images on the retina during rapid 
head motions. The gain of the VOR (the ratio of eye to head rotation velocity) 
is typically around -1 when the eyes are focused on a distant target. However, to 
stabilize images accurately, the VOR gain must vary with context (eye position, 
eye vergerice and head translation). We first describe a kinematic model of the 
VOR which relies solely on sensory information available from the semicircular 
canals (head rotation), the otoliths (head translation), and neural correlates of eye 
position and vergerice angle. We then propose a dynamical model and compare it 
to the eye velocity responses measured in monkeys. The dynamical model repro- 
duces the observed amplitude and time course of the modulation of the VOR and 
suggests one way to combine the required neural signals within the cerebellum and 
the brain stem. It also makes predictions for the responses of neurons to multiple 
inputs (head rotation and translation, eye position, etc.) in the oculomotor system. 
1 Introduction 
The VOR stabilizes images on the retina during rapid head motions: Rotations and translations of 
the head in three dimensions must be compensated by appropriate rotations of the eye. Because the 
head's rotation axis is not the same as the eye's rotation axis, the calculations for proper image stabi- 
lization of an object must take into account diverse variables such as object distance from each eye, 
90 O.J.M.D. COENEN, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
gaze direction, and head translation (Viire et al., 1986). The stabilization is achieved by integrating 
information from different sources: head rotations from the semicircular canals of the inner ear, head 
translations from the otolith organs, eye positions, viewing distance, as well as other context informa- 
tion, such as posture (head tilts) or activity (walking, running) (Snyder and King, 1992; Shelhamer 
et a1.,1992; Grossman et al., 1989). In this paper we concentrate on the context modulation of the 
VOR which can be described by the kinematics of the reflex, i.e. eye position, eye vergence and 
head translation. 
2 The Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex: Kinematic Model 
Definition of Vectors 
Coordinate System 
Yece position 
for 
Head 
Top View 
D Target Object 
/ 'l Gaze Vector 
'l 0'-'"- 0 Gaze Angle 
 / I nterocular 
I A-  Distance 
ak \ al l Semicircular 
 \ I ll Canals and 
/ 
. / Origin of c.o?,iinate 
 J systeva (arb,h'ary) 
Figure 1: Diagram showing the definition of the vectors used in the equation of the kinematic model of the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex. 
The ideal VOR response is a compensatory eye movement which keeps the image fixed on the retina 
for any head rotations and translations. We therefore derived an equation for the eye rotation velocity 
by requiring that a target remains stationary on the retina. The velocity of the resulting compensatory 
eye rotation can be written as (see fig. 1): 
(1) 
where c is the head rotation velocity sensed by the semicircular canals, foj is the head translation 
velocity sensed by the otoliths, cj = (ff - 6j), ff is a constant vector specifying the location of an 
eye in the head, j is the position of either the left or right otolith, õ and Igl are the unit vector and 
amplitude of the gaze vector: õ gives the eye position (orientation of the eye relative to the head), 
and Igl gives the distance from the eye to the object, and the symbol x indicates the cross-product 
between two vectors.  and ½ are rotation vectors which describe the instantaneous angular velocity 
of the eye and head, respectively. A rotation vector lies along the instantaneous axis of rotation; 
its magnitude indicates the speed of rotation around the axis,_,and its direction is gven by the right- 
hand screw rule. A motion of the head combining rotation (f) and translation (T) is sensed as the 
combination of a rotation velocity ft½ measured by the semicircular canals and a translation velocity 
fo sensed by the otoliths. The rotation vectors are equal (_. = c), and the translation velocity vector 
as measured by the otoliths is given by: 2noj = t./ x fl + f, where t./ _= ( - 3./), and  is the 
position vector of the axis of rotation. 
A Dynamical Model of Context Dependencies for the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 91 
The special case where the gaze is horizontal and the rotation vector is vertical (horizontal head ro- 
tation) has been studied extensively in the literature. We used this special case in the simulations. 
In that case  may,be simplify by writing its equation with dot products. Since õ and ½ are then 
perpendicular (õ. ft½= 0), the first term of the following expression in brackets is zero: 
1 
= + 17 - - X Vo] 
(2) 
The semicircular canals decompose and report acceleration and velocity of head rotation  by its 
components along the three canals on each side of the head c ' horizontal, anterior and posterior. 
The two otolith organs on each side report the dynamical inertial forces generated during linear mo- 
tion (translation) in two perpendicular plane, one vertical and the other horizontal relative to the head. 
Here we assume that a translation velocity signal (fo) derived from or reported by the otolith affer- 
ents is available. The otoliths encode as well the head orientation relative to the gravity vector force, 
but was not included in this study. 
To complete the correspondence between the equation and a neural correlate, we need to determine 
a physiological source for õ and I-Y' The eye position õ is assumed to be given by the output of the 
velocity-to-position transformation or so-called "neural integrator" which provides eye position in- 
fomarion and which is necessary for the activation of the motoneuron to sustain the eye in a fixed 
position. The integrator for horizontal eye position appears to be located in the nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi in the pons, and the vertical integrator in the midbrain interstitial nucleus of Cajal. (Craw- 
ford, Cadera and Vilis, 1991; Cannon and Robinson, 1987). We assume that the eye position is given 
as the coordinates of the unit vector õ along the/x and  of fig. 1. The eye position depends on the 
eye velocity according to - = õ x 3. For the special case (t) = w(t), i.e. for horizontal head 
rotation, the eye position coordinates are given by: 
(t) = (0) + f2 
9(t) = 9(0) - f2 
(3) 
This is a set of two negatively coupled integrators. The "neural integrator" therefore does not inte- 
grate the eye velocity directly but a product of eye position and eye velocity. The distance from eye 
1 
to target I- can be written using the gaze angles in the horizontal plane of the head: 
 sin(On - 0L) 1 sec(0L) sin(On - 0) (4) 
Right eye: 1--[ = Icos(0/) =7 
Left eye:  _ sin(On - 0) 1 sec(0n) sin(On - 0) (5) 
177[ - I cos(On) = 7 
where (On - 0) is the vergence angle, and I is the interocular distance; the angles are measured from 
a straight ahead gaze, and take on negative values when the eyes are turned towards the right. Within 
the oculomotor system, the vergence angle and speed are encoded by the mesencephalic reticular 
formation neurons (Judge and Cumming, 1986; Mays, 1984). The nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis 
with reciprocal connections to the flocculus, oculomotor vermis, paravermis of the cerebellum also 
contains neurons which activity varies linearly with vergence angle (Gamlin and Clarke, 1995). 
We conclude that it is possible to perform the computations needed to obtain an ideal VOR with sig- 
nals known to be available physiologically. 
92 O.J.M.D. COENEN, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
Dynamical Model Overview 
Cabdlum 
Figure 2: Anatomical connections considered in the dynamical model. Only the left side is shown, the right 
side is identical and connected to the left side only for the calculation of vergence angle. The nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi and the nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis are meant to be representative of a class of nuclei in the 
brain stem carrying eye position or vergence signal. All connections are known to exist except the connection 
between the prepositus nucleus to the reticularis nucleus which has not been verified. Details of the cerebellum 
are in fig. 3 and of the vestibular nucleus in fig. 4. 
3 Dynamical Model 
Snyder & King (1992) studied the effect of viewing distance and location of the axis of rotation on 
the VOR in monkeys; their main results are reproduced in fig. 5. In an attempt to reproduce their 
data and to understand how the signals that we have described in section 2 may be combined in time, 
we constructed a dynamical model based on the kinematic model. Its basic anatomical structure is 
shown in fig. 2. Details of the model are shown in fig. 3, and fig. 4 where all constants are written 
using a millisecond time scale. The results are presented in fig. 5. The dynamical variables represent 
the change of average firing rate from resting level of activity. The firing rate of the afferents has a 
tonic component proportional to the velocity and a phasic component proportional to the acceleration 
of movement. Physiologically, the afferents have a wide range ofphasic and tonic amplitudes. This 
is reflected by a wide selection of parameters in the numerators in the boxes of fig. 3 and fig. 4. The 
Laplace transform of the integration operator in equation (3) of the eye position coordinates is 
8 
Following Robinson (1981), we modeled the neural integrator with a gain and a time constant of 
 with 20000 in the calculations of eye 
20 seconds. We therefore replaced the pure integrator; 20000s+ 
- in fig. 3 is calculated by using equations (4) and (5), and by using the integrator 
position. The term g 
200o0 on the eye velocity motor command to find the angles 0L and 
20000s+ 1 
The dynamical model is based on the assumption that the cerebellum is required for context modula- 
tion, and that because of its architecture, the cerebellum is more likely to implement complex func- 
tions of multiple signals than other relevant nuclei. The major contributions of vergence and eye 
position modulation on the VOR are therefore mediated by the cerebellum. Smaller and more tran- 
sient contributions from eye position are assumed to be mediated through the vestibular nucleus as 
shown in fig. 4. The motivation for combining eye position as in fig. 4 are, first, the evidence for eye 
response oscillations; second, the theoretical consideration that linear movement information (fo) is 
useless without eye position information for proper VOR. 
The parameters in the dynamical model were adjusted by hand after observing the behavior of the dif- 
ferent components of the model and noting how these combine to produce the oscillations observed 
A Dynamical Model of Context Dependencies for the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 93 
Vestibular 
Semircular 
Canal 
Cerebellum 
Nudeus 
Prepmirus 
(Vesence) Nucleus 
Figure 3: Contribution of the cerebellum to the dynamical model. Filtered velocity inputs from the canals and 
otoliths are combined with eye position according to equation (2). These calculations could be performed either 
outside the cerebellum in one or multiple brain stem nuclei (as shown) or possibly inside the cerebellum. The 
only output is to the vestibular nucleus. The Laplace notation is used in each boxes to represent a leaky integrator 
with a time constant, input derivative and input gain. The term oe are the coordinates of the vector & shown 
in fig. 1. The x indicates a multiplication. The term  multiplies each inputs individually. The open arrows 
indicate inhibitory (negative) connections. 
Vttbnlar 
Semlcitula 
Canal 
Cerebellum 
Vestibular 
Nudes 
Figure 4: Contribution of the vestibular nucleus to the dynamical model. Three pathways in the vestibular nu- 
cleus process the canal and otolith inputs to drive the eye. The first pathway is modulated by the output of the 
cerebellum through a FTN (Flocculus Target Neuron). The second and third pathways report transient informa- 
tion from the inputs which are combined with eye position in a manner identical to fig. 3. The location of these 
calculations is hypothetical. 
in the data. Even though the number of parameters in the model is not small, it was not possible to 
fit any single response in fig. 5 without affecting most of the other eye responses. This puts severe 
limits on the set of parameters allowed in the model. 
The dynamical model suggests that the oscillations present in the data reflect: 1) important accelera- 
tion components in the neural signals, both rotational and linear, 2) different time delays between the 
canal and otolith signal processing, and 3) antagonistic or synergistic action of the canal and otolith 
signals with different axes of rotation, as described by the two terms in the bracket of equation (2). 
4 Discussion 
By fitting the dynamical model to the data, we tested the hypothesis that the VOR has a response 
close to ideal taking into account the time constraints imposed by the sensory inputs and the neural 
networks performing the computations. The vector computations that we used in the model may not 
94 O.J.M.D. COENEN, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
Dynamical Model Responses vs Experimental Data 
Time (ms) Time (ms) 
Figure 5: Comparison between the dynamical model and monkey data. The dotted lines show the effect of 
viewing distance and location of the axis of rotation on the VOR as recorded by Snyder & King (1992) from 
monkeys in the dark. The average eye velocity response (of left and right eye) to a sudden change in head ve- 
locity is shown for different target distances (left) and rotational axes (right). On the left, the location of the axis 
of rotation was in the midsagittal plane 12.5 cm behind the eyes (-12.5 cm), and the target distance was varied 
between 220 cm and 9 cm. On the right, the target distance was kept constant at 9 cm in front of the eye, and the 
location of the axis of rotation was varied from 14 cm behind to 4 cm in front of the eyes (-14 cm to 4 cm) in the 
midsagittal plane. The solid lines show the model responses. The model replicates many characteristics of the 
data. On the left the model captures the eye velocity fluctuations between 20-50 ms, followed by a decrease and 
an increase which are both modulated with target distance (50-80 ms). The later phase of the response (80-100 
ms) is almost exact for 220 cm, and one peak is seen at the appropriate location for the other distances. On the 
right the closest fits were obtained for the 4 cm and 0 cm locations. The mean values are in good agreement and 
the waveforms are close, but could be shifted in time for the other locations of the axis of rotations. Finally, the 
latest peak (~ 100 ms) in the data appears in the model for -14 cm and 9 cm location. 
be the representation used in the oculomotor system. Mathematically, the vector representation is 
only one way to describe the computations involved. Other representations exist such as the quater- 
nion representation which has been studied in the context of the saccadic system (Tweed and Vilis, 
1987; see also Handzel and Flash, 1996 for a very general representation). Detailed comparisons 
between the model and recordings from neurons will be require to settle this issue. 
Direct comparison between Purkinje cell recordings (L.H. Snyder & W.M. King, unpublished data) 
and predictions of the model could be used to determine more precisely the different inputs to some 
Purkinje cells. The model can therefore be an important tool to gain insights difficult to obtain di- 
rectly with experiments. 
The question of how the central nervous system learns the transformations that we described still 
remains. The cerebellum may be one site of learning for these transformations, and its output may 
modulate the VOR in real time depending on the context. This view is compatible with the results 
of Angelaki and Hess (1995) which indicate that the cerebellum is required to correctly perform an 
otolith transformation. It is also consistent with adaptation results in the VOR. To test this hypothesis, 
we have been working on a model of the cerebellum which learns to anticipate sensory inputs and 
feedbacks, and use these signals to modulate the VOR. The learning in the cerebellum and vestibular 
nuclei is mediated by the climbing fibers which report a reinforcement signal of the prediction error 
(Coenen and Sejnowski, in preparation). 
A Dynamical Model of Context Dependencies for the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 95 
5 Conclusion 
Most research on the VOR has assumed forward gaze focussed at infinity. The kinematics of off- 
center gaze and fixation at finite distance necessitates nonlinear corrections that require the integra- 
tion of a variety of sensory inputs. The dynamical model studied here is a working hypothesis for 
how these corrections could be computed and is generally consistent with what is known about the 
cerebellum and brain stem nuclei. We are, however, far from knowing the mechanisms underlying 
these computations, or how they are learned through experience. 
6 Acknowledgments 
The first author was supported by a McDonnell-Pew Graduate Fellowship during this research. We 
would like to thank Paul Viola for helpful discussions. 
References 
Angelaki, D. E. and Hess, B. J. (1995). Inertial representation of angular motion in the vestibular system of rhe- 
sus monkeyus. II. Otolith-controlled transformation that depends on an intact cerebellar nodulus. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 73(5): 1729-1751. 
Cannon, S.C. and Robinson, D. A. (1987). Loss of the neural integrator of the oculomotor system from brain 
stem lesions in monkey. Journal of Neurophysiology, 57(5): 1383-1409. 
Crawford, J. D., Cadera, W., and Vilis, T. (1991). Generation of torsional and vertical eye position signals by 
the interstitial nucleus of Cajal. Science, 252:1551-1553. 
Gamlin, P. D. R. and Clarke, R. J. (1995). Single-unit activity in the primate nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis 
related to vergence and ocular accomodation. Journal of Neurophysiology, 73(5):2115-2119. 
Grossman, G. E., Leigh, R. J., Bruce, E. N., Huebner, W. P., and Lanska, D. J. (1989). Performance of the human 
vestibuloocular reflex during locomotion. Journal of Neurophysiology, 62(1):264-272. 
Handzel, A. A. and Flash, T. (1996). The geometry of eye rotations and listing's law. In Touretzky, D., Mozer, 
M., and Hasselmo, M., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8, Cambridge, MA. 
MIT Press. 
Judge, S. J. and Cumming, B. G. (1986). Neurons in the monkey midbrain with activity related to vergence eye 
movement and accomodation. Journal of Neurophysiology, 55:915-930. 
Mays, L. E. (1984). Neural control of vergence eye movements: Convergence and divergence neurons in mid- 
brain. Journal of Neurophysiology, 51:1091-1108. 
Robinson, D. A. (1981). The use of control systems analysis in the neurophysiology of eye movements. Ann. 
Rev. Neurosci., 4:463-503. 
Shelhamer, M., Robinson, D. A., and Tan, H. S. (1992). Context-specific adaptation of the gain of the vestibulo- 
ocular reflex in humans. Journal of Vestibular Research, 2:89-96. 
Snyder, L. H. and King, W. M. (1992). Effect of viewing distance and location of the axis of head rotation on the 
monkey's vestibuloocular reflex I. eye movement response. Journal of Neurophysiology, 67(4):861-874. 
Tweed, D. and Vilis, T. (1987). Implications of rotational kinematics for the oculomotor system in three dimen- 
sions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 58(4):832-849. 
Viire, E., Tweed, D., Milner, K., and Vilis, T. (1986). A reexamination of the gain of the vestibuloocular reflex. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 56(2):439-450. 
