REMAP: Recursive Estimation and 
Maximization of A Posteriori 
Probabilities- Application to 
Transition-Based Connectionist Speech 
Recognition 
Yochai Konig, Herv Bourlard and Nelson Morgan 
konig,bourlard,morgan)@icsi.berkeley.edu 
International Computer Science Institute 
1947 Center Street Berkeley, CA 94704, USA. 
Abstract 
In this paper, we introduce REMAP, an approach for the training 
and estimation of posterior probabilities using a recursive algorithm 
that is reminiscent of the EM-based Forward-Backward (Liporace 
1982) algorithm for the estimation of sequence likelihoods. Al- 
though very general, the method is developed in the context of a 
statistical model for transition-based speech recognition using Ar- 
tificial Neural Networks (ANN) to generate probabilities for Hid- 
den Markov Models (HMMs). In the new approach, we use local 
conditional posterior probabilities of transitions to estimate global 
posterior probabilities of word sequences. Although we still use 
ANNs to estimate posterior probabilities, the network is trained 
with targets that are themselves estimates of local posterior proba- 
bilities. An initial experimental result shows a significant decrease 
in error-rate in comparison to a baseline system. 
I INTRODUCTION 
The ultimate goal in speech recognition is to determine the sequence of words that 
has been uttered. Classical pattern recognition theory shows that the best possi- 
ble system (in the sense of minimum probability of error) is the one that chooses 
the word sequence with the maximum a posteriori probability (conditioned on the 
*Also a/tiliated with with Facult Polytechnique de Mons, Mons, Belgium 
REMAP: Recursive Estimation and Maximization of A Posteriori Probabilities 389 
evidence). If word sequence i is represented by the statistical model Mi, and the 
evidence (which, for the application reported here, is acoustical) is represented by 
a sequence X - {xx,..., x,..., XN}, then we wish to choose the sequence that 
corresponds to the largest P(MiIX). In (Bourlard & Morgan 1994), summarizing 
earlier work (such as (Boarlard & Wellekens 1989)), we showed that it was possi- 
ble to compute the global a posteriori probability P(MIX ) of a discriminant form 
of Hidden Markov Model (Discriminant HMM), M, given a sequence of acoustic 
vectors X. In Discriminant HMMs, the global a posteriori probability P(MIX ) is 
computed as follows: if F represents all legal paths (state sequences qx, q2,..., qN) 
in Mi, N being the length of the sequence, then 
P(MiIX) = E P(Mi, q, q2, . . . , qvlX) 
F 
in which q, represents the specific state hypothesized at time n, from the set Q = 
{qX,..., qt, qa,..., qK} of all possible HMM states making up all possible models 
Mi. We can further decompose this into: 
P(Mi, qx, q2, . . . , qNI X) = P(q, q2, . . . , qNIX)P(Milqx, qe, . . . , qN, X) 
Under the assumptions stated in (Boutlard & Morgan 1994) we can compute 
N 
P(qx'q'''"qNIX) = 1-[ p(q]q,-x,x,) 
The Discriminant HMM is thus described in terms of conditional transition proba- 
bilities p(ql  x,), in which t 
q,_ , q, stands for the specific state qt of Q hypothesized 
at time n and can be schematically represented as in Figure 1. 
P(/k/I/k/, x) P(/ae./I/ae./, x) P(/t/I/t/, x) 
P(/ae./I/k/, x) P(/t/I/ae./, x) 
Figure 1: An example Discriminant HMM for the word "cat". The variable x refers 
to a specific acoustic observation x, at time n. 
Finally, given a state sequence we assume the following approximation: 
P(Milqi,q2, ...,qN, X)  P(Milqx,q2,...,qN) 
We can estimate the right side of this last equation from a phonological model (in 
the case that a given state sequence can belong to two different models). All the 
required (local) conditional transition probabilities p(qtlq}_x, x,) can be estimated 
by the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) shown in Figure 2. 
Recent work at ICSI has provided us with further insight into the discriminant 
HMM, particularly in light of recent work on transition-based models (Konig & 
Morgan 1994; Morgan et al. 1994). This new perspective has motivated us to further 
develop the original Discriminant HMM theory. The new approach uses posterior 
probabilities at both local and global levels and is more discriminant in nature. 
In this paper, we introduce the Recursive Estimation-Maximization of A posteriori 
390 Y. KONIG, H. BOURLARD, N. MORGAN 
P(Current_state I Acoustics, Previous_state) 
0.1..0 
Previous Acoustics 
State 
Figure 2: An MLP that estimates local conditional transition probabilities. 
Probabilities (REMAP) training algorithm for hybrid HMM/MLP systems. The 
proposed algorithm models a probability distribution over all possible transitions 
(from all possible states and for all possible time frames n) rather than picking a 
single time point as a transition target. Furthermore, the algorithm incrementally 
increases the posterior probability of the correct model, while reducing the posterior 
probabilities of all other models. Thus, it brings the overall system closer to the 
optimal Bayes classifier. 
A wide range of discriminant approaches to speech recognition have been studied 
by researchers (Katagiri et al. 1991; Bengio et al. 1992; Bourlard et al. 1994). A 
significant difficulty that has remained in applying these approaches to continuous 
speech recognition has been the requirement to run computationally intensive algo- 
rithms on all of the rival sentences. Since this is not generally feasible, compromises 
must always be made in practice. For instance, estimates for all rival sentences can 
be derived from a list of the "N-best" utterance hypotheses, or by using a fully 
connected word model composed of all phonemes. 
2 REMAP TRAINING OF THE DISCRIMINANT HMM 
2.1 MOTIVATIONS 
The discriminant HMM/MLP theory as described above uses transition-based prob- 
abilities as the key building block for acoustic recognition. However, it is well known 
that estimating transitions accurately is a difficult problem (Glass 1988). Due to 
the inertia of the articulators, the boundaries between phones are blurred and over- 
lapped in continuous speech. In our previous hybrid HMM/MLP system, targets 
were typically obtained by using a standard forced Viterbi alignment (segmenta- 
tion). For a transition-based system as defined above, this procedure would thus 
yield rigid transition targets, which is not realistic. 
Another problem related to the Viterbi-based training of the MLP presented in 
Figure 2 and used in Discriminant HMMs, is the lack of coverage of the input space 
during training. Indeed, during training (based on hard transitions), the MLP only 
processes inputs consisting of "correct" pairs of acoustic vectors and correct previous 
state, while in recognition the net should generalize to all possible combinations of 
REMAP: Recursive Estimation and Maximization of A Posteriori Probabilities 391 
acoustic vectors and previous states, since all possible models and transitions will be 
hypothesized for each acoustic input. For example, some hypothesized inputs may 
correspond to an impossible condition that has thus never been observed, such as 
the acoustics of the temporal center of a vowel in combination with a previous state 
that corresponds to a plosive. It is unfortunately possible that the interpolative 
capabilities of the network may not be sufficient to give these "impossible" pairs a 
sufficiently low probability during recognition. 
One possible solution to these problems is to use a full MAP algorithm to find tran- 
sition probabilities at each frame for all possible transitions by a forward-backward- 
like algorithm (Liporace 1982), taking all possible paths into account. 
2.2 PROBLEM FORMULATION 
As described above, global maximum a posteriori training of HMMs should find the 
optimal parameter set O maximizing 
1-I P(MjIXj, e) (1) 
j-'l 
in which Mj represents the Markov model associated with each training utterance 
Xj, with j = 1,..., J. 
Although in principle we could use a generalized back-propagation-like gradient 
procedure in O to maximize (1) (Bengio et al. 1992), an EM-like algorithm should 
have better convergence properties, and could preserve the statistical interpreta- 
tion of the ANN outputsﬂ In this case, training of the discriminant HMM by a 
global MAP criterion requires a solution to the following problem: given a trained 
MLP at iteration t providing a parameter set O t and, consequently, estimates of 
P(qlx,  or), how can we determine new MLP targets that: 
qn-1, 
1 will be smooth estimates of conditional transition probabilities  t 
ﬂ qn-1 -- qn, 
Vk,ú e [1,K] and æn e [1, N], 
2. when training the MLP for iteration t+l, will lead to new estimates of (t+x 
and P(qlx,,  
q,_x, O +1) that are guaranteed to incrementally increase the 
global posterior probability P(Mi[X, ()? 
In (Bourlard et al. 1994), we prove that a re-estimate of MLP targets that guarantee 
convergence to a local maximum of (1) is given by1: 
P*(qlx,  M) P(qlX,  
q-x, = q-x, 0, M) 
(2) 
where we have estimated the left-hand side using a mapping from the previous 
state and the local acoustic data to the current state, thus making the estimator 
realizable by an MLP with a local acoustic window? Thus, we will want to estimate 
 In most of the following, we consider only one particular training sequence X associated 
with one particular model M. It is, however, easy to see that all of our conclusions remain 
valid for the case of several training sequences Xj, j -- 1,..., J. A simple way to look 
at the problem is to consider all training sequences as a single training sequence obtained 
by concatenating all the X3's with boundary conditions at every possible beginning and 
ending point. 
2Note that, as done in our previous hybrid HMM/MLP systems, all conditional on xn 
X + {X,-c,....,x,,...,x,+} to take some acoustic context into 
can be replaced by ,-c -- 
account. 
392 Y. KONIG, H. BOURLARD, N. MORGAN 
the transition probability conditioned on the local data (as MLP targets) by using 
the transition probability conditioned on all of the data. 
In (Bourlard et al. 1994), we further prove that alternating MLP target estimation 
(the "estimation" step) and MLP training (the "maximization" step) is guaranteed 
to incrementally increase (1) over I. 3 The remaining problem is to find an efficient 
algorithm to express P(qtnIX , q-x, M) in terms of P(qlx,,  
q,-x) so that the next 
iteration targets can be found. We have developed several approaches to this esti- 
mation, some of which are described in (Bourlard et al. 1994). Currently, we are 
implementing this with an efficient recursion that estimates the sum of all possible 
paths in a model, for every possible transition at each possible time. From these 
values we can compute the desired targets (2) for network training by 
t k 
P(qIX, M, = 
q-x) P(M'q'q-xlX) 
j P(M,q,q-l X) 
2.3 REMAP TRAINING ALGORITHM 
The general scheme of the REMAP training of hybrid HMM/MLP systems can be 
summarized as follow: 
1. Start from some initial net providing P(qlx, t: o, V possible 
(k, ú)-pairs 4. 
Compute MLP targets P(qlX s, 0 
q,-x, ,Ms) according to (3), æ training 
sentences X s associated with HMM MS, V possible (k,ú) state transition 
pairs in M s and V x,, n - 1,...,N in X s (see next point). 
For every x, in the training database, train the MLP to minimize the 
relative entropy between the outputs and targets. See (Bourlard el 
1994) for more details. This provides us with a new set of parameters 
for t-t+1. 
4. Iterate from 2 until convergence. 
This procedure is thus composed of two steps: an Estimation (E) step, correspond- 
ing to step 2 above, and a Maximization (M) step, corresponding to step 3 above. 
In this regards, it is reminiscent of the Estimation-Maximization (EM) algorithm 
as discussed in (Dempster et al. 1977). However, in the standard EM algorithm, 
the M step involves the actual maximization of the likelihood function. In a related 
approach, usually referred to as Generalized EM (GEM) algorithm, the M step does 
not actually maximize the likelihood but simply increases it (by using, e.g., a gra- 
dient procedure). Similarly, REMAP increases the global posterior function during 
the M step (in the direction of targets that actually maximize that global function), 
rather than actually maximizing it. Recently, a similar approach was suggested for 
mapping input sequences to output sequences (Bengio & Frasconi 1995). 
3Note here that one "iteration" does not stand for one iteration of the MLP training 
but for one estimation-maximization iteration for which a complete MLP training will be 
required. 
4This can be done, for instance, by training up such a net from a hand-labeled database 
like TIMIT or from some initial forward-backward estimator of equivalent local probabil- 
ities (usually referred to as "gamma" probabilities in the Baum-Welch procedure). 
REMAP: Recursive Estimation and Maximization of A Posteriori Probabilities 393 
System Error Rate 
DHMM, pre-REMAP 14.9% 
I REMAP iteration 13.6% 
2 REMAP iterations 13.2% 
Table 1: Training and testing on continuous numbers, no syntax, no durational 
models. 
3 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
For testing our theory we chose the Numbers'93 corpus. It is a continuous speech 
database collected by CSLU at the Oregon Graduate Institute. It consists of num- 
bers spoken naturally over telephone lines on the public-switched network (Cole 
et al. 1994). The Numbers'93 database consists of 2167 speech files of spoken num- 
bers produced by 1132 callers. We used 877 of these utterances for training and 
657 for cross-validation and testing (200 for cross-validation) saving the remaining 
utterances for final testing purposes. There are 36 words in the vocabulary, namely 
zero, oh, 1, 2, 3,...,20, 30, 0, 50,...,100, 1000, a, and, dash, hyphen, and double. 
All our nets have 214 inputs: 153 inputs for the acoustic features, and 61 to rep- 
resent the previous state (one unit for every possible previous state, one state per 
phoneme in our case). The acoustic features are combined from 9 frames with 17 
features each (RASTA-PLP8 q- delta features q- delta log gain) computed with an 
analysis window of 25 ms computed every 12.5 ms (overlapping windows) and with 
a sampling rate of 8 Khz. The nets have 200 hidden units and 61 outputs. 
Our results are summarized in Table 1. The row entitled "DHMM, pre-REMAP" 
corresponds to a Discriminant HMM using the same training approach, with hard 
targets determined by the first system, and additional inputs to represent the previ- 
ous state The improvement in the recognition rate as a result of REMAP iterations 
is significant at p < 0.05. However all the experiments were done using acoustic 
information alone. Using our (baseline) hybrid system under equal conditions, i.e., 
no duration information and no language information, we get 31.6% word error; 
adding the duration information back we get 12.4% word error. We are currently 
experimenting with enforcing minimum duration constraints in our framework. 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
In summary: 
ﬂ We have a method for MAP training and estimation of sequences. 
This can be used in a new form of hybrid HMM/MLP. Note that recurrent 
nets or TDNNs could also be used. As with standard HMM/MLP hybrids, 
the network is used to estimate local posterior probabilities (though in this 
case they are conditional transition probabilities, that is, state probabilities 
conditioned on the acoustic data and the previous state). However, in the 
case of REMAP these nets are trained with probabilistic targets that are 
themselves estimates of local posterior probabilities. 
ﬂ Initial experiments demonstrate a significant reduction in error rate for this 
process. 
3 94 Y. KONIG, H. BOURLARD, N. MORGAN 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Kristine Ma and Su-Lin Wu for their help with the Num- 
bers'93 database. We also thank OGI, in particular to Ron Cole, for providing the 
database. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Office of Naval Research, 
URI No. N00014-92-J-1617 (via UCB), the European Commission via ESPRIT 
project 20077 (SPRACH), and ICSI and FPMs in general for supporting this work. 
References 
BENGIO, Y., & P. FRASCONI. 1995. An input output HMM architecture. 
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, ed. by G. Tesauro, 
D. Touretzky, & T. Leen, volume 7. Cambridge: MIT press. 
, R. Dr MORI, G. FLAMMIA,  R. KOMPE. 1992. Global optimization of a 
neural network-hidden Markov model hybrid. IEEE trans. on Neural Networks 
3.252-258. 
BOURLARD, H., Y. KONIG, & N. MORGAN. 1994. REMAP: Recursive estimation 
and maximization of a postertort probabilities, application to transition-based 
connectionist speech recognition. Technical Report TR-94-064, International 
Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA. 
--,  N. MORGAN. 1994. Connectionist Speech Recognition - A Hybrid Approach. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
--, & C. J. WELLEKENS. 1989. Links between Markov models and multilayer 
perceptrons. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1, ed. by 
D.J. Touretzky, 502-510, San Mateo. Morgan Kaufmann. 
COLE, R.A., M. FANTY, & T. LANDER. 1994. Telephone speech corpus develop- 
ment at CSLU. In Proceedings Int'l Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 
Yokohama, Japan. 
DEMPSTER, A. P., N.M. LAmD, & D. B. RUSN. 1977. Maximum likelihood 
from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society, Series B 34.1-38. 
GLASS, J. R., 1988. Finding Acoustic Regulartries in Speech Applications to Pho- 
netic Recognition. M.I.T dissertation. 
KATAGR, S., C.H. LEE, & JUANG B.H. 1991. New discriminative training 
algorithms based on the generalized probabilistic decent method. In Proc. of 
the IEEE Workshop on Neural Nelwroks for Signal Processing, ed. by 'B.H. 
Juang, S.Y. Kung, & C.A. Kamm, 299-308. 
KONG, Y., & N. MORGAN. 1994. Modeling dynamics in connectionist speech 
recognition - the time index model. In Proceedings Int'l Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, 1523-1526, Yokohama, Japan. 
LPORACE, L. A. 1982. Maximum likelihood estimation for multivariate observa- 
tions of markov sources. IEEE Trans. on Information Theory IT-28.729-734. 
MORGAN, N., H. BOURLARD, S. GREENSERG, & H. HERMANSKY. 1994. Stochas- 
tic perceptual auditory-event-based models for speech recognition. In Proceed- 
ings Inl'l Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 1943-1946, Yokohama, 
Japan. 
