Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround 
Receptive Field 
Shih-Chii Liu and Kwabena Boahen 
Computation and Neural Systems 
139-74 California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
shih@pcmp.caltech.edu, buster@pcmp.caltech.edu 
Abstract 
Both vertebrate and invertebrate retinas are highly eicient in ex- 
tracting contrast independent of the background intensity over five 
or more decades. This eiciency has been rendered possible by 
the adaptation of the DC operating point to the background inten- 
sity while maintaining high gain transient responses. The center- 
surround properties of the retina allows the system to extract in- 
formation at the edges in the image. This silicon retina models the 
adaptation properties of the receptors and the antagonistic center- 
surround properties of the laminar cells of the invertebrate retina 
and the outer-plexiform layer of the vertebrate retina. We also illus- 
trate the spatio-temporal responses of the silicon retina on moving 
bars. The chip has 59x64 pixels on a 6.9x6.8mm  die and it is 
fabricated in 2/rn n-well technology. 
1 Introduction 
It has been observed previously that the initial layers of the vertebrate and inver- 
tebrate retina systems perform very similar processing functions on the incoming 
input signal[I]. The response versus log intensity curves of the receptors in inver- 
tebrate and vertebrate retinas look similar. The curves show that the receptors 
have a larger gain for changes in illumination than to steady illumination, i.e, the 
receptors adapt. This adaptation property allows the receptor to respond over a 
large input range without saturating. 
Anatomically, the eyes of invertebrates differ greatly from that of vertebrates. Ver- 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 679 
tebrates normally have two simple eyes while insects have compound eyes. Each 
compound eye in the fly consists of 3000-4000 ommatidia and each ommatidium 
consists of 8 photoreceptors. Six of these receptors (which are also called R1-R6) 
are in a single spectral class. The other two receptors, R7 and R8 provide channels 
for wavelength discrimination and polarization. 
The vertebrate eye is divided into the outer-plexiform layer and the inner-plexiform 
layer. The outer-plexiform layer consists of the rods and cones, horizontal cells 
and bipolar cells. Invertebrate receptors depolarise in response to an increase in 
light, in contrast to vertebrate receptors, which hyperpolarise to an increase in light 
intensity. Both vertebrate and invertebrate receptors show light oxtaptation over at 
least five decoxtes of background illumination. This oxtaptation property allows the 
retina to maintain a high transient gain to contrast over a wide range of background 
intensities. 
The invertebrate receptors project to the next layer which is called the lamina layer. 
This layer consists primarily of monopolar cells which show a similar response ver- 
sus log intensity curve to that of vertebrate bipolar cells in the outer-plexiform 
layer. Both cells respond with graded potentials to changes in illumination. These 
cells also show a high transient gain to changes in illumination while ignoring the 
background intensity and they possess center-surround receptive fields. In verte- 
brates, the cones which are excited by the incoming light, activate the horizontal 
cells which in turn inhibit the cones. The horizontal cells thus mediate the lateral 
inhibition which produces the center-surround properties. In insects, a possible 
process of this lateral inhibition is done by current flow from the photoreceptors 
through the epithelial glial cells surrounding an ommatidium or the modulation 
of the local field potential in the lamina to influence the transmembrane potential 
of the photoreceptor[2]. The center-surround receptive fields allow contrasts to be 
accentuated since the surround computes a local mean and subtracts that from the 
center signal. 
Mahowald[3] previously described a silicon retina with adaptive photoreceptors and 
Boahen et al.[4] recently described a compact current-mode analog model of the 
outer-plexiform layer of the vertebrate retina and analysed the spario-temporal 
processing properties of this retina[5]. A recent array of photoreceptors from 
Delbriick[6] uses an adaptive photoreceptor circuit that adapts its operating point 
to the background intensity so that the pixel shows a high transient gain over 5 
decoxtes of background illumination. However this retina does not have spatial 
coupling between pixels. 
The pixels in the silicon retina described here has a compact circuit that incor- 
porates both spatial and temporal filtering with light oxtaptation over 5 decoxtes 
of background intensity. The network exhibits center-surround behavior. Boahen 
et al.[4] in their current-mode diffusor retina, draw an analogy between parts of 
the diffusor circuit and the different cells in the outer-plexiform layer. While the 
same analogy cannot be drawn from this silicon retina to the invertebrate retina 
since the function of the cells are not completely understood, the output responses 
of the retina circuit are similar to the output responses of the photoreceptor and 
monopolar cells in invertebrates. 
The circuit details are described in Section 2 and the spario-temporal processing 
performed by the retina on stimulus moving at different speeds is shown in Section 
680 S.-C. LIU, K. BOAHEN 
2 Circuit 
(a) 
iin-1, 
gmlYe!.l  fcr 
Vr+ 1 rrr 
gmlVd+(l Cr 
Figure 1: (a) One-dimensional version of the retina. (b) Small-signal equivalent of 
circuit in (a). 
A one-dimensional version of the retina is shown in Figure l(a). The retina consists 
of an adaptive photoreceptor circuit at each pixel coupled together with diffusors, 
controlled by voltages, Vg and Va. The output of this network can either be obtained 
at the voltage output, 14 or at the current output, Io but the outputs have different 
properties. Phototransduction is obtained by using a reverse-biased photodiode 
which produces current that is proportional to the incident light. The logarithmic 
properties are obtained by operating the feedback transistor shown in Figure l(a) 
in the subthreshold region. The voltage change at the output photoreceptor, vr, is 
proportional to a small contrast since 
vr = UTd(logi)- UT dI _ UT i 
n n I tClbg 
co, Coz is the oxide capacitance and 
where U- is the thermal voltage, n = Co,+Cd , 
Ca is the depletion capacitance of a transistor. The circuit works as follows: If 
the photocurrent through the photodiode increases, Vr will be pulled low and the 
output voltage at 14 increases by vt = Avr where A is the amplifier gain of the 
output stage. This output change in Vt is coupled into Vet through a capacitor 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 681 
divider ratio, c2 The feedback transistor, M4, operates in the subthreshold 
C +C2 ' 
region and supplies the current necessary to offset the photocurrent. The increase 
in Vcl (i.e. the gate voltage of M4) causes the current supplied by M3 to increase 
which pulls the node voltage, Vr, back to the voltage level needed by M1 to sink 
the bias current from transistor, M2. 
3.5 
3.45 
3.4 
3.3 
3.25 
-1 
3.2 I I I I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
Time (Sec) 
Figure 2: This figure shows the output response of the receptor to a variation of 
about 40% p-p in the intensity of a flickering LED light incident on the chip. The 
response shows that the high sensitivity of the receptor to the LED is maintained 
over 5 decades of differing background intensities. The numbers on the section of 
the curve indicate the log intensity of the mean value. 0 log is the absolute intensity 
from the LED. 
The adaptive element, M3, has an I-V curve which looks like a hyperbolic sine. 
The small slope of the I-V curve in the middle means that for small changes of 
voltages across M3, the element looks like an open-circuit. With large changes of 
voltage across M3, the current through M3 becomes exponential and Vcl is charged 
or discharged almost instantaneously. 
Figure 2 shows the output response of the photoreceptor to a square-wave variation 
of about 40% p-p in the intensity of a red LED (635 nm). The results show that 
the circuit is able to discern the small contrast over five decades of background in- 
tensity while the steady-state voltage of the photoreceptor output varies only about 
15reV. Further details of the photoreceptor circuit and its adaptation properties 
are described in Delbr/ick[6]. 
3 Spario-Temporal Response 
The spario-temporal response of the network to different moving stimuli is explored 
in this section. The circuit shown in Figure l(a) can be transferred to an equivalent 
network of resistors and capacitors as shown in Figure l(b) to obtain the transfer 
function of the circuit. The capacitors at each node are necessary to model the 
682 S.-C. LIU, K. BOAHEN 
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1 
(a) Time (sec) 
O 4.81 
'4.6 
O 4.4 
='42 
4 
3.8 
0.:5 
0.4 0.5 0,6 0 7 0 8 
(b) Time (Sec) 
Figure 3: (a) Response of a pixel to a grey strip 2 pixels wide of gray-level "0.4" 
on a dark background of level "0" moving past the pixel at different speeds. (b) 
Response of a pixel to a dark strip of gray-level "0.6" on a white background of level 
"1" moving past the pixel at different speeds. The voltage shown on these curves is 
not the direct measurement of the voltage at  but rather  drives a current-sensing 
transistor and this current is then sensed by an offchip current sense-amplifier. 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 683 
temporal responses of the circuit. 
The chip results from the experiments below illustrate the center-surround proper- 
ties of the network and the difference in time-constants between the surround and 
center. 
3.1 Chip Results 
Data from the 2D chip is shown in the next few figures. In these experiments, we 
are only looking at one pixel of the 2D array. A rotating circular fly-wheel stimulus 
with strips of alternating contrasts is mounted above the chip. The stimulus was 
created using Mathematica. Figure 3a shows the spario-temporal impulse response 
of one pixel measured at ¬ with a small strip at level "0.4" on a dark background of 
level "0" moving past the pixels on the row. At slow speeds, the impulse response 
shows a center-surround behavior where the pixel first receives inhibition from the 
preceding pixels which are excited by the stimulus. When the stimulus moves by 
the pixel of interest, it is excited and then it is inhibited by the subsequent pixels 
seeing the stimulus. 
6.5 
6 
 43 
Time (Sec) 
Figure 4: Response of a pixel to a strip of varying contrasts on a dark background 
moving past the pixel at a constant speed. 
At faster speeds, the initial inhibition in the response grows smaller until at some 
even faster speed, the initial inhibition is no longer observed. This response comes 
about because the inhibition from the surround has a longer-time constant than the 
center. When the stimulus moves past the pixel of interest, the inhibition from the 
preceding pixels excited by the stimulus does not have time to inhibit the pixel of 
interest. Hence the excitation is seen first and then the inhibition comes into place 
when the stimulus passes by. Note that in these figures (Figures 3-4), the curves 
have been displaced to show the pixel response at different speeds of the moving 
stimulus. The voltage shown on these curves is not the direct measurement of the 
voltage at  but rather ¬ drives a current-sensing transistor and this current is 
then sensed by an off-chip current sense-amplifier. 
Figure 3b shows the spario-temporal impulse response of one pixel with a similar 
684 S.-C. LIU, K. BOAHEN 
size strip of level "0.6" on a light background of level "1" moving past the row of 
pixels. The same inhibition behavior is seen for increasing stimulus speeds. Fig- 
ure 4 shows the output response at  for the same stimulus of gray-levels varying 
from "0.2" to "0.8" on a dark background of level "0" moving at one speed. The 
peak excitation response is plotted against the contrast in Figure 5. A level of "0.2" 
corresponds to a irradiance of 15mW/m 2 while a level of "0.8" corresponds to a irra- 
diance of 37.4mW/m . These measurements are done with a photometer mounted 
about 1.5in above a piece of paper with the contrast which is being measured. The 
irradiance varies exponentially with increasing level. 
4 Conclusion 
In this paper, we described an adaptive retina with a center-surround receptive 
field. The system properties of this retina allows it to model functionally either the 
responses of the laminar cells in the invertebrate retina or the outer-plexiform layer 
of vertebrate retina. We show that the circuit shows adaptation to changes over 
5 decades of background intensities. The center-surround property of the network 
can be seen from its spatio-temporal response to different stimulus speeds. This 
property serves to remove redundancy in space and time of the input signal. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Carver Mead for his support and encouragement. SC Liu is supported by 
an NIMH fellowship and K Boahen is supported by a Sloan fellowship. We thank 
Tobias Delbriick for the inspiration and help in testing the design. We also thank 
Rahul Sarpeshkar and Bradley Minch for comments. Fabrication was provided by 
MOSIS. 
References 
[1] 
S. B. Laughlin, "Coding efficiency and design in retinal processing", In: Facets 
of Vision (D. G. Stavenga and R. C. Hardie, eds) pp. 213-234. Springer, Berlin, 
1989. 
[2] S. R. Shaw, "Retinal resistance barriers and electrical lateral inhibition", Na- 
ture, Lond. 255,: 480-483, 1975. 
[3] 
M. A. Mahowald, "Silicon Retina with Adaptive Photoreceptors" in 
SPIE/SPSE Symposium on Electronic Science and Technology: From Neurons 
to Chips. Orlando, FL, April 1991. 
[4] 
K. A. Boahen and A. G. Andreou, "A Contrast Sensitive Silicon Retina with 
Reciprocal Synapses", In D. S. Touretzky (ed.), Advances in Neural Informa- 
tion Processing Systems , 764-772. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. 
[5] 
K. A. Boahen, "Spatiotemporal sensitivity of the retina: A physical model", 
CNS Memo CNS-TR-91-06, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, June 1991. 
[6] 
T. Delbriick, "Analog VLSI Phototransduction by continous-time, adaptive, 
logarithmic photoreceptor circuits", CNS Memo No.30, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 1994. 
