Neuron-MOS Temporal Winner Search 
Hardware for Fully-Parallel Data 
Processing 
Tadashi SHIBATA, Tsutomu NAKAI, Tatsuo MORIMOTO 
Ryu KAIHARA, Takeo YAMASHITA, and Tadahiro OHMI 
Department of Electronic Engineering 
Tohoku University 
Aza-Aoba, Aramaki, Aobaku, Sendai 980-77 JAPAN 
Abstract 
A unique architecture of winner search hardware has been de- 
veloped using a novel neuron-like high functionality device called 
Neuron MOS transistor (or vMOS in short) [1,2] as a key circuit 
element. The circuits developed in this work can find the location 
of the maximum (or minimum) signal among a number of input 
data on the continuous-time basis, thus enabling real-time winner 
tracking as well as fully-parallel sorting of multiple input data. We 
have developed two circuit schemes. One is an ensemble of self- 
loop-selecting vMOS ring oscillators finding the winner as an oscil- 
lating node. The other is an ensemble of yMOS variable threshold 
inverters receiving a common ramp-voltage for competitive excita- 
tion where data sorting is conducted through consecutive winner 
search actions. Test circuits were fabricated by a double-polysilicon 
CMOS process and their operation has been experimentally veri- 
fied. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Search for the largest (or the smallest) among a number of input data, i.e., the 
winner-take-all (WTA) action, is an essential part of intelligent data processing 
such as data retrieval in associative memories [3], vector quantization circuits [4], 
Kohonen's self-organizing maps [5] etc. In addition to the maximum or minimum 
search, data sorting also plays an essential role in a number of signal processing 
such as median filtering in image processing, evolutionary algorithms in optimizing 
problems [6] and so forth. Usually such data processing is carried out by software 
running on general purpose computers, but the computation time increases explo- 
686 T. SHIBATA, T. NAKAI, T. MORIMOTO, R. KAIHARA, T. YAMASHITA, T. OHMI 
sively with the increase in the volume of data. In order to build electronic systems 
having a real-time-response capability, the direct implementation of fully paxallel 
algorithms on the integrated circuits haxdwaxe is critically demanded. 
A vaxiety of WTA [4, 7, 8] circuits have been implemented so fax based on analog 
current-mode circuit technologies. A number of cells, each composed of a current 
source, competitively shaxe the total current specified by a global current sink and 
the winner is identified through the current concentration towaxd the cell via tacit 
positive feedback mechanisms. The circuit implementations using MOSFET's op- 
erating in the subthreshold regime [4, 7] axe ideal for laxge scale integration due to 
its ultra low power nature. Although they axe inherently slow at circuit levels, the 
performance at a system level is fax superior to digital counterpaxts owing to the 
flexible computing algorithms of analog. In order to achieve a high speed opera- 
tion, MOSFET's biased at strong inversion is also utilized in Ref. [8]. However, 
cost must be traxied off for increased power. 
What we axe presenting in this paper is a unique WTA axchitecture implemented 
by vMOS technology [1,2]. In vMOS circuits the summation of multiples of voltage 
signals is conducted on the cMOS floating gate (or better be called "temporaxy float- 
ing gate" when used in a clocked scheme [9]) via chaxge shaxing aznong cpacitors, 
and the result of the summation controls the transistor action. The voltage-mode 
summation capability of cMOS has been uniquely utilized to produce the WTA 
action. No DC current flows for the sum operation itself in contrast to the Kirch- 
hoff sum. In cMOS transistors, however, DC current flows in a CMOS inverter 
configuration when the floating gate is biased in the transition region. Therefore 
the power consumption is laxget than in the subthreshold circuitdes. However, the 
cMOS WTA's presented in this axticle will give an opportunity of high speed opera- 
tion at much less power consumption than current-mode circuitties operating in the 
strong inversion mode. In the following we present two kinds of winner seaxch haxd- 
waxe featuring very fast operation. The winner cn be tracked in a continuous-time 
regime with a detection delay time of about 100psec, while the sorting of multiple 
data is conducted in a fixed frazne of time of about 100nsec. 
2 NEURON-MOS CONTINUOUS-TIME WTA 
Fig. l(a) shows a schematic circuit diagraxn of a vMOS continuous-time WTA 
for four input signals. Each signal is fed to an input-stage cMOS inverter-A: a 
VA~VA 
0 
(b) 
V^ ~VA 
VAI ~VA4 
Figure 1: (a) Circuit diagram of cMOS continuous-time WTA circuit. (b)~(d) 
Response of Vtl ~ Vt4 as a function of the floating-gate potential of cMOS inverter- 
A. 
Neuron-MOS Temporal Winner Search Hardware for Fully-parallel Data Processing 687 
CMOS inverter in which the common gate is made floating and its potential brn 
is determined via capacitance coupling with three input terminals. V (~ 1/4) and 
Vn are equally coupled to the floating gate and a small capacitance pulls down the 
floating gate to ground. The zMOS inverter-B is designed to turn on when the 
number of l's in its inputs (VA ~ VA4) is more than 1. When a feedback loop is 
formed as shown in the figure, it becomes a ring oscillator composed of odd-numbers 
of inverter stages. 
When V ~ V4 = 0, the circuit is stable with Vn = 1 because inverter-A's do not 
turn on. This is because the small grounded capacitor pulls down the floating gate 
potential brn a little smaller than its inverting threshold (Vt>t>/2) (see Fig. l(b)). 
If non-zero signals are given to input terminals, more-than-one inverter-A's turn on 
(see Fig. 1 (c)) and the inverter-B also turns on, thus initiating the transition of Vn 
from VDD to 0. According to the decrease in Vn, some of the inverter-A's turn off 
but the inverter-B (number 1 detector) still stays at on-state until the last inverter- 
A turns off. When the last inverter-A, the one receiving the largest voltage input, 
turns off, the inverter-B also turns off and Vn begins to increase. As a result, ring 
oscillation occurs only in the loop including the largest-input inverter-A(Fig. l(d)). 
In this manner, the winner is identified as an oscillating node. The inverter-B can 
be altered to a number "2" detector or a number "3" detector etc. by just reducing 
the input voltage to the largest coupling capacitor. Then it is possible for top two 
or top three to be winners. 
Fignre 2: (a) Measured wave forms of four-input WTA as depicted in Fig. 
(bread board experoment). (b) Simulation results for non-oscillating WTA ex- 
plained in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 2(a) demonstrates the measured wave forms of a bread-board test circuit 
composed of discrete components for verifying the circuit idea. It is clearly seen that 
ring oscillation occurs only at the temporal winner. However, the ring oscillation 
increases the power dissipation, and therefore, non-oscillating circuitry would be 
preferred. An example of simulation results for such a non-oscillating circuit is 
demonstrated in Fig. 2(b). 
Fig. 3(a) gives the circuit diagram of a non-oscillating version of the zMOS 
688 T. SHIBATA, T. NAKAI, T. MORIMOTO, R. KAIHARA, T. YAMASHITA, T. OHMI 
0.2 
o 
o 
ß R.O 
,  o 2o'00 ' 4o'oo ' 
C .,-' R V. c=T/c. 
(a) (½) 
;o'oo 
Figure 3: (a) Circuit diagram of non-oscillating-mode WTA. HSPICE simulation 
results: (b) combinations of R and C'ExT for non-oscillating mode; (c) winner 
detection delay as a function of capacitance load. 
continuous-time WTA. In order to suppress the oscillation, the loop gain is reduced 
by removing the two-stage CMOS inverters in front of the inverter-B and _rig delay 
element is inserted in the feedback loop. The small grounded capacitors were re- 
moved in inverter-A's. The waveforms demonstrated in Fig. 2(b) axe the HSPICE 
simulation results with R = 0 and C'ExT = 20C'gae(C'gae: input capacitance of 
elemental CMOS inverter=5.16fF) . The circuit was simulated assuming a typical 
double-poly 0.5-#m CMOS process. Fig. 3(b) indicates the combinations of R and 
C'rxr yielding the non-oscillating mode of operation obtained by HSPICE simula- 
tion. It is important to note that if C'x, _ 15C'ot, non-oscillating mode appears 
with R = 0. This means the output resistance of the inverter-B plays the role of 
R. When the number of inverter-A's is increased, the increased capacitance load 
serves as C'rxr. Therefore, WTA having more than 19 input signals can operate in 
the non-oscillating mode. Fig. 3(c) represents the detection delay as a function of 
C'xr. It is known that the increase in C'Exr, therefore the increase in the number 
of input signals to the WTA, does not significantly increase the detection delay and 
that the delay is only in the range of 100 to 200psec. 
A photomicrograph of a test circuit of the non-oscillating mode WTA fabricated 
by Tohoku-Univarsity standaxd double-polysilicon CMOS process on 3-#m design 
rules, and the measurement results axe shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. 
uJ v I PUT  ' 
(b) TME 
Figure 4: (a) Photomicrograph of a test circuit for 4-input continuous-time WTA. 
Chip size is 800#mx500#m including all peripherals (3-#m rules). The core circuit 
of Fig. 3(a) occupies appromately 0.X2 mm . (b) Menured wave forms. 
Neuron-MOS Temporal Winner Search Hardware for Fully-parallel Data Processing 689 
3 NEURON-MOS DATA SORTING CIRCUITRY 
The elemental idea of this circuit was first proposed at ISSCC '93 [3] as an applica- 
tion of the t/MOS WTA drcuit. In the present work, a clocked-t/MOS technique [9] 
was introduced to enhance the accuracy and reliability of t/MOS circuit operation 
and test circuits were fabricated and their operation have been verified. 
Fig. 5 (a) shows the circuit diagram of a test circuit for sorting three analog data V.4, 
Va, and V½, and a photomicrograph of a fabricated test circuit designed on 3-#m 
rules is shown in Fig. 5(b). Each input stage is a t/MOS inverter: a CMOS inverter 
in which the common gate is made floating and its potential br is determined 
by two input voltages via equally-weighted capacitance coupling, namely br = 
(V.4 + Vn.aM,)/2. The reset signal forces the floating node be grounded, thus 
cancelling the charge on the t/MOS floating gate each time before sorting. This is 
quite essential in achieving long-term reliability of t/MOS operation. In the second 
stage are flip-flop memory cells to store sorting results. The third stage is a circuit 
which counts the number of 1's at its three input terminals and outputs the result in 
binary code. The concept of the t/MOS A/D converter design [10] has been utilized 
in the circuit. 
(b) 
Figure 5: (a) Circuit diagram of vMOS data-soring circuit. (b)Photomicrograph 
of a test circuit fabricated by Tohoku Univ. Standard double-polysillicon CMOS 
process (3-pro rules). Chip size is 1250#mx800#m including all peripherals. 
The sorting circuit is activated by ramping up V.4M, from 0V to VOD. Then the 
t/MOS inverter receiving the largest input turns on first and the output data of the 
counter at this moment (0,0) is latched in the respective memory cells. The counter 
output changes to (0,1) after gate delays in the counter and this code is latched 
when the t/MOS inverter receiving the second largest turns on. Then the counter 
counts up to (1,0). In this manner, the all input data are numbered according to 
the order of their magnitudes after a ramp voltage scan is completed. 
The measurement results are demonstrated in Fig. 6(a) in comparison with the 
HSPICE simulation results. Simulation was carried out on the same architecture 
circuit designed on 0.5-pm design rules and operated under 3V power supply. For 
three analog input voltages: V.4 = 5V, Vs= 4V, and V½ = 2V, (0,0), (0,1), 
690 T. SHIBATA, T. NAKAI, T. MORIMOTO, R. KAIHARA, T. YAMASHITA, T. OHMI 
Figure 6: (a) Wave forms of the test circuit shown in Fig. 5(a) measured without 
buffer circuitry (left) and simulation results of a circuit designed with 0.5-#m rules 
(right). (b) Minimum scan time vs. sorting accuracy for a three-input sorter. (c) 
Minimum scan time vs. sorting accuracy for a 15-input sorter. 
and (1,0) axe latched, respectively, after the ramp voltage scan, thus accomplishing 
correct sorting. Slow operation of the test circuit is due to the loading effect caused 
by the direct probing of the node voltage without output buffer circuitries. The 
simulation with a 0.5-#m-design-rule circuit indicates the sorting is accomplished 
within the scan time of 40nsec. 
In Fig. 6(b), the minimum scan time obtained by simulation is plotted as a func- 
tion of the bit accuracy in sorting analog data. N-bit accuracy means the minimum 
voltage difference required for winner discrimination is VDD/22. If the ramp rate 
is too fast, the vMOS inverter receiving the next laxgest data turns on before the 
correct counting results become available, leading to an erroneous operation. The 
scan time/accuracy relation in Fig. 6(b) is primaxily determined by the response 
delay in the counter. It should be noted that the number of inverter stages in the 
counter (vMOS A/D converter) is always three indifferent to the number of output 
bits, namely, the delay would not increase significantly by the increase in the num- 
ber of input data. In order to investigate this, a 15-input counter was designed and 
the delay time was evaluated by HSPICE simulation. It was 312 psec in comparison 
with 110 psec of the 3-input counter of Fig. 5(a). The scan time/accuracy relation 
for the 15-input sorting circuit is shown in Fig. 6(c), indicating the sorting of 15 
input data can be accomplished in 100 nsec with 8-bit accuracy. 
Neuron-MOS Temporal Winner Search Hardware for Fully-parallel Data Processing 691 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
A novel neuron-like functional device t/MOS has been successfully utilized in con- 
structing intelligent electronic circuits which can carry out search for the temporal 
winner. As a result, it has become possible to perform data sorting as well as 
winner search in an instance, both requiring very time-consuming sequential data 
processing on a digital computer. The hardware algorithms presented here are typ- 
ical examples of the t/MOS binary-multivalue-analog merged computation scheme, 
which would play an important role in the future flexible data processing. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 
(06402038) from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture, Japan. A 
part of this work was carried out in the Super Clean Room of Laboratory for Elec- 
tronic Intelligent Systems, Research Institute of Electrical communication, Tohoku 
University. 
References 
[1] T. Shibata and T. Ohmi, "A functional MOS transistor featuring gate-level 
weighted sum and threshold operations," IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 39, 
No. 6, pp.1444-1455 (1992). 
[2] T. Shibata, K. Kotani, T. Yamashita, H. Ishii, H. Kosaka, and T. Ohmi, "Imple- 
menting interlligence on silicon using neuron-like functional MOS transistors," in 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6 (San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann 1994) pp. 919-926. 
[3] T. Yamashita, T. Shibata, and T. Ohmi, "Neuron MOS winner-take-all circuit 
and its application to associative memory," in ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 1993, 
FA 15.2, pp. 236-237. 
[4] G. Gauwenberghs and V. Pedroni, "A charge-based CMOS parallel analog vector 
quantizer," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 7 (Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press 1995) pp. 779-786. 
[5] T. Kohonen, Self-Organization and Associative Memory, 2nd ed. (New York: 
Springer-Verlag 1988). 
[6] M. Kawamata, M. Abe, and T. Higuchi, "Evolutionary digital filters," in Proc. 
Int. Workshop on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems, seoul, 
Oct., 1994, pp. 263-268. 
[7] J. Lazzaro, S. Ryckebusch, M. A. Mahowald, and C. A. Mead, "Winner-Take- 
All networks of O(N) complexity," in Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems I (San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann 1989) pp. 703-711. 
[8] J. Choi and B. J. Sheu, "A high-precision VLSI winner-take-all circuit for self- 
organizing neural networks," IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, Vol. 28, No. 5, pp.576- 
584 (1993). 
[9] K. Kotani, T. Shibata, M. Imai, and T. Ohmi, "Clocked-Neuron-MOS logic 
circuits employing auto-threshold-adjustment," in ISSCC Dig. Technical Papers, 
Feb. 1995, FA 19.5, pp. 320-321. 
[10] T. Shibata and T. Ohmi, "Neuron MOS binary-logic integrated circuits: Part 
II, Simplifying techniques of circuit configuration and their practical applications," 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 40, No. 5,974-979 (1993). 
