Silicon Models 
for 
Auditory Scene Analysis 
John Lazzaro and John Wawrzynek 
CS Division 
UC Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720-1776 
lazzaro¸cs. berkeley. edu, j ohnw¸cs. berkeley. edu 
Abstract 
We are developing special-purpose, low-power analog-to-digital 
converters for speech and music applications, that feature analog 
circuit models of biological audition to process the audio signal 
before conversion. This paper describes our most recent converter 
design, and a working system that uses several copies of the chip to 
compute multiple representations of sound from an analog input. 
This multi-representation system demonstrates the plausibility of 
inexpensively implementing an auditory scene analysis approach to 
sound processing. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The visual system computes multiple representations of the retinal image, such as 
motion, orientation, and stereopsis, as an early step in scene analysis. Likewise, 
the auditory brainstem computes secondary representations of sound, emphasizing 
properties such as binaural disparity, periodicity, and temporal onsets. Recent 
research in auditory scene analysis involves using computational models of these 
auditory brainstem representations in engineering applications. 
Computation is a major limitation in auditory scene analysis research: the com- 
plete auditory processing system described in (Brown and Cooke, 1994) operates at 
approximately 4000 times real time, running under UNIX on a Sun SPARCstation 
1. Standard approaches to hardware acceleration for signal processing algorithms 
could be used to ease this computational burden in a research environment; a variety 
of parallel, fixed-point hardware products would work well on these algorithms. 
700 J. LAZ7ARO, J. WAWRZYNEK 
However, hardware solutions appropriate for a research environment may not be 
well suited for accelerating algorithms in cost-sensitive, battery-operated consumer 
products. Possible product applications of auditory algorithms include robust 
pitch-tracking systems for musical instrument applications, and small-vocabulary, 
speaker-independent wordspotting systems for control applications. 
In these applications, the input takes an analog form: a voltage signal from a 
microphone or a guitar pickup. Low-power analog circuits that compute auditory 
representations have been implemented and characterized by several research groups 
- these working research prototypes include several generation of cochlear models 
(Lyon and Mead, 1988), periodicity models, and binaural models. These circuits 
could be used to compute auditory representations directly on the analog signal, in 
real-time, using these low-power, area-efficient analog circuits. 
Using analog computation successfully in a system presents many practical difficul- 
ties; the density and power advantages of the analog approach are often lost in the 
process of system integration. One successful IC architecture that uses analog com- 
putation in a system is the special-purpose analog to digital converter, that includes 
analog, non-linear pre-processing before or during data conversion. For example, 
converters that include logarithmic waveform compression before digitization are 
commercially viable components. 
Using this component type as a model, we have been developing special-purpose, 
low-power analog-to-digital converters for speech and audio applications; this paper 
describes our most recent converter design, and a working system that uses several 
copies of the chip to compute multiple representations of sound. 
2. CONVERTER DESIGN 
Figure 1 shows an architectural block diagram of our current converter design. The 
35,000 transistor chip was fabricated in the 2/am, n-well process of Orbit Semicon- 
ductor, brokered through MOSIS; the circuit is fully functional. Below is a summary 
of the general architectural features of this chip; unless otherwise referenced, circuit 
details are similar to the converter design described in (Lazzaro et al., 1994). 
ß An analog audio signal serves as input to the chip; dynamic range is 40dB to 
60dB (1-10mV to 1V peak, dependent on measurement criteria). 
ß This signal is processed by analog circuits that model cochlear processing (Lyon 
and Mead, 1988) and sensory transduction; the audio signal is transformed into 
119 wavelet-filtered, half-wave rectified, non-linearly compressed audio signals. The 
cycle-by-cycle waveform of each signal is preserved; no temporal smoothing is per- 
formed. 
ß Two additional analog processing blocks follow this initial cochlear processing, 
a temporal autocorrelation processor and a temporal adaptation processor. Each 
block transforms the input array into a new representation of equal size; alterna- 
tively, the block can be programmed to pass its input vector to its output without 
alteration. 
ß The output circuits of the final processing block are pulse generators, which code 
the signal as a pattern of fixed-width, fixed-height spikes. All the information in 
the representation is contained in the onset times of the pulses. 
Silicon Models for Auditory Scene Analysis 701 
ß The activity on this array is sent off-chip via an asynchronous parallel bus. The 
converter chip acts as a sender on the bus; a digital host processor is the receiver. 
The converter initiates a transaction on the bus to communicate the onset of a pulse 
in the array; the data value on the bus is a number indicating which unit in the 
array pulsed. The time of transaction initiation carries essential information. This 
coding method is also known as the address-event representation. 
ß Many converters can be used in the same system, sharing the same asynchronous 
output bus (Lazzaro and Wawrzynek, 1995). No extra components are needed to 
implement bus sharing; the converter bus design includes extra signals and logic that 
implements multi-chip bus arbitration. This feature is a major difference between 
this design and (Lazzaro et al., 1994). 
ß The converter includes a digitally-controllable parameter storage and generation 
system; 25 tunable parameters control the behavior of the analog processing blocks. 
Programmability supports the creation of multi-converter systems that use a single 
chip design: each chip receives the same analog signal, but processes the signal in 
different ways, as determined by the parameter values for each chip. 
ß Non-volatile analog storage elements are used to store the parameters; parameters 
are changeable via Fowler-Nordhiem tunneling, using a 5V control input bus. Many 
converters can share the same control bus. Parameter values can be sensed by acti- 
vating a control mode, which sends parameter information on the converter output 
bus. Apart from two high-voltage power supply pins, and a trimming input pin 
for tunneling pulse width, all control voltages used in this converter are generated 
on-chip. 
21V 
15V 
Trim 
DO 
D1 
D2 
D3 
D4 
D5 
D6 
CS 
WR 
VDD 
GND 
VDD 
GND 
VDD 
GND 
Audio In 
Figure 1. Block diagram of the converter chip. Most of the 40 pins of the chip are 
dedicated to the data output and control input buses, and to the control signals for 
coordinating bus sharing in multi-converter systems. 
702 J. LAZZAR.O, J. WAWRZYNEK 
3. SYSTEM DESIGN 
Figure 2 shows a block diagram of a system that uses three copies of the converter 
chip to compute multiple representations of sound; the system acts as a real-time 
audio input device to a Sun workstation. An analog audio input connects to each 
converter; this input can be from a pre-amplified microphone, for spontaneous input, 
or from the analog audio signal of the workstation, for controlled experiments. 
The asynchronous output buses from the three chips are connected together, to 
produce a single output address space for the system; no external components are 
needed for output bus sharing and arbitration. The onset time of a transaction 
carries essential information on this bus; additional logic on this board adds a 16- 
bit timestamp to each bus transaction, coding the onset time with 20s resolution. 
The control input buses for the three chips are also connected together to produce 
a single input address space, using external logic for address decoding. We use a 
commercial interface board to link the workstation with these system buses. 
4. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
We designed a software environment, Aer, to support real-time, low-latency data 
visualization of the multi-converter system. Using Aer, we can easily experiment 
with different converter tunings. Figure 3 shows a screen from Aer, showing data 
from the three converters as a function of time; the input sound for this screen is 
a short 800 Hz tone burst, followed by a sinusoid sweep from 300 Hz to 3 Khz. 
The top ("Spectral Shape") and bottom ("Onset") representations are raw data 
from converters 1 and 3, as marked on Figure 2, tuned for different responses. The 
output channel number is plotted vertically; each dot represents a pulse. 
The top representation codes for periodicity-based spectral shape; for this repre- 
sentation, the temporal autocorrelation block (see Figure 1) is activated, and the 
temporal adaptation block is inactivated. Spectral frequency is mapped logarith- 
mically on the vertical dimension, from 300 Hz to 4 Khz; the activity in each 
channel is the periodic waveform present at that frequency. The difference between 
a periodicity-based spectral method and a resonant spectral method can be seen 
in the response to the 800 Hz sinusoid onset: the periodicity representation shows 
activity only around the 800 Hz channels, whereas a spectral representation would 
show broadband transient activity at tone onset. 
In 
Out 
Multi-Converter System 
I Timer 
Sound Input 
Sbus 
Sun I 
Figure 2. Block diagram of the multi-converter system. 
Silicon Models for Auditory Scene Analysis 703 
4 Khz 
(log) 
300 Hz 
0 ms 
(linear) 
12.5 ms 
4 Khz 
(log) 
300 Hz 
I I 
200 ms 
Spectral 
Shape 
Summary 
Auto 
Corr. 
Onset 
Figure 3. Data from the multi-converter system, in response to a 800-Hz pure 
tone, followed by a sinusoidal sweep from 300Hz to 3Khz. 
704 J. LAZZARO, J. WAWRZYNEK 
n , i ne 
   .-- .:''. '..::..'.  ...v.-. w.:; :'/.:. :.'i:'.; ': i.'f c.' .'.;'.:; i ':.X:'.. :i  ;'.)' .%. :'.: ' :' :- .: .3'..'; 
: '.::  --'.. h'.,.':".',:..':'::.,.'..v:' .6 :. ': :. ::.: - .::..'; :' .,:.: .:.:.w..':'.. :.:': '..'.:, '..' :.:..:. 
"''.'';.': ,::!'.::'::'. i::::. i,::!: ',:i': i:i i.q:.:!; :ii',:,: ',":: ::"': i. ',,'.! '"; 
, V.'. !: ': !.'- 
':.i:!:' ::' ' 
12.5m, 
Khz 
0 H 
Figure 4. Dt from the multi-converter system, in response to the word "five" 
followed by the word "nine". 
Silicon Models for Auditory Scene Analysis 705 
The bottom representation codes for temporal onsets; for this representation, the 
temporal adaptation block is activated, and the temporal autocorrelation block is 
inactivated. The spectral filtering of the representation reflects the silicon cochlea 
tuning: a low-pass response with a sharp cutoff and a small resonant peak at the 
best frequency of the filter. The black, wideband lines at the start of the 800 Hz 
tone and the sinusoid sweep illustrate the temporal adaptation. 
The middle ("Summary Auto Corr.") representation is a summary autocorrelo- 
gram, useful for pitch processing and voiced/unvoiced decisions in speech recogni- 
tion. This representation is not raw data from a converter; software post-processing 
is performed on the converter output to produce the final result. The frequency re- 
sponse of converter 2 is set as in the bottom representation; the temporal adaptation 
response, however, is set to a 100 millisecond time constant. The converter output 
pulse rates are set so that the cycle-by-cycle waveform information for each output 
channel is preserved in the output. 
To complete the representation, a set of running autocorrelation functions 
is computed for r = k105s, k = 1... 120, for each of the 119 output channels. 
These autocorrelation functions are summed over all output channels to produce 
the final representation; r is plotted as a linear function of time on the vertical axis. 
The correlation multiplication can be efficiently implemented by integer subtraction 
and comparison of pulse timestamps; the summation over channels is simply the 
merging of lists of bus transactions. The middle representation in Figure 3 shows 
the qualitative characteristics of the summary autocorrelogram: a repetitive band 
structure in response to periodic sounds. 
Figure 4 shows the output response of the multi-converter system in response to 
telephone-bandwidth-limited speech; the phonetic boundaries of the two words, 
"five" and "nine", are marked by arrows. The vowel formant information is shown 
most clearly by the strong peaks in the spectral shape representation; the wideband 
information in the "f" of five is easily seen in the onset representation. The summary 
autocorrelation representation shows a clear texture break between vowels and the 
voiced "n" and "v" sounds. 
Acknowledgement s 
Thanks to Richard Lyon and Peter Cariani for summary autocorrelogram discus- 
sions. Funded by the Office of Naval Research (URI-N00014-92-J-1672). 
References 
Brown, G.J. and Cooke, M. (1994). Computational auditory scene analysis. Com- 
puter Speech and Language, 8:4, pp. 297-336. 
Lazzaro, J. P. and Wawrzynek, J. (1995). A multi-sender asynchronous extension 
to the address-event protocol. In Dally, W. J., Poulton, J. W., Ishii, A. T. (eds), 
16th Conference on Advanced Research in VLSI, pp. 158-169. 
Lazzaro, J.P., Wawrzynek, J., and Kramer, A (1994). Systems technologies for 
silicon auditory models. IEEE Micro, 14:3. 7-15. 
Lyon, R. F., and Mead, C. (1988). An analog electronic cochlea. IEEE Trans. 
Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing vol. 36, pp. 1119-1134. 
