VLSI Model of Primate Visual Smooth Pursuit 
Ralph Etienne-Cummings 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, 
IL 62901 
Jan Van der Spiegel 
Moore School of Electrical Engineering, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104 
Paul Mueller 
Corticon, Incorporated, 
3624 Market Str, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104 
Abstract 
A one dimensional model of primate smooth pursuit mechanism has 
been implemented in 2 tm CMOS VLSI. The model consolidates 
Robinson's negative feedback model with Wyatt and Pola's positive 
feedback scheme, to produce a smooth pursuit system which zero's the 
velocity of a target on the retina. Furthermore, the system uses the 
current eye motion as a predictor for future target motion. Analysis, 
stability and biological correspondence of the system are discussed. For 
implementation at the focal plane, a local correlation based visual 
motion detection technique is used. Velocity measurements, ranging 
over 4 orders of magnitude with < 15% variation, provides the input to 
the smooth pursuit system. The system performed successful velocity 
tracking for high contrast scenes. Circuit design and performance of the 
complete smooth pursuit system is presented. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The smooth pursuit mechanism of primate visual systems is vital for stabilizing a region 
of the visual field on the retina. The ability to stabilize the image of the world on the 
retina has profound architectural and computational consequences on the retina and visual 
cortex, such as reducing the required size, computational speed and communication 
hardware and bandwidth of the visual system (Bandera, 1990; Eckert and Buchsbaum, 
1993). To obtain similar benefits in active machine vision, primate smooth pursuit can 
be a powerful model for gaze control. The mechanism for smooth pursuit in primates 
was initially believed to be composed of a simple negative feedback system which 
attempts to zero the motion of targets on the fovea, figure l(a) (Robinson, 1965). 
However, this scheme does not account for many psychophysical properties of smooth 
VLSI Model of Primate Visual Smooth Pursuit 70 7 
pursuit, which led Wyatt and Pola (1979) to proposed figure l(b), where the eye 
movement signal is added to the target motion in a positive feed back loop. This 
mechanism results from their observation that eye motion or apparent target motion 
increases the magnitude of pursuit motion even when retinal motion is zero or constant. 
Their scheme also exhibited predictive qualities, as reported by Steinbach (1976). The 
smooth pursuit model presented in this paper attempts the consolidate the two models 
into a single system which explains the findings of both approaches. 
Target Retinal Eye Target Eye 
Motion Motion Motion Motion Motion 
(b) 
Oe= Ot -G---' G -  Or= O 
G+I' 
(a) 
Figure 1: System Diagrams of Primate Smooth Pursuit Mechanism. 
(a) Negative feedback model by Robinson (1965). (b) Positive 
feedback model by Wyatt and Pola (1979). 
The velocity based smooth pursuit implemented here attempts to zero the relative velocity 
of the retina and target. The measured retinal velocity, is zeroed by using positive 
feedback to accumulate relative velocity error between the target and the retina, where the 
accumulated value is the current eye velocity. Hence, this model uses the Robinson 
approach to match target motion, and the Wyatt and Pola positive txxl back loop to 
achieve matching and to predict the future velocity of the target. Figure 2 shows the 
system diagram of the velocity based smooth pursuit system. This system is analyzed 
and the stability criterion is derived. Possible computational blocks for the elements in 
figure l(b) are also discussed. Furthermore, since this entire scheme is implemented on a 
single 2 gm CMOS chip, the method for motion detection, the complete tracking circuits 
and the measured results are presented. 
O \ Target Retinal Eye 
 Motion Motion Motion 
4 --T ot + or vr+ 
Figure 2: System Diagram of VLSI Smooth Pursuit Mechanism. O F 
is target velocity in space, Ot is projected target velocity, Oe is the eye 
velocity and Or is the measured retinal velocity. 
2 VELOCITY BASED SMOOTH PURSUIT 
Although figure l(b) does not indicate how retinal motion is used in smooth pursuit, it 
provides the only measurement of the projected target motion. The very process of 
calculating retinal motion realizes negative feed back between the eye movement and the 
target motion, since retinal motion is the difference between project target and eye 
motion. If Robinson's model is followed, then the eye movement is simply the 
amplified version of the retinal motion. If the target disappears from the retina, the eye 
motion would be zero. However, Steinbach showed that eye movement does not cease 
when the target fades off and on, indicating that memory is used to predict target motion. 
Wyatt and Palo showed a direct additive influence of eye movement on pursuit. However, 
the computational blocks G' and o of their model are left untilled. 
708 R. ETIENNE-CUMMINGS, J. VAN DER SPIEGEL, P. MUELLER 
In figure 2, the gain G models the internal gain of the motion detection system, and the 
internal representation of retinal velocity is then Vr. Under zero-slip tracking, the retinal 
velocity is zero. This is obtained by using positive feed back to correct the velocity error 
between target, Ot, and eye, Oe. The delay element represents a memory of the last eye 
velocity while the current retinal motion is measured. If the target disappears, the eye 
motion continues with the last value, as recorded by Steinbach, thus anticipating the 
position of the target in space. The memory also stores the current eye velocity during 
perfect pursuit. The internal representation of eye velocity, V e, is subsequently amplified 
by H and used to drive the eye muscles. The impulse response of the system is given in 
equations (1). Hence, the relationship between eye velocity and target velocity is recursire 
and given by equations (2). To prove the stability of this system, the retinal velocity can 
be expressed in terms of the target motion as given in equations (3a). The ideal condition 
for accurate performance is for GH = 1. However, in practice, gains of different amplifiers 
Oe (Z)= GH z-! O0rer 
0,. I Z- l (a); (n) = GH[-6(n) + u(n)] (b) (1) 
n-I 
Oe(rl ) = Ot(n ) - Or(H ) '- GH[-6(n) + u(n)] * Or(H ) '- GH y.Or(k ) (2) 
k=0 
Or(n ) = Ot( n ) (1- GH )  Or(n ) = O if GH = I  Oe( n ) = O ( n ) ( a ) 
(3) 
Or(rt) n > 0 if I I - GH I 1 0 GH  2 for stability ( b ) 
are rarely perfectly matched. Equations (3b) shows that stability is assured for 0<GH< 2. 
Figure 3 shows a plot of eye motion versus updates for various choices of GH. At each 
update, the retinal motion is computed. Figure 3(a) shows the eye's motion at the on-set 
of smooth pursuit. For GH = 1, the eye movement tracks the target's motion exactly, 
and lags slightly only when the target accelerates. On the other hand, if GH << 1, the 
eye's motion always lags the target's. If GH -> 2, the system becomes increasing 
unstable, but converges for GH < 2. The three cases presented correspond to the smooth 
pursuit system being critically, over and under damped, respectively. 
3 HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
Using the smooth pursuit mechanism described, a single chip one dimensional tracking 
system has been implemented. The chip has a multi-layered computational architecture, 
similar to the primate's visual system. Phototransduction, logarithmic compression, 
edge detection, motion detection and smooth pursuit control has been integrated at the 
focal-plane. The computational layers can be partitioned into three blocks, where each 
block is based on a segment of biological oculomotor systems. 
3.1 IMAGING AND PREPROCESSING 
The first three layers of the system mimics the photoreceptors, horizontal cells and 
bipolar cells of biological retinas. Similar to previous implementations of silicon 
retinas, the chip uses parasitic bipolar transistors as the photoreceptors. The dynamic 
range of photoreceptor current is compressed with a logarithmic response in low light and 
square root response in bright light. The range compress circuit represents 5-6 orders of 
magnitude of light intensity with 3 orders of magnitude of output current dynamic range. 
Subsequently, a passive resistive network is used to realize a discrete implementation of a 
Laplacian edge detector. Similar to the rods and cones system in primate retinas, the 
response time, hence the maximum detectable target speed, is ambient intensity dependent 
(160 (12.5) gs in 2.5 (250) gW/cm2). However, this does prevent the system from 
handling fast targets even in dim ambient lighting. 
VLSI Model of Primate Visual Smooth Pursuit 709 
20 
15 
10 
5 
-10 
-15 
-20 
ß Target 
..... Eye: GH=I 99 
Eye GH=I 00 
-- -- .Eye: GH=0.10 
50 100 150 
Updates 
(a) 
2O 
15 
10 
5 
_0 
>'-5 
-10 
-15 
-20 
500 
E'ye: HG =1.00  
-- -- -E.v GH=0,10  
600 700 800 900 1 000 
Updates 
(b) 
Figure 3: (a) The On-Set of Smooth Pursuit for Various GH Values. 
(b) Steady-State Smooth Pursuit. 
3.2 MOTION MEASUREMENT 
This computational layer measures retinal motion. The motion detection technique 
implemented here differs from those believed to exist in areas V 1 and MT of the primate 
visual cortex. Alternatively, it resembles the fly's and rabbit's retinal motion detection 
system (Reichardt, 1961; Barlow and Levick, 1965; Delbruck, 1993). This is not 
coincidental, since efficient motion detection at the focal plane must be performed in a 
small areas and using simple computational elements in both systems. 
The motion detection scheme is a combination of local correlation for direction 
determination, and pixel transfer time measurement for speed. In this framework, motion 
is defined as the disappearance of an object, represented as the zero-crossings of its edges, 
at a pixel, followed by its re-appearance at a neighboring pixel. The (dis)appearance of 
the zero-crossing is determined using the (negative) positive temporal derivative at the 
pixel. Hence, motion is detected by AND gating the positive derivative of the zero- 
crossing of the edge at one pixel with the negative derivative at a neighboring pixel. The 
direction of motion is given by the neighboring pixel from which the edge disappeared. 
Provided that motion has been detected at a pixel, the transfer time of the edge over the 
pixe!'s finite geometry is inversely proportional to its speed. 
Equation (4) gives the mathematical representation of the motion detection process for an 
object moving in +x direction. In the equation, f(I:k,y,t) is the temporal response of 
pixel k as the zero crossing of an edge of an object passes over its 2a aperture. Equation 
(4) gives the direction of motion, while equation (5) gives the speed. The schematic of 
motion_x=[ft(I:k,y,t)>O][ft(I:k+l,y, t)<O]=O (a) 
motion+x=[ft(l:k-l,y,t)<O][?ft(I'k,y,t)>O] (b) (4) 
2a(k -n -a 
- 6It - v 16Ix - 2akl 
x 
2a(k-n)-a 2a(k-n) +a 
= ß Disappear t d v 
Motion t m v ' 
x x (5) 
1 Vx 
Speed + x t d - t m 2 a 
the VLSI circuit of the motion detection model is shown in figure 4(a). Figure 4(b) 
shows reciprocal of the measured motion pulse-width for 1 D motion. The on-chip speed, 
Ot, is the projected target speed. The measured pulse-widths span 3-4 orders magnitude, 
710 R. ETIENNE-CUMMINGS, J. VAN DER SPIEGEL, P. MUELLER 
Local 
Correlation 
Latches 
Motion 
Pulses 
1.2 
Left Right 
(a) 
(a) Schematic 
0.8 
 0.4 
. -o.a 
-.. 
-0.8 
-1.2 
-12.0 
Figure 4: of the Motion 
One-Over Pulse-Width vs On-Chip Speed 
= I/PW_Left 
- - ß - - I/PW_Rght 
-8.0 -4 0 0 4.0 8.0 12.0 
On-Chip Seed Iota/s} 
(b) 
Detection Circuit. (b) 
Measured Output of the Motion Detection Circuit. 
depending on the ambient lighting, and show less than 15% variation between chips, 
pixels, and directions (Etienne-Cummings, 1993). 
3.3 THE SMOOTH PURSUIT CONTROL SYSTEM 
The one dimensional smooth pursuit system is implemented using a 9 x 1 array of 
motion detectors. Figure 5 shows the organization of the smooth pursuit chip. In this 
system, only diverging motion is computed to reduce the size of each pixel. The outputs 
of the motion detectors are grouped into one global motion signal per direction. This 
grouping is performed with a simple, but delayed, OR, which prevents pulses from 
neighboring motion cells from overlapping. The motion pulse trains for each direction 
are XOR gated, which allows a single integrator to be used for both directions, thus 
limiting mis-match. The final value of the integrator is inversely proportional to the 
target*s speed. The OR gates conserve the direction of motion. The reciprocal of the 
integrator voltage is next computed using the linear mode operation of a MOS transistor 
(Etienne-Cummings, 1993). The unipolar integrated pulse allows a single inversion 
circuit to be used for both directions of motion, again limiting mis-match. The output of 
the "one-over" circuit is amplified, and the polarity of the measured speed is restored. 
This analog voltage is proportional to retinal speed. 
The measured retinal speed is subsequently added to the stored velocity. Figure 6 shows 
the schematic for the retinal velocity accumulation (positive feedback) and storage (analog 
["L. Wave Forms 
X _L 
øgitøn ..[-- -[ ',[ Target[ I- 
 Left rJJ,y '] Integrator[ 'ltnte--7'M s+ [-'K.-. IVeløcity I f 
Ul-I Lelt [/.. I - I I  ' I__ff' ' ' 
-..] Motion Pulse Integration Retinal Velocity 
_/ _, and "One-Over" Polarity Accumulation 
v ._[ { V = GlRetinal Velocityl Restoration and Sample/Hold 
Figure 5' Architecture of the VLSI Smooth Pursuit System. Sketches 
of the wave forms for a fast leftward followed by a slow rightward 
retinal motion are shown. 
VLSI Model of Primate Visual Smooth Pursuit 711 
memory). The output of the XOR gate in figure 5 is used by the sample-and-hold circuit 
to control sampling switches S1 and S2. During accumulation, the old stored velocity 
value, which is the current eye velocity, is isolated from the summed value. At the 
falling edge of the XOR output, the stored value on C2 is replaced by the new value on 
C1. This stored value is amplified using an off chip motor driver circuit, and used to 
move the chip. The gain of the motor driver can be finely controlled for optimal 
operation. 
Motor Retinal Target 
System Velocity Accumulation Two Phase Sample/Hold Velocity 
Figure 6: Schematic Retinal Velocity Error Accumulation, Storage and 
Motor Driver Systems. 
Figure 7(a) shows a plot of one-over the measured integrated voltage as a function of on 
chip target speed. Due to noise in the integrator circuit, the dynamic range of the motion 
detection system is reduced to 2 orders of magnitude. However, the matching between left 
and right motion is unaffected by the integrator. The MOS "one-over" circuit, used to 
compute the analog reciprocal of the integrated voltage, exhibits only 0.06% deviation 
from a fitted line (Etienne-Cummings, 1993b). Figure 7(b) shows the measured 
increments in stored target velocity as a function of retinal (on-chip) speed. This is a test 
of all the circuit components of the tracking system. Linearity between retinal velocity 
increments and target velocity is observed, however matching between opposite motion 
has degraded. This is caused by the polarity restoration circuit since it is the only 
location where different circuits are used for opposite motion. On average, positive 
increments are a factor of 1.2 times larger than negative increments. The error bars shows 
the variation in velocity increments for different motion cells and different chips. The 
deviation is less than 15 %. The analog memory has a leakage of 10 mV/min and an 
asymmetric swing of 2 to -1 V, caused by the buffers. The dynamic range of the 
complete smooth pursuit system is measured to be 1.5 orders magnitude. The maximum 
speed of the system is adjustable by varying the integrator charging time. The maximum 
speed is ambient intensity dependent and ranges from 93 cm/s to 7 cm/s on-chip speed in 
Integrated Pulse vs On-Chip Speed Velocity Error Increment vs On-Chip Speed 
32 
24 
-24 
-32 
.  o lntPulge_Left 
_ _ ß _ . lntPulqe_Rght 
I I 
-5.0 0,0 5,0 10,0 
On-Chip Speed leto/s] 
(a) 
Figure 7. (a) Measured integrated motion pulse voltage. 
output for the complete smooth pursuit system. 
(}.8 
06 
 0 4 . i ,  Neg_lncremem 
0.0 , , , I , , , I , , 
0 2 4 6 8 
On-Chip Speed [cm/sl 
(b) 
(b) 
10 
712 R. ETIENNE-CUMMINGS, J. VAN DER SPIEGEL, P. MUELLER 
bright (250 lW/cm 2) and dim (2.5 lW/cm 2) lighting, respectively. However, for any 
maximum speed chosen, the minimum speed is a factor of 0.03 slower. The minimum 
speed is limited by the discharge time of the temporal differentiators in the motion 
detection circuit to 0.004 cm/s on chip. The contrast sensitivity of this system proved to 
be the stumbling block, and it can not track objects in normal indoor lighting. However, 
all circuits components tested successfully when a light source is used as the target. 
Additional measured data can be found in (Etienne-Cummings, 1995). Further work will 
improve the contrast sensitivity, combat noise and also consider two dimensional 
implementations with target acquisition (saccades) capabilities. 
4 CONCLUSION 
A model for biological and silicon smooth pursuit has been presented. It combines the 
negative feed back and positive feedback models of Robinson and Wyatt and Pola. The 
smooth pursuit system is stable if the gain product of the retinal velocity detection 
system and the eye movement system is less than 2. VLSI implementation of this 
system has been performed and tested. The performance of the system suggests that wide 
range (92.9 - 0.004 cm/s retinal speed) target tracking is possible with a single chip focal 
plane system. To improve this chip's performance, care must be taken to limit noise, 
improve matching and increase contrast sensitivity. Future design should also include a 
saccadic component to re-capture escaped targets, similar to biological systems. 
References 
C. Bandera, "Foveal Machine Vision Systems", Ph.D. Thesis, SUNY Buffalo, New 
York, 1990 
H. Barlow and W. Levick, "The Mechanism for Directional Selective Units in Rabbit's 
Retina", Journal of Physiology, Vol. 178, pp. 477-504, 1965 
T. Delbruck, "Silicon Retina with Correlation-Based, Velocity-Tuned Pixels", IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks, Vol. 4:3, pp. 529-41, 1993 
M. Eckert and G. Buchsbaum, "Effect of Tracking Strategies on the Velocity Structure of 
Two-Dimensional Image Sequences", J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. A10:7, pp. 1582-85, 1993 
R. Etienne-Cummings et al., "A New Temporal Domain Optical Flow Measurement 
Technique for Focal Plane VLSI Implementation", Proceedings of CAMP 93, M. 
Bayoumi, L. Davis and K. Valavanis (Eds.), pp. 241-251, 1993 
R. Etienne-Cummings, R. Hathaway and J. Van der Spiegel, "An Accurate and Simple 
CMOS 'One-Over' Circuit", Electronic Letters, Vol. 29-18, pp. 1618-1620, 1993b 
R. Etienne-Cummings et al., "Real-Time Visual Target Tracking: Two Implementations 
of Velocity Based Smooth Pursuit", Visual Information Processing IV, SPIE Vol. 2488, 
Orlando, 17-18 April 1995 
W. Reichardt, "Autocorrelation, A Principle for the Evaluation of Sensory Information by 
the Central Nervous System", Sensory Communication, Wiley, New York, 1961 
D. Robinson, "The Mechanism of Human Smooth Pursuit Eye Movement", Journal of 
Physiology ( London ) Vol. 180, pp. 569-591, 1965 
M. Steinbach, "Pursuing the Perceptual Rather than the Retinal Stimuli", Vision 
Research, Vol. 16, pp. 1371-1376, 1976 
H. Wyatt and J. Pola, "The Role of Perceived Motion in Smooth Pursuit Eye 
Movements", Vision Research, Vol. 19, pp. 613-618, 1979 
