Handwritten Word Recognition using Contextual 
Hybrid Radial Basis Function Network/Hidden 
Markov Models 
Bernard Lemari( 
La Poste/SRTP 
10, Rue de l'ile-Mabon 
F-44063 Nantes Cedex France 
lemarieSsrtp. srt-poste. fr 
Michel Gi!!oux 
La Poste/SRTP 
10, Rue de l'ile-Mabon 
F-44063 Nantes Cedex France 
illouxsrtp. srt-poste. fr 
Manuel Leroux 
La Poste/SRTP 
10, Rue de l'ile-Mabon 
F-44063 Nantes Cedex France 
lerouxsrtp. srt-poste. fr 
Abstract 
A hybrid and contextual radial basis function network/hidden Markov 
model off-line handwritten word recognition system is presented. The 
task assigned to the radial basis function networks is the estimation of 
emission probabilities associated to Markov states. The model is contex- 
tual because the estimation of emission probabilities takes into account 
the left context of the current image segment as represented by its pred- 
ecessor in the sequence. The new system does not outperform the previ- 
ous system without context but acts differently. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are now commonly used in off-line recognition of 
handwritten words (Chen et al., 1994) (Gilloux et al., 1993) (Gilloux et al. 1995a). In some 
of these approaches (Gilloux et al. 1993), word images are transformed into sequences of 
image segments through some explicit segmentation procedure. These segments are passed 
on to a module which is in charge of estimating the probability for each segment to appear 
when the corresponding hidden state is some state s (state emission probabilities). Model 
probabilities are generally optimized for the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) cri- 
terion. 
MLE training is known to be sub-optimal with respect to discrimination ability when the 
underlying model is not the true model for the data. Moreover, estimating the emission 
probabilities in regions where examples are sparse is difficult and estimations may not be 
accurate. To reduce the risk of over training, images segments consisting of bitmaps are of- 
ten replaced by feature vector of reasonable length (Chen et al., 1994) or even discrete sym- 
bols (Gilloux et al., 1993). 
Handwritten Word Recognition Using HMM/RBF Networks 765 
In a previous paper (Gilloux et al., 1995b) we described a hybrid HMM/radial basis 
function system in which emission probabilities are computed from full-fledged bitmaps 
though the use of a radial basis function (RBF) neural network. This system demonstrated 
better recognition rates than a previous one based on symbolic features (Gilloux et al., 
1995b). Yet, many misclassification examples showed that some of the simplifying as- 
sumptions made in HMMs were responsible for a significant part of these errors. In partic- 
ular, we observed that considering each segment independently from its neighbours would 
hurt the accuracy of the model. For example, figure 1 shows examples of letter a when it is 
segmented in two parts. The two parts are obviously correlated. 
Figure 1: Examples of segmented a. 
We propose a new variant of the hybrid HMM/RBF model in which emission probabil- 
ities are estimated by taking into account the context of the current segment. The context 
will be represented by the preceding image segment in the sequence. 
The RBF model was chosen because it was proven to be an efficient model for recog- 
nizing isolated digits or letters (Poggio & Girosi, 1990) (Lemari6, 1993). Interestingly 
enough, RBFs bear close relationships with gaussian mixtures often used to model emis- 
sion probabilities in markovian contexts. Their advantage lies in the fact that they do not 
directly estimate emission probabilities and thus are less prone to errors in this estimation 
in sparse regions. They are also trained through the Mean Square Error (MSE) criterion 
which makes them more discriminant. 
The idea of using a neural net and in particular a RBF in conjunction with a HMM is not 
new. In (Singer & Lippman, 1992) it was applied to a speech recognition task. The use of 
context to improve emission probabilities was proposed in (Bourlard & Morgan, 1993) 
with the use of a discrete set of context events. Several neural networks are there used to 
estimate various relations between states, context events and current segment. Our point is 
to propose a different method without discrete context based on a adapted decomposition 
of the HMM likelihood estimation.This model is next applied to off-line handwritten word 
recognition. 
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 1 is an overview of the architecture 
of our HMM. Section 2 describes the justification for using RBF outputs in a contextual 
hidden Markov model. Section 3 describes the radial basis function network recognizer. 
Section 4 reports on an experiment in which the contextual model is applied to the recog- 
nition of handwritten words found on french bank or postal cheques. 
2 OVERVIEW OF THE HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL 
In an HMM model (Bahl et al., 1983), the recognition scores associated to words w are 
likelihoods 
L(Wlil...in) = P(il...in[W) Xp(TM) 
in which the first term in the product encodes the probability with which the model of each 
word w generates some image (some sequence of image segments) il...i n. In the HMM par- 
adigm, this term is decomposed into a sum on all paths (i.e. sequence of hidden states) of 
products of the probability of the hidden path by the probability that the path generated the 
image sequence: 
P(il"'inlW) =  P(il'"inlSl'"Sn) xp(s 1...sn) 
path = {s l...sn} 
766 B. LEMARIi, M. GILLOUX, M. LEROUX 
It is often assumed that only one path contributes significantly to this term so that 
P(il...i I w) - P(il...i I Sl...Sn) xp(sl...Sn) 
n n 
In HMMs, each sequence element is assumed to depend only on its corresponding state: 
n 
p(i 1 .i Is = rip ß i 
"n l'"Sn ) (tj sj) 
j=l 
Moreover, first-order Markov models assume that paths are generated by a first-order 
Markov chain so that 
P(Sl'"Sn) - rI p(sjlsj_l) 
j=l 
We have reported in previous papers (Gilloux et al., 1993) (Gilloux et al., 1995a) on sev- 
eral handwriting recognition systems based on this assumption.The hidden Markov model 
architecture used in all systems has been extensively presented in (Gilloux et al., 1995a). 
In that model, word letters are associated to three-states models which are designed to ac- 
count for the situations where a letter is realized as 0, 1 or 2 segments. Word models are the 
result of assembling the corresponding letter models. This architecture is depicted on figure 
2. We used here transition emission rather than state emission. However, this does not 
e e, 0.05 e e, 0.05 e 
l a v a l 
Figure 2: Outline of the model for "lavar'. 
change the previous formulas if we replace states by transitions, i.e. pairs of states. 
One of these systems was an hybrid RBF/HMM model in which a radial basis function 
network was used to estimate emission probabilities p (/j I s :) . The RBF outputs are intro- 
...i JI s 
duced by applying Bayes rule in the expression ofp (il n 1'" Sn): 
n p (sj I/j) xp (/j) 
P(il"'in I Sl"'Sn) = rI 
j= 1 p ( Sj) 
Since the product of a priori image segments probabilities p (/j) does not depend on the 
word hypothesis w, we may write: 
P(iI" i Is 1...sn) o rI tj) 
'n 
j=l p 
In the above formula, terms of form p (s. I x. , ) are transition probabilities which may 
be estimated through the Baum-Welch re-stinton algorithm. Terms of form p (s;) are 
a priori probabilities of states. Note that for Bayes rule to apply, these probabilitie have 
and only have to be estimated consistently with terms of form p (sj I/j) since p (/j I sj) 
is independent of the statistical distribution of states. 
It has been proven elsewhere (Richard & Lippman, 1992) that systems trained through 
the MSE criterion tend to approximate Bayes probabilities in the sense that Bayes proba- 
Handwritten Word Recognition Using HMM/RBF Networks 767 
bilities are optimal for the MSE criterion. In practice, the way in which a given system 
comes close to Bayes optimum is not easily predictable due to various biases of the trained 
system (initial parameters, local optimum, architecture of the net, etc.). Thus real output 
scores are generally not equal to Bayes probabilities. However, there exist different proce- 
dures which act as a post-processor for outputs of a system trained with the MSE and make 
them closer to Bayes probabilities (Singer & Lippman, 1992). Provided that such a post- 
processor is used, we will assume that terms p (s. I i .) are well estimated by the post-proc- 
essed outputs of the recognition system. Then, trmJs p (s .) are just the a priori probabili- 
ties of states on the set used to train the system or post-prJ0cess the system outputs. 
This hybrid handwritten word recognition system demonstrated better performances 
than previous systems in which word images were represented through sequences of sym- 
bolic features instead of full-fledged bitmaps (Gilloux et al., 1995b). However, some rec- 
ognition errors remained, many of which could be explained by the simplifying assump- 
tions made in the model. In particular, the fact that emission probabilities depend only on 
the state corresponding to the current bitmap appeared to be a poor choice. For example, 
on figure 3 the third and fourth segment are classified as two halves of the letter i. For letters 
ß i,! [,i,l,l,l,t,[,i,l,l,l,i, ,l.l,t,i,l.i, ,t,I. ,i,i,t,1,1,1,1 l,l* '1:1' 
........... i . .l..I .......... I ...... 
t.l.bl,l.l.l.l.l.l,l.l.I I.I.1,I..I.1.1.1.1,I.I.I.1.[I.1,I, .I.l.!.l.l,l..lq.l.t.1 
lh. .:ilililii 
Figure 3: An image of trente classified as mille. 
segmented in two parts, the second half is naturally correlated to the first (see figure 1). Yet, 
our Markov model architecture is designed so that both halves are assumed uncorrelated. 
This has two effects. Two consecutive bitmaps which cannot be the two parts of a unique 
letter are sometimes recognized as such like on figure 3. Also, the emission probability of 
the second part of a segmented letter is lower than if the first part has been considered for 
estimating this probability. The contextual model described in the next section is designed 
so has to make a different assumption on emission probabilities. 
3 THE HYBRID CONTEXTUAL RBF/HMM MODEL 
The exact decomposition of the emission part of word likelihoods is the following: 
n 
P(il...inlSl...Sn) = p(i 11Sl...Sn) x l'-[ p(ijlSl"'Sn'il'"ij-1) 
j=2 
We assume now that bitmaps are conditioned by their state and the previous image in the 
sequence: 
P(il...inlSl...Sn) =p(i 11Sl) x I'IP(/jlsj'/j-1) 
j=2 
The RBF is again introduced by applying Bayes rule in the following way: 
P(Sl iil)xp(il) n p(sjl/j,/j_l ) xp(/jl/j_l ) 
P(il...i ISl...Sn)_= x I'I p(sjli. ) 
n P(Sl) /=2 j-1 
Since terms of form p (/j I/j _ 1) do not contribute to the discrimination of word hy- 
potheses, we may write: 
P($1 I/l) n p(xjl9,9_l) 
P(il...inlSl...Sn): P(Sl ) x 1"[ p(sjli 1) 
/=2 J- 
768 B. LEMARII, M. GILLOUX, M. LEROUX 
The RBF has now to estimate not only terms of form p (s. I i., i. ,) but also terms like 
p (s; I i, ) which are no longer computed by mere coun]ing. "ldx-o  radial basis function 
netvorls-e then used to estimate these probabilities. Their common architecture is de- 
scribed in the next section. 
4 THE RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION MODEL 
The radial basis function model has been described in (Lemari6, 1993). RBF networks 
are inspired from the theory of regularization (Poggio & Girosi, 1990). This theory studies 
how multivariate real functions known on a finite set of points may be approximated at 
these points in a family of parametric functions under some bias of regularity. It has been 
shown that when this bias tends to select smooth functions in the sense that some linear 
combination of their derivatives is minimum, there exist an analytical solution which is a 
linear combination of gaussians centred on the points where the function is known (Poggio 
& Girosi, 1990). It is straightforward to transpose this paradigm to the problem of learning 
probability distributions given a set of examples. 
In practice, the theory is not tractable since it requires one gaussian per example in the 
training set. Empirical methods (Lemari6, 1993) have been developed which reduce the 
number of gaussian centres. Since the theory is no longer applicable when the number of 
centres is reduced, the parameters of the model (centres and covariance matrices for gaus- 
sians, weights for the linear combination) have to be trained by another method, in that case 
the gradient descent method and the MSE criterion. Finally, the resulting RBF model may 
be looked at like a particular neural network with three layers. The first is the input layer. 
The second layer is completely connected to the input layer through connections with unit 
weights. The transfer functions of cells in the second layer are gaussians applied to the 
weighed distance between the corresponding centres and the weighed input to the cell. The 
weight of the distance are analogous to the parameters of a diagonal covariance matrix. Fi- 
nally, the last layer is completely connected to the second one through weighted connec- 
tions. Cells in this layer just output the sum of their input. 
In our experiments, inputs to the RBF are feature vectors of length 138 computed from 
the bitmaps of a word segment (Lemari6, 1993). The RBF that estimates terms of form 
p(s. l i.,i. ,) uses to such vectors as input whereas the second RBF (terms 
J jJ-I 
p (s. I t. .) ) is only fed with the vector associated to i, 1. These vectors are inspired from 
I j-t 
"chfiracteristic loci" methods (Gluksman, 1967) and encode the proportion of white pixels 
from which a bitmap border can be reached without meeting any black pixel in various of 
directions. 
5 EXPERIMENTS 
The model has been assessed by applying it to the recognition of words appearing in le- 
gal amounts of french postal or bank cheques. The size of the vocabulary is 30 and its per- 
plexity is only 14.3 (Bahl et al., 1983). The training and test bases are made of images of 
amount words written by unknown writers on real cheques. We used 7 191 images during 
training and 2 879 different images for test. The image resolution was 300 dpi. The amounts 
were manually segmented into words and an automatic procedure was used to separate the 
words from the preprinted lines of the cheque form. 
The training was conducted by using the results of the former hybrid system. The seg- 
mentation module was kept unchanged. There are 48 140 segments in the training set and 
19 577 in the test set. We assumed that the base system is almost always correct when align- 
ing segments onto letter models. We thus used this alignment to label all the segments in 
the training set and took these labels as the desired outputs for the RBF. We used a set of 
63 different labels since 21 letters appear in the amount vocabulary and 3 types of segments 
are possible for each letter. The outputs of the RBF are directly interpreted as Bayes prob- 
Handwritten Word Recognition Using HMM/RBF Networks 769 
abilities without further post-processing. 
First of all, we assessed the quality of the system by evaluating its ability to recognize 
the class of a segment through the value of p (s; I i;, i; ) and compared it with that of 
the previous hybrid system. The results of this dxpdrirdt are reported on table 1 for the 
test set. They demonstrate the importance of the context and thus its potential interest for a 
Table 1.' Recognition and confusion rates for segment classifiers 
Recognition rate Confusion rate Mean square error 
RBF system without context 32.6% 67.4% 0.828 
RBF system with context 41.7% 58.3% 0.739 
word recognition system. 
We next compare the performance on word recognition on the data base of 2878 images 
of words. Results are shown in table 2. The first remark is that the system without context 
Table 2: Recognition and confusion rates for the word recognition systems 
Recognition rate Confusion rate # Confusions 
RBF system without context 81,3% 16,7% 536 
RBF system with context 76,3% 23,7% 683 
present better results than the contextual system. Some of the difference between the sys- 
tems with and without context are shown below in figures 4 and 5 and may explain why the 
contextual system remains at a lower level of performance. The word "huit" and "deux" of 
figure 4 are well recognized by the system without context but badly identified by the con- 
textual system respectively as "trente" and "franc". The image of the word "huit", for ex- 
ample, is segmented into eight segments and each of the four letters of the word is thus nec- 
essarily considered as separated in two parts. The fifth and sixth segments are thus 
recognized as two halves of the letter 'T' by the standard system while the contextual sys- 
tem avoids this decomposition of the letter 'T'. On the next image, the contextual system 
proposes "ra" for the second and third segments mainly because of the absence of informa- 
tion on the relative position of these segments. On the other hand, figure 5 shows examples 
where the contextual system outperforms the system without context. In the first case the 
latter proposed the class "trois" with two halves on the letter 'T' on the fifth and sixth seg- 
ments. In the second case the context is clearly useful for the recognition on the first letter 
of the word. Forthcoming experiments will try to combine the two systems so as to benefit 
of their respective characteritics. 
,;.,.,.  ,,-..,............,.,., m:.-, :,.--:.--::..,::--m,, ,.,:..:..m.,,,,  ,,,, 1 lJll!JljjttlJljlJljljlJljljlJjljljljljlJljljlllljl 
Figure 4: some new confusions produced by the contextual system. 
Experiments have also revealed that the contextual system remains very sensible to the 
numerical output values for the network which estimates p (s; I i, ,). Several approaches 
for solving this problem are currently under investigation. First results have yet been ob- 
tained by trying to approximate the network which estimates p (sj I ij_ ) from the network 
which estimates p (sj I/j, ij_ ) . 
770 B. LEMARII, M. GILLOUX, M. LEROUX 
6 CONCLUSION 
We have described a new application of a hybrid radial basis function/hidden Markov 
model architecture to the recognition of off-line handwritten words. In this architecture, the 
estimation of emission probabilities is assigned to a discriminant classifier. The estimation 
of emission probabilities is enhanced by taking into account the context as represented by 
the previous bitmap in the sequence to be classified. A formula have been derived introduc- 
ing this context in the estimation of the likelihood of word scores. The ratio of the output 
values of two networks are now used so as to estimate the likelihood. 
The reported experiments reveal that the use of context, if profitable at the segment rec- 
ognition level, is not yet useful at the word recognition level. Nevertheless, the new system 
acts differently from the previous system without context and future applications will try 
to exploit this difference. The dynamic of the ratio networks output values is also very un- 
stable and some solutions to stabilize it which will be deeply tested in the forthcoming ex- 
periences. 
References 
Bahl L, Jelinek F, Mercer R, (1983). A maximum likelihood approach to speech recogni- 
tion. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 5(2): 179-190. 
Bahl LR, Brown PF, de Souza PV, Mercer RL, (1986). Maximum mutual information es- 
timation of hidden Markov model parameters for speech recognition. In: Proc of the Int 
Conf on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP'86):49-52. 
Bourlard, H., Morgan, N., (1993). Continuous speech recognition by connectionist statisti- 
cal methods, IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 893-909, 1993. 
Chen, M.-Y., Kundu, A., Zhou, J., (1994). Off-line handwritten word recognition using a 
hidden Markov model type stochastic network, IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Ma- 
chine Intelligence, vol. 16, no. 5:481-496. 
Gilloux, M., Leroux, M., Bertill, J.-M., (1993). Strategies for handwritten words recogni- 
tion using hidden Markov models, Proc. of the 2nd Int. Conf. on Document Analysis and 
Recognition:299-304. 
Gilloux, M., Leroux, M., Bertille, J.-M., (1995a). "Strategies for Cursive Script Recogni- 
tion Using Hidden Markov Models", Machine Vision & Applications, Special issue on 
Handwriting recognition, R. Plamondon ed., accepted for publication. 
Gilloux, M., Lemari, B., Leroux, M., (1995b). "A Hybrid Radial Basis Function Network/ 
Hidden Markov Model Handwritten Word Recognition System", Proc. of the 3rd Int. Conf. 
on Document Analysis and Recognition:394-397. 
Gluksman, H.A., (1967). Classification of mixed font alphabetics by characteristic loci, 1 st 
Annual 1EEE Computer Conf.: 138-141. 
Lemari, B., (1993). Practical implementation of a radial basis function network for hand- 
written digit recognition, Proc. of the 2nd Int. Conf. on Document Analysis and Recogni- 
tion:412-415. 
Poggio, T., Girosi, F., (1990). Networks for approximation and learning, Proc. of the IEEE, 
vol 78, no 9. 
Richard, M.D., Lippmann, R.P., (1991). "Neural network classifiers estimate bayesian a 
posteriori probabilities", Neural Computation, 3:461-483. 
Singer, E, Lippmann, R.P., (1992). A speech recognizer using radial basis function net- 
works in an HMM framework, Proc. of the Int. Conf. on acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing. 
