KODAK IMAGELINK TM OCR 
Alphanumeric Handprint Module 
Alexander Shustorovich and Christopher W. Thrasher 
Business Imaging Sys _tem, Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, NY 14653-5424 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the Kodak Imagelink TM OCR alphanumeric 
handprint module. There are two neural network algorithms at its 
cc: the first network is trained to find individual characters in an 
alphammea'ic field, while the secxmd oe performs the classification. 
Both networks we uained on Gabor projections of the original 
pixel images, which reintired in high reccL2n_. ition rates and greater 
noiso immunity. Compared to its purely mmeΩ cotrate. art 
(Shustxvich and Thrasher, 1995), this version of the system hos a 
siEnificant applicatic specie postprocessing module. The system 
has beta implemented in specialized parallel hardware, which allows 
it to run at 80 charlsec]board. It has been irtts!iod at the Driver and 
Vehicle L Agency (DVLA) in the United Kingdom, and its 
overall stwss rate ex__,,.ls 96% (character level without rejects), 
which tran.glates into 85% field rate. ff approimt_ely 20% of the 
fields are rejected, the system achieves 99.8% character and 99.5% 
field success rate. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The system we describe below was designed to process alphanumeric fields extracted 
from forms. The ms_jor assumptions were that (1) the form layout and definition allows 
the system to captree the field image with a single line of ch0racters, (2) the 
characters are handprinted capital letters and mmerals, with possible addition of 
several special characters, and (3) the characters may occasimolly touch, but generally 
they do not overlap. We also assrune that some additional informsfion about the 
contents of the field is available to assist in the process of disambiguation. Otherwise, 
it is virtually 'unpossible to distinguish not only between "O" and zero, but also" I" 
and one, "Z "and two," S" and five, etc. 
A good example of such an applicatkm is the processing of vehicle registration forms 
at the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) in the United Kingdom. The 
alphAmmedc field in question contains a license plate. There are 29 allowed patterns 
of character combinations, fram two to seven characters long. For example," 
A999AAA" is a valid license, whereas "A9A9A9 "is not (here "A" stands for any 
alpha character, "9" - for any numeric character). In addition, every field hos a 
KODAK IMAGELINK TM OCR Alphanumeric Handprint Module 779 
control character box on the right. This control charactor is computed as a ainder 
of the integer division by 37 of a linear combination of mmedc values of the 
characters in the main field. Ambiguous characters, namely "O "," I " and" S" are 
,n, ot allowed in the role of the control character, so they are replaced here by" " + 
ﬂ and" /" (not a very good choice, and the 37th character used is the" o/ ,,'. To 
make things more complicated, sometimes the control character is not available at the 
moment of filing the form (at a local post c/rice), and this lack of knowledge is 
indicated by putting an asterisk instead. Later we will discuss possible ways to use this 
additional informs_tion in an application specific postprocessing module. 
2 SEGMENTATION AND ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES 
The most challenging problem for h_dprint OCR is finding individual characters in a 
field. A m_mber of approaches to this problem can be fonnd in the literattue, the two 
most common being (1) se.tnn_ent_afion (Gupta et al., 1993, as an example of a recent 
publication), and (2) combined segmentation and recoEn. ition (Keeler and Rnmelhart, 
1992). 
The segmentation approach has difficulty separating touchi characters, and recently 
the consensus of practitioners in the field started shifting towards combined 
segmentation and recognition. In this scheme, the algorithm moves a window of a 
certain width along the fieldﬂ and confidence values of competing classification 
hypoth are used (sometimes with a separate centered/noncenlexed node) to decide 
if the window is positioned on top of a character. In the Saccade system (Martin et al., 
1993), for example, the neural network was trained not only to recognize choracters in 
the center of the moving window (and whether there is a character centered in the 
window), but also to make corrective jnmps (saccades) to the nearest character and, 
after classification, to the next character. 
Still another variation on the theme is an arrangement when the classification window 
is duplicated with one- or several-pixel shifts along the field (Benjio et al., 1994). 
Then the outputs of the classifiers serve as input for a postprocessing module (in this 
paper, a Hidden Markov Model) used to decide which of the multitude of process 
windows act_lly have centered characters in them. 
All these approaches have deficiencies. As we mentioned earlier, touching characllrs 
are difficult for autonomous segmentera. The moving (and jnmping) window with a 
single cememdMtered node ends to miss Ilarrow characters and sometimes to 
duplicate wide ones. The replication of a classifier together with postproce,ssing ends 
to be qule expensive computationally. 
3 POSITIONING NETWORK 
To do the positioning, we decided to introduce an array of output nnits correding 
to successive pixels in the middle portion of the window. These nodes signal if a 
center ('Ireart") of a character lies at the corresponding positions. Because the 
precision with which a h-man operator can mark the eh_racter heart is low (usjolly 
within one or two pixels at be,sO, the target activations of three consecutive nodes are 
set to one if there is a character heart at a pixel position conv.,sponding to the middle 
node. The rest of the target activations are set to zero. 
The network is then trained to produce bnmps of activation indicating the character 
hearts. Two bnffer regions on the left and on the right of the window (pixels without 
corre output nodes) are necessary to allow all or most of the character 
centered at each of the output node positions to fit inside the window. The 
replacement of a single centerexoncentered node by an array allows us to average 
output activations, generated by different window shifts, while conv..sIxmding to the 
same position. This additional procedure allows us to slide the window several pixels 
780 A. SHUSTOROVICH, C. W. THRASHER 
at a time: the appropriate step is a trade-off between the processing speed and the 
required level of robusmess. The final procedure involves thresholding of the 
activation-wave and the estimation of the predicted character position as the center of 
mass of the activation-bubble. The resulting algorithm is very effective: touching 
characters do not present significant problems, and only abnormally wide characters 
sometimes fool the system into false alarms. 
The system works with preprocessed images. Each field is divided into subfields of 
disconnected gronps of characters. These subfields are size-norms_lized to a height of 
20 pixels. After that they are reassembled into a single field again, with 6 pixel gaps 
between them. Two blank rows are added both along the top and the bottom of the 
recombined field as preferred by the Gabor projection technique (Shustorovich, 1994). 
In our current system, the input nodes of a sliding window are organized in a 24 x 36 
array. The first, intermediary, layer of the network implements the Gabor projections. 
It has 12 x 12 local receptive fields (LRFs) with fixed preccmputed weights. The step 
between LRFs is 6 pixels in both directions. We work with 16 Gabor basis fimctiom 
with cirojlar Gaussian envelopes centered within each LRF; they are both sine and 
cosine wavelets in four orientaticm and two sizes. All 16 projections frem each LRF 
constitute the input to a colnmn of 20 hidden vnits, thus the second (first trainable) 
hidden layer is organized in a three-dimensional array 3 x 5 x 20. The third hidden 
layer of the network also has local receptive fields, they are three-dlmensimal 2 x 2 x 
20 with the step 1 x 1 x 0. The vnits in the third hidden layer are also duplicated 20 
times, thus this layer is organized in a three-dimensional array 2 x 4 x 20. The fourth 
hidden layer has 60 vnits fully connected to the third layer. Finally, the output layer 
has 12 _mits, also fully connected to the fourth layer. 
The network was trained using a variant of the Back-Propagation algorithm. Both 
training and testing sets were drawn from the field data collected at DVLA. The 
training set contained approimat-ely 60,000 characters from 8,000 fields, and about 
5,000 characters from 650 fields were used for testing. On this test set, more than 
92% of all character hearts were found within 1-pixel precision, and only 0.4% were 
missed by more than 4 pixels. 
4 CLASSIFICAON NETWORK 
The structure of the classification network resembles that of the posi llgtwork. 
The Gabor projection layer works in exactly the same way, but the window size is 
._'maller, only 24 x 24 pixels. We chose this size because after height normalization to 
20 pixels, only occasionally the characters are wider than 24 pixels. Widening the 
window complicates tr 'aming: it imxeases the dimensionlity of the input while 
providing information, mostly about irrelevant_ pieces of adjacent characters. As a 
result, the second layer is organized as a 3 x 3 x 20 array of Units with LRFs and 
shared weights, the third is a 2 x 2 x 20 array of onits with LRFs, alld there are 37 
output units fully connected to the 80 onits in the third layer. The nnmber of output 
.nits in this variant of our system has been determined by the intended application. It 
was necessary to recognize uppercase le_.___ers. numerals. and also five special 
characters. namely plus (+). minus (-), slash (/). percent (%), and aslerisk (*). Since 
additional information was available for the purposes of disambiguation. we combined 
"O" and zero, "I "and one, "Z" and two," S "and five, and so the n-tuber of 
output classes became 26 (alpha) + 6 (numerals 3A,6,7.8q) + 5 (special characters) = 
37. 
Because we did not expect any positioning module to provide precision higher than 1 
or 2 pixels, the classifier network was trained and tested on five copies of all centered 
characters in the database, with shifts of 0, 1. and 2 pixels, both left and right. On the 
same test set mentioned in the previous section. the corresponding character 
recognition rates averaged 93.0%, 95.5%. and 96.0% for characters normali7ed to the 
KODAK IMAGELINK TM OCR Alphanumeric Handprint Module 781 
height of 18 to 20 pixels and placed in the middle of the window with shifts of 0 and 
1 pixel up and down. 
5 POSTPROCESSING MODULE 
The postprocessing module is a rule-based algorithm. First, it monitors the width of 
each subfield and rejects it if the nnmber of predicted character hearts is inconsismnt 
with the width. For example, if the positioning system cannot find a single character in 
a subfield, the output of the sysmm becomes a question mark. Second, the 
postprocessing module organizes competition between predicted character hearts if 
they are too dose to each other. For example, it will kill a ptedictod center with a 
lower activation value if its distance from a competitor is less than ten pixels, but it 
may allow both to survive if one of the two labels is "one". It is especially sensitive to 
closely positioned centers with identical labels, and will remove the weaker one for 
wide characters such as "W "or" M ". 
The rest of the postprocessing had to rely on the application knowledge. Since the 
alphanumeric fields on DVLA forms contain license plates, we cotfid use the fact that 
there are exactly 29 allowed patterns of symbol combinations, and that correct strings 
should match control characters from the box on the right. 
Because in this application rejection of individ, ol characters is meaningless, we 
decided to keep and analyze all possible candidates for each demcted position, that is, 
characters with output activations above a certain threshold (currently, 0.1). Of course, 
special characters are not allowed in the main field. The field as a whole is rejected if 
for any one position there is not even a single candidam character. All possible 
cxlmbinafions of candidate characters are analyzed. A candidam string is rejecmd if it 
does not conform to any of allowed patterns, or if it does not match any of the 
candidate control characters. All remaining candidate strings are assigned contd_ences. 
Since a chain is no stronger th_ its weakest linlr; in the case of an astel-isk (nO Ca3IltrO1 
character information), the string confidence exp_01s that of its least confident character. 
If there is a valid control character, then we can tolerate one low-confidence character, 
and so the string confid_ence eqols that of its character with the second lowest 
individual confidence. ff there are two or more candidate strings, the difference in 
confidence between the best and the second best is compared to another threshold 
(currently, 0.7) in order to pass the finn_l round of rejects. 
6 CONCLUSIONS 
Kodak Imagelink TM OCR alphannmeric handprint module described in this paper uses 
one neural network to find individual characters in a field, and then the second 
network performs the classification. The outputs of both networks are interpreted by a 
postprocessing module that generates the final label string (Figure 1, Figure 2). 
The algorithms were designed within the constraints of the plumned hardware 
implementation. At the same time., they provide a high level of positioning accuracy 
as well as classification ability. One new feature of our approach is the use of an 
array of cenmred/ntered nodes to significantly improve speed and robustness of 
the positioning scheme. The overall robustness of the system is further improved by 
noise resistance provided by a layer of Gabor projection nnits. The positioaing module 
and the classification module are nnlfled by the postprocessing module. 
System-level testing was performed on a test set mentioned above. The image quality 
was generally very good, but the data included some fields with touching characters. 
The character level success rate (without rejects) achieved on this test e 96%, 
which corresponded to above 85% field rate. With approimt_ely 20% of the fields 
rejected, the system achieved 99.8% character and 99.5% field success rate. 
782 A. SHUSTOROVICH, C. W. THRASHER 
In the testing mode, the preprocessing module would separate characters if it can 
reliably do so, normalize them individually, and place them with gaps of ten blank 
pixels, in order to simplify the job of both the positioning and the classification 
modules. When it is impossible to seoment individual characters, our system is still 
able to perform on the level of approximately 94% (since it has been trained on such 
data). The robustness of our system is an important factor in its success. Most other 
systems have substantial difficulties trying to recover from errors in segmentation. 
References 
Benjio, Y., Le Curt, Y., and Henderson, D. (1994) Globally Trained Handwritten Word 
Recognizer Using Spatial Representation, Space Displacement Neural Networks and 
Hidden Markov Models. In Cowan, I.D., Tesauro, G., and Alspector, J. (eds.), 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6, pp. 937-944. San Mamo, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
Gupta, A., Nagendraprasad, M.V., Liu, A., Wang, P.S.P., and Ayyadural, S. (1993) An 
Integrated Architecture for RecoEn, ifion of Totally Unconstrained Handwritten 
N_merals. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 7 
(4), pp. 757-773. 
Keeler, J. and Rumelhart, D.E. (1992) A Serf-Organizing Integrated Segmentation and 
Recognition Neural Net. In Moody, I.E., Hanson, S.J., and Lippmann, R.P. (eds.), 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 4, pp. 496-503. San Mamo, CA: 
Morgan Kaufinann Publishers. 
Martin, G., Mosfeq, R., Chapman D., and Pi _ttman J. (1993) Learning to See Where 
and What: Training a Net to Make Saccades and Recognize Handwritn Clmracters. 
In Nanson, S.J., Cowan, I.D., and Giles, C.L. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 5, pp. 441 ..7. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kanfmnn Publishers. 
Shustorovich, A. (1994) A Subspace Projection Approach to Feature Extraction: the 
Two-Dimensional Gabor Transform for Character Recognition. Neural Networks 7 
(8), 1295-1301. 
Shustorovich, A. and Thrasher, C.W. (1995) KODAK IMAGEliNK TM OCR N_wneric 
Handprint Module: Neural Network Positioning and Classification. Proceedings of 
Session 11 (Dooment Processing) of the industrial conference of ICANN-95 Paris, 
October 9-13, 1995. 
KODAK IMAGELINK TM OCR Alphanumeric Handprint Module 783 
Original Image with Detected Subimages 
Scaled Subimages 
Character Heart Index Waveform 
Best Guess Characters 
MY9 
z 
BEWC 
Final Character String (Aflr Post-Processing) 
M7 9 2 BEWC 
Figure 1: An Example of a Field Processed by the Syslm 
Outline. choracters indical low confidence. 
784 A. SHUSTOROVICH, C. W. THRASHER 
Odghud Image fith DeUced Subhnages 
Scaled Subimages 
Charac Hea Inc!x Wavorm 
Best Guess Characters 
G3 S 8 
AAF 3 
Final Character String (After Post-Processing) 
G3 5 8 AAF 3 
Figure 2: Another Example of a Field Processed by the System. 
