On the Computational Utility of 
Consciousness 
Donald W. Mathis and Michael C. Mozer 
mathis@cs.colorado.edu, mozer@cs.colorado.edu 
Department of Computer Science and Institute of Cognitive Science 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
Boulder, CO 80309-0430 
Abstract 
We propose a computational framework for understanding and 
modeling human consciousness. This framework integrates many 
existing theoretical perspectives, yet is sufficiently concrete to allow 
simulation experiments. We do not attempt to explain qualia (sub- 
jective experience), but instead ask what differences exist within 
the cognitive information processing system when a person is con- 
scious of mentally-represented information versus when that infor- 
mation is unconscious. The central idea we explore is that the con- 
tents of consciousness correspond to temporally persistent states 
in a network of computational modules. Three simulations are de- 
scribed illustrating that the behavior of persistent states in the 
models corresponds roughly to the behavior of conscious states 
people experience when performing similar tasks. Our simulations 
show that periodic settling to persistent (i.e., conscious) states im- 
proves performance by cleaning up inaccuracies and noise, forcing 
decisions, and helping keep the system on track toward a solution. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
We propose a computational framework for understanding and modeling conscious- 
ness. Though our ultimate goal is to explain psychological and brain imaging data 
with our theory, and to make testable predictions, here we simply present the frame- 
work in the context of previous experimental and theoretical work, and argue that 
12 Donald Mathis, Michael C. Mozer 
it is sensible from a computational perspective. We do not attempt to explain 
qualia--subjective experience and feelings. It is not clear that qualia are amenable 
to scientific investigation. Rather, our aim is to understand the mechanisms under- 
lying awareness, and their role in cognition. We address three key questions: 
What are the preconditions for a mental representation to reach consciousness? 
ß What are the computational consequences of a representation reaching conscious- 
ness? Does a conscious state affect processing differently than an unconscious state? 
What is the computational utility of consciousness? That is, what is the compu- 
tational role of the mechanism(s) underlying consciousness? 
2 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Modular Cognitive Architecture. We propose that the human cognitive ar- 
chitecture consists of a set of functionally specialized computational modules (e.g., 
Fodor, 1983). We imagine the modules to be organized at a somewhat coarse level 
and to implement processes such as visual object recognition, visual word-form 
recognition, auditory word and sound recognition, computation of spatial relation- 
ships, activation of semantic representations of words, sentences, and visual objects, 
construction of motor plans, etc. Cognitive behaviors require the coordination of 
many modules. For example, functional brain imaging studies indicate that there 
are several brain areas used for different subtasks during cognitive tasks such as 
word recognition (Posner  Cart, 1992). 
Modules Have Mapping And Cleanup Processes. We propose that mod- 
ules perform an associative memory function in their domain, and operate via a 
two-stage process: a fast, essentially feedforward input-output mapping  followed 
by a slower relaxation search (Figure 1). The computational justification for this 
two stage process is as follows. We assume that, in general, the output space of a 
module can represent a large number of states relative to the number of states that 
are meaningful or well formed--i.e., states that are interpretable by other modules 
or (for output modules) that correspond to sensible motor primitives. If we know 
which representations are well-formed, we can tolerate an inaccurate feedforward 
mapping, and "clean up" noise in the output by constraining it to be one of the 
well-formed states. This is the purpose of the relaxation step: to clean up the 
output of the feedforward step, resulting in a well-formed state. The cleanup pro- 
cess knows nothing about which output state is the best response to the input; 
it acts solely to enforce well-formedness. Similar architectures have been used re- 
cently to model various neuropsychological data (Hinton  Shallice, 1991; Mozer  
Behrmann, 1990; Plaut  Shallice, 1993). The empirical motivation for identifying 
consciousness with the results of relaxation search comes from studies indicating 
that the contents of consciousness tend to be coherent, or well-formed (e.g., Baars, 
1988; Crick, 1994; Damasio, 1989). 
Persistent States Enter Consciousness. In our model, module outputs enter 
consciousness if they persist for a sufficiently long time. What counts as long enough 
We do not propose that this process is feedforward at the neural level. Rather, we 
mean that any iterative refinement of the output over time is unimportant and irrelevant, 
On the Computational Utili of Consciousness 13 
relaxation search 
feedforward mapping 
Figure 1: Modules consist of two components. 
is not yet determined, but in order to model specific psychological data, we will be 
required to make this issue precise. At that time a specific commitment will need 
to be made, and this commitment must be maintained when modeling further data. 
An important property of our model is that there is no hierarchy of modules with 
respect to awareness, in contrast to several existing theories that propose that access 
to some particular module (or neural processing area) is required for consciousness 
(e.g., Baars, 1988). Rather, information in any module reaches awareness simply by 
persisting long enough. The persistence hypothesis is consistent with the theoretical 
perspectives of Smolensky (1988), Rumelhart et al (1986), Damado (1989), Crick 
and Koch (1990), and others. 
2.1 WHEN ARE MENTAL STATES CONSCIOUS? 
In our framework, the output of any module will enter consciousness if it persists in 
time. The persistence of an output state of a module is assured if: (1) it is a point 
attractor of the relaxation search (i.e., a well-formed state), and (2) the inputs to 
the module are relatively constant, i.e., they continue to be mapped into the same 
attractor basin. 
While our framework appears to make strong claims about the necessary and suf- 
ficient conditions for consciousness, without an exact specification of the modules 
forming the cognitive architecture, it is lacking as a rigorous, testable theory. A 
complete theory will require not only a specification of the modules, but will also 
have to avoid arbitrariness in claiming that certain cognitive operations or brain 
regions are modules while other are not. Ultimately, one must identify the neu- 
rophysiological and neuroanatomical properties of the brain that determine the 
module boundaries (see Crick, 1994, for a promising step in this regard). 
3 COMPUTATIONAL UTILITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS 
For the moment, suppose that our framework provides a sensible account of aware- 
ness phenomena (demonstrating this is the goal of ongoing work.) If one accepts 
this, and hence the notion that a cleanup process and the resulting persistent states 
are required for awareness, questions about the role of cleanup in the model be- 
come quite interesting because they are equivalent to questions about the role of 
the mechanism underlying awareness in cognition. One question one might ask is 
whether there is computational utility to achieving conscious states. That is, does a 
system that achieves persistent states perform better than a system that does not? 
14 Donald Mathis, Michael C. Mozer 
Does a system that encourages settling to well-formed states perform better than 
system that does not? We now show that the answer to this question is yes. 
3.1 ADDITION SIMULATION 
To examine the utility of cleanup, we trained a module to perform a simple multistep 
cognitive task: adding a pair of two-digit numbers in three steps? We tested the 
system with and without cleanup and compared the generalization performance. 
The network architecture (Figure 2) consists of a single module. The inputs consist 
of the problem statement and the current partial solution-state. The output is 
an updated solution-state. The module's output feeds back into its input. The 
problem statement is represented by four pools of units, one for each digit of each 
operand, where each pool uses a local encoding of digits. Partial solution states are 
represented by five pools, one for each of the three result digits and one for each of 
the two carry digits. 
Projection 
Input-o.utput 
mapp,ng 
I hidden units 
I op II op2 II o3 II ø41 re[--' rel-Y['"'lcarryllcarry21 
Figure 2: Network architecture for the addition task 
Each addition problem was decomposed into three steps (Figure 3), each describing 
a transformation from one partial solution state to the next, and the mapping net 
was trained perform each transformation individually. 
?? 71 11 11 
48 step1 48 step2 48 step3 48 
+ 62 + 62 + 62 + 62 
??? ?70 710 110 
Figure 3: The sequence of steps in an example addition problem 
Step 1 Given the problem statement, activate the rightmost result digit and right- 
most carry digit (comprising the first partial solution). 
' Of course, we don't believe that there is a brain module dedicated to addition problems. 
This choice was made because addition is an intuitive example of a multistep task. 
On the Computational Utility of Consciousness 15 
Step 2 Given the first partial solution, activate the next result and carry digits 
(second partial solution). 
Step 3 Given the second partial solution, activate the leftmost result digit (final 
solution). 
The set of well-formed states in this domain consists of all possible combinations of 
digits and "don't knows" among the pools ("don't knows" are denoted by question 
marks in Figure 3). Local representations of digits are used within each pool, and 
"don't knows" are represented by the state in which no unit is active. Thus, the 
set of well-formed states are those in which either one or no units are active in 
each pool. To make these states attractors of the cleanup net, the connections 
were hand-wired such that each pool was a winner-take-all pool with an additional 
attractor at the zero state. 
To run the net, a problem statement pattern is clamped on the input units, and 
the net is allowed to update for 200 iterations. Unit activities were updated using 
an incremental rule approximating continuous dynamics: 
ai(t) -- rf(E wijaj(t - 1)) + (1 - r)ai(t -- 1) 
where ai(t) is the activity of unit i at time t, r is a time constant in the interval 
[0,1], and f(.) is the usual sigmoid squashing function. 
Figure 4 shows the average generalization performance of networks run with and 
without cleanup, as a function of training set size. Note that, in principle, it is 
not necessary for the system to have a cleanup process to learn the training set 
perfectly, or to generalize perfectly. Thus, it is not simply the case that no solutions 
exist without cleanup. The generalization results were that for any size training set, 
percent correct on the generalization set is always better with cleanup than without. 
This indicates that although the mapping network often generalizes incorrectly, the 
output pattern often falls within the correct attractor basin. This is especially 
beneficial in multistep tasks because cleanup can correct the inaccuracies introduced 
by the mapping network, preventing the system from gradually diverging from the 
desired trajectory. 
100- 
o 
o 
i Projection 
, , No projection 
training set size 
(% of all problems) 
Figure 4: Cleanup improves generalization performance. 
Figure 5 shows an example run of a trained network. There is one curve for each 
of the five result and carry pools, showing the degree of "activity" of the ultimate 
target pattern, t, for that pool as a function of time. Activity is defined to be 
e -lIt-all2 where a is the current activity pattern and t is the target. The network 
16 Donald Mathis, Michael C. Mozer 
solves the problem by passing though the correct sequence of intermediate states, 
each of which are temporarily persistent. This resembles the sequence of conscious 
states a person might experience while performing this task; each step of the problem 
is performed by an unconscious process, and the results of each of step appear in 
conscious awareness. 
Activation of 
target pattern 
in each pool 
1.0 
.8 
.6 
.4 
.2 
10 20 30 40 50 
result digit 1, 
 carry digit 1 
result digit 2, 
..... carry digit 2 
.......... result digit 3 
Time 
Figure 5: Network solving the addition task in three steps 
3.2 CHOICE POINT SIMULATION 
In many ordinary situations, people are required to make decisions, e.g., drive 
straight through an intersection or turn left, order macaroni or a sandwich for 
lunch. At these choice points, any of the alternative actions are reasonable a priori. 
Contextual information determines which action is correct, e.g., whether you are 
trying to drive to work or to the supermarket. Conscious decision making often 
occurs at these choice points, except when the task is overlearned (Mandiet, 1975). 
We modeled a simple form of a choice point situation. We trained a module to 
output sequences of states, e.g., IBCD or EFGH, where states were represented by 
unique activity patterns over a set of units. If the sequences shared no elements, 
then presenting the first element of any sequence would be sufficient to regenerate 
the sequence. But when sequences overlap, choice points are created. For example, 
with the sequences IBCD and IEFG, state I can be followed by either B or E. 
We show that cleanup allows the module to make a decision and complete one of 
the two sequences. Figure 6 shows the operation of the module with and without 
cleanup following presentation of an  after training on the sequence pair BCD and 
lEFt. There is one curve for each state, showing the activation of that state (defined 
as before), as a function of time. When the network is run with cleanup, although 
both states B and E are initially partially activated, the cleanup process maps this 
ill-formed state to state B, and the network then correctly completes the sequence 
IBCD. Without cleanup, the initial activation of states B and E causes a blending of 
the two sequences IBCD and IEF and the state degenerates? 
Although the arithmetic and choice point tasks seem simple in part because we 
predefined the set of well-formed states. However, because the architecture segre- 
Sin this simulation, we are not modeling the role of context in helping to select one 
sequence or another; we are simply assuming that either sequence is valid in the current 
context. The nature of the model does not change when we consider context. Assuming 
that the domain is not highly overlearned, the context will not strongly evoke one alter- 
native action or the other in the feedforward mapping, leading to partial activation of 
multiple states, and the deanup process will be needed to force a decision. 
On the Computational Utility of Consciousness 17 
Activity 
of state o.o 
05 
o2 
,o 2o oo ,,o o o 7o .o .o Time 
-- state B 
.... state C 
.... stated 
........ state E 
08 
07 
05 
04 
03 
02 
Figure 6: Decision-point task with and without cleanup 
gates knowledge of well-formedness from knowledge of how to solve problems in the 
domain, well-formøtinesø could be learned simultaneously with, or prior to learn- 
ing the task. One could imagine training the cleanup network to autoassociate 
states it observes in the domain before or during training using an unsupervised or 
self-supervised procedure. 
4 
COMPUTATIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF 
PERSISTENT STATES 
In a network of modules, a persistent well-formed state in one module exerts larger 
influences on the state of other modules than do transient or ill-formed states. As a 
result the dynamics of the system tends to be dominated by well-formed persistent 
states. We show this in a final simulation. 
The network consisted of two modules, It and B, connected in a simple feedforward 
cascade. Each module's cleanup net was trained to have ten attractorø, locally 
represented in a winner-take-all pool of units. The mapping network of module B 
was trained to map the attractorø of module It to attractorø in B in a one-to-one 
fashion. Thus, state cq in module It is mapped to/x in module It, c2 to/2, etc. 
Module B was initialized to a well-formed state/x, and the output state of module 
It was varied, creating three conditions. In the persistent well-formed condition, 
module It was clamped in the well-formed state c2 for 50 time steps. In the transient 
well-formedcondition, module It was clamped in state c2 for only 30 time steps. And 
in the ill-]orrned condition, module It was clamped in an ill-formed state in which 
two states, c2 and ca, were both partially active. Figure 7 shows the subsequent 
activation of state /2 in module B as a function of time. Module B undergoes a 
transition from state/x to state /2 only in the persistent well-formed condition. 
This indicates that the conjunction of well-formøtinesø and persistence is required 
to effect a transition from one state to another. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our computational framework and simulation results suggest the following answers 
to our three key questions: 
18 Donald Mathis, Michael C. Mozer 
Activity of 
state 132 in 
module B 
0.8 
0.7 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
o Time 
well-formed, persistent 
state o2 in module A 
well-formed, transient 
state o2 in module A 
ill-formed, persistent 
state in module A 
Figure 7: Well-œormedness and persistence are both required for attractor transitions. 
In order to reach consciousness, the output of a module must be both per- 
sistent and semantically well-formed, and must not initiate an overlearned 
process. 
The computational consequences of conscious (persistent) representations 
include exerting larger influences on the cognitive system, resulting in in- 
creased ability to drive response processes such as verbal report. 
The computational utility of consciousness in our model lies in the ability of 
cleanup to "focus" cognition, by keeping the system close to states which 
are semantically meaningful. Because the system has learned to process 
such states, performance is improved. 
References 
Baars, B. J. (1988) A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness, Cambridge University Press. 
Crick, F. (1994) The astonishing hypothesis: The scientific search for the soul. Scribner. 
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1990) Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness. Sero. 
Neuro., 2:263-275 
Damasio, A. (1989) The brain binds entities and events by multiregional activation from 
convergence .ones. Neural Computation, 1, 123-132 
Fodor, J. A. (1983) The modularity of mind: An essay on faculty psychology. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Hinton, G. E., & Shallice, T. (1991) Lesioning an attractor network: Investigations of 
acquired dyslexia., Psych. Rev., 98:74-95 
Mantiler, G. (1975) Consciousness: Respectable, useful and probably necessary. In Infor- 
mation Processing and Cognition, The Loyola Symposium, R. Solso (Ed.). Erlbaum. 
Mozer, M. C., & Behrmann, M. (1990). On the interaction of spatial attention and lexical 
knowledge: A connectionist account of neglect dyslexia. Cognitive Neuroscience, 2, 96-123. 
Plaut, D.C., & Shallice, T. (1993) Perseverative and semantic influences on visual object 
naming errors in optic aphasla: A connectionist account. J. Cog. Neuro., 5(1): 89-117 
Posner, M. I., & Cart, T. (1992) Lexical access and the brain: Anatomical constraints on 
cognitive models of word recognition. American Journal of Psychology, 105(1): 1-26 
Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, P., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton, G. E. (1986) Schemata 
and sequential thought in PDP models. In J. L. McClelland & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), 
Parallel Distributed Processing, Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Smolensky, P. (1988) On the proper treatment of connectionism. Brain Behar. Sci., 11: 
1-74 
