Grouping Components of 
Three-Dimensional Moving Objects in 
Area MST of Visual Cortex 
Richard S. Zemel 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Department of Psychology 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
zemelcmu. edu 
Terrence J. Sejnowski 
CNL, The Salk Institute 
P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
; errysalk. edu 
Abstract 
Many cells in the dorsal part of the medial superior temporal 
(MST) area of visual cortex respond selectively to spiral flow 
patterns--specific combinations of expansion/contraction and ro- 
tation motions. Previous investigators have suggested that these 
cells may represent self-motion. Spiral patterns can also be gener- 
ated by the relative motion of the observer and a particular object. 
An MST cell may then account for some portion of the complex 
flow field, and the set of active cells could encode the entire flow; 
in this manner, MST effectively segments moving objects. Such 
a grouping operation is essential in interpreting scenes containing 
several independent moving objects and observer motion. We de- 
scribe a model based on the hypothesis that the selective tuning 
of MST cells reflects the grouping of object components undergo- 
ing coherent motion. Inputs to the model were generated from 
sequences of ray-traced images that simulated realistic motion sit- 
uations, combining observer motion, eye movements, and indepen- 
dent object motion. The input representation was modeled after 
response properties of neurons in area MT, which provides the pri- 
mary input to area MST. After applying an unsupervised learning 
algorithm, the units became tuned to patterns signaling coherent 
motion. The results match many of the known properties of MST 
cells and are consistent with recent studies indicating that these 
cells process 3-D object motion information. 
166 Richard $. Zemel, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
I INTRODUCTION 
A number of studies have described neurons in the dorsal part of the medial superior 
temporal (MSTd) monkey cortex that respond best to large expanding/contracting, 
rotating, or shifting patterns (Tanaka et al., 1986; Duffy & Wurtz, 1991a). Recently 
Graziano et al. (1994) found that MSTd cell responses correspond to a point in a 
multidimensional space of spiral motions, where the dimensions are these motion 
types. 
Combinations of these motions are generated as an animal moves through its envi- 
ronment, which suggests that area MSTd could play a role in optical flow analysis. 
When an observer moves through a static environment, a singularity in the flow 
field known as the focus of expansion may be used to determine the direction of 
heading (Gibson, 1950; Warren &Hannon, 1988). Previous computational models 
of MSTd (Lappe & Rauschecker, 1993; Perrone & Stone, 1994) have shown how 
navigational information related to heading may be encoded by these cells. These 
investigators propose that each MSTd cell represents a potential heading direction 
and responds to the aspects of the flow that are consistent with that direction. 
In natural environments, however, MSTd cells are often faced with complex flow 
patterns produced by the combination of observer motion with other independently- 
moving objects. These complex flow fields are not a single spiral pattern, but instead 
are composed of multiple spiral patterns. This observation that spiral flows are local 
subpatterns in flow fields suggests that an MSTd cell represents a particular regular 
subpattern which corresponds to the aspects of the flow field arising from a single 
cause--the relative motion of the observer and some object or surface in the scene. 
Adopting this view implies a new goal for MST: the set of MST responses accounts 
for the flow field based on the ensemble of motion causes. 
An MST cell that responds to a local subpattern accounts for a portion of the flow 
field, specifically the portion that arises from a single motion cause. In this manner, 
MST can be considered to be segmenting motion signals. As in earlier models, the 
MSTd cell responds to the aspects of flow consistent with its motion hypothesis, 
but here a cell's motion hypothesis is not a heading direction but instead represents 
the 3-D motion of a scene element relative to the observer. This encoding may be 
useful not only in robustly estimating heading detection, but may also facilitate 
several other tasks thought to occur further down the motion processing stream, 
such as localizing objects and parsing scenes containing multiple moving objects. 
In this paper we describe a computational model based on the hypothesis that an 
MST cell signals those aspects of the flow that arise from a common underlying 
cause. We demonstrate how such a model can develop response properties from the 
statistics of natural flow images, such as could be extracted from MT signals, and 
show that this model is able to capture several known properties of information 
processing in MST. 
2 THE MODEL 
The input to the system is a movie containing some combination of observer motion, 
eye movements, and a few objects undergoing independent 3-D motion. An optical 
Grouping Components of 3-D Moving Objects in Area MST of Visual Cortex 167 
flow algorithm is then applied to yield local motion estimates; this flow field is the 
input to the network, which consists of three layers. The first layer is designed after 
monkey area MT. The connectivity between this layer and the second layer is based 
on MST receptive field properties, and the second layer has the same connectivity 
pattern to the output layer. The weights on all connections are determined by a 
training algorithm which attempts to force the network to recreate the input pattern 
on the output units. We discuss the inputs, the network, and the training algorithm 
in more detail below. 
2.1 STIMULI 
The flow field input to the network is produced from a movie. The various movies 
are intended to simulate natural motion situations. Sample situations include one 
where all motion is due to the observer's movement, and the gaze is in the motion 
direction. Another situation that produces a qualitatively different flow field is when 
the gaze is not in the motion direction. A third situation includes independent 
motion of some of the objects in the environment. Each movie is a sequence of 
images that simulates one of these situations. 
The images are created using a flexible ray-tracing program, which allows the simu- 
lation of many different objects, backgrounds, observer/camera motions, and light- 
ing effects. We currently employ a database of 6 objects (a block of swiss cheese, 
a snail, a panther, a fish, a ball, and a teapot) and three different backgrounds. A 
movie is generated by randomly selecting one to four of the objects, and a back- 
ground. To simulate one of the motion situations, a random selection of motion 
parameters follows: a). The observer's motion along (x, z) describes her walking; 
b). The eyes can rotate in (x, y), simulating the tracking of an object during motion; 
c). Each object can undergo independent 3-D motion. A sequence of 15 images is 
produced by randomly selecting 3-D initial positions and then updating the pose 
of the camera and each object in the image based on these motion parameters. 
Figure i shows 3 images selected from a movie generated in this manner. 
We apply a standard optical flow technique to extract a single flow field from each 
synthetic image sequence. Nagel's (1987) flow algorithm is a gradient-based scheme 
which performs spatiotemporal smoothing on the set of images and then uses a 
multi-resolution second-order derivative technique, in combination with an oriented 
smoothness relaxation scheme, to produce the flow field. 
2.2 MODEL INPUT AND ARCHITECTURE 
The network input is a population encoding of these optical flow vectors at each 
location in a 21x31 array by small sets of neurons that share the same receptive 
field position but are tuned to different directions of motion. The values for each 
input unit is computed by projecting the local flow vector onto the cell's preferred 
direction. We are currently using 4 inputs per location, with evenly spaced preferred 
directions and a tuning half-width of 45 ø. 
This population encoding in the input layer is intended to model the response of 
cells in area MT to a motion sequence. The receptive field (RF) of each model MT 
unit is determined by the degree of spatial smoothing and subsampling in the flow 
168 Richard S. Zemel, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Figure 1: Three images from a movie, and the corresponding flow field. In this 
movie, the observer is moving into the scene while maintaining his gaze on the 
fish. The panther is moving independently. Note that the flow field contains spiral 
subpatterns that describe the independent relative motion of different objects. 
algorithm. We have set these so that each input unit in the model is sensitive to 
a 10 ø range in the visual field, which approximately matches the RF sensitivity of 
MT neurons near the fovea. 
The connectivity between the input layer and hidden layer of the network is based 
on the receptive field properties of MST cells. These RFs have always been reported 
to be large, but the exact size has been controversial. We base our RFs on the recent 
studies of Lagae et al. (1994), who found that most MSTd RFs included the fovea, 
and the sensitive part of the RF averaged 25o-30 ø and was relatively independent of 
eccentricity. Our input images cover approximately a 60øx45 ø portion of the visual 
field. We therefore evenly place the centers of the second layer cell's RFs within 
a region near the image center, and extend the RFs to include approximately 13 
of the image. There are a total of 20 different RF centers, and ten hidden layer 
units share each RF; each of these 200 hidden units receives input from a 14x21 
unit patch in the input layer. 
Grouping Components of 3-D Moving Objects in Area MST of Visual Cortex 169 
2.3 LEARNING ALGORITHM 
The question that we asked is whether the model would develop MST-like response 
properties in the second layer of the network under conditions of unsupervised 
learning. This would provide evidence for our hypothesis that the spiral pattern 
selectivity of an MST cell derives from the regular occurrence of a set of flow sig- 
nals caused by the relative motion of an object and the observer. An earlier model 
(Zhang et al., 1993) showed how simple Hebbian synapses can yield weight patterns 
resembling the combinations of motion components; the inputs to this model were 
simple linear combinations of these motion patterns. However, a Hebbian mech- 
anism fails to find the underlying structure--the spiral motion patterns--for the 
more complicated inputs described above. Other standard unsupervised methods, 
such as Principal Components Analysis and competitive learning, also fail to achieve 
the desired selectivity in the MST units. 
The network we used for unsupervised learning was an autoencoder, in which the 
network is trained to reconstruct the input on its output units. This type of network 
is well-suited for a generarive view of input examples, in which inputs are seen as 
random samples drawn from some particular distribution, which it is then the goal of 
learning to discover. Unsupervised learning methods attempt to invert this process 
to extract the representations of the underlying causes of the inputs. Zemel (1993) 
shows that unsupervised techniques contain assumptions about the form of these 
underlying causes; these different assumptions can be translated into the network 
architecture, activations, and cost function, and the resulting network tends to learn 
representations that conform to these assumptions. 
In this network we make an assumption about the causes that generated the scene 
based on our knowledge of the underlying structure in the flow fields. Each input 
example is assumed to be generated by several independent causes, each of which 
corresponds to one moving object, or a part thereof. Furthermore, we assume that 
the value of a single output dimension, here the response of an MT cell, can always 
be specified as coming from just one cause; that is, local flow is generally the result 
of the relative motion of the observer and the nearest object along that line-of-sight. 
This assumption can be translated into an activation function for the output units 
which encourages the causes to compete to account for the activity of an input unit 
while also allowing multiple causes to be present in each image (Dayan & Zemel, 
1995). The stochastic activity of an output unit j is given by: pj = 1 - (1 + 
i x,wy, )-1 where xi is the binary output of hidden unit i, sampled from the 
1-w j,  
standard sigmoidal function of its net input. 
We use a cross-entropy error measure for each output unit j: Ej = -tj logp/- (1 - 
tj) log(1 -pj), where tj is the value of the corresponding input unit. A second cost 
in the objective function implements our assumption that only a few causes will 
account for an input example. This cost is the asymmetric divergence between each 
hidden unit's expected and actual activity distributions, which encourages the unit's 
activity to match its expected activity b across the training set. We back-propagate 
this summed error to determine the network weights. 1 
 Our activation function is derived from a probabilistic formulation of the image for- 
mation process. A biologically plausible learning rule can be applied if the network is run 
170 Richard S. Zemel, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
3 SIMULATION RESULTS 
The training set for the network contained 600 flow fields, each computed from a 
different motion sequence. The network reached a minimum of the cost function 
after approximately 1000 iterations of a conjugate gradient procedure. 
We have tested the generalization ability of the network by presenting 50 flow fields 
from novel random motion sequences. The network is able to successfully recon- 
struct these fields using only a few active hidden units. We have examined the 
selectivity of individual hidden units by simulating the neurophysiological experi- 
ments, i.e., presenting various spiral flow patterns in the unit's RF. The speed was 
held equal for all stimuli, and the pitch of spiral motion systematically varied. Fig- 
ure 2 shows the result for one unit; like most units, this unit prefers a particular 
combination of the motion types. To quantify the units' selectivities, we fit a cir- 
cular normal function to each unit's tuning curve. We found that 68% of the cells 
(all with Ymax > 0.9) were selective--their tuning half-width was less than 30 ø. 
Another interesting property of some dorsal MST neurons is that they maintain 
their preference for a motion pattern regardless of the location of the velocity flow 
center. We tested the position-invariance of the model MST units in our network by 
shrinking the flow stimuli and placing them in different positions within each unit's 
RF. Most of the selective units retained their preferences in these experiments. 
In this position-invariance test, we discovered another interesting property of the 
network: 43 of the 200 model MST units that were not selective for a particular 
motion type on the full-field test were selective when the stimuli were reduced in size; 
that is, these units responded preferentially to particular flows at specific positions 
in their RFs. This local flow specificity is a natural consequence of modeling not 
only observer motion but also independent object motion, as can be seen in Figure 1. 
4 DISCUSSION 
Many of the hidden units in the model have receptive fields that prefer spiral flow 
fields and resemble the responses observed in area MST neurons. Several other 
properties are consistent with this identification. For example, the hidden unit re- 
sponses are relatively invariant to the object shape. This is clear from the units' flow 
selectivities, as shown in Figure 2--the units instead respond to localized patches 
of the flow field undergoing coherent motion. This shape-invariance agrees with the 
physiological findings of (Lagae et al., 1994), who found that MST cells are less 
selective for motion types that depend on object structure than they are to types 
that depend primarily on the relative movement between objects and the observer. 
Also, many of the model MST units motion selectivities are unaffected by placing the 
stimulus in different locations within the RF, which matches the results of (Duffy & 
Wurtz, 1991b; Graziano et al., 1994) and others, One way that our simulation results 
diverge from the neurophysiological findings on MSTd is the presence of units that 
are selective to a particular motion type at specific locations within their RF. This 
local selectivity suggests that these units may model the response properties of 
using a stochastic sampling procedure. We use a mean-field approximation, and back- 
propagation to speed up learning. 
Grouping Components of 3-D Moving Objects in Area MST of Visual Cortex 171 
@ 
© © 
© 
© © 
Q 
Figure 2: The response selectivity of an individual model MST unit to various mo- 
tion types. In this polar plot, the angle represents the pitch of spiral motion, and the 
radius represents the response of the unit. Eight directions were sampled in two con- 
tinuous spaces, one for translation and the other for rotation-expansion/contraction. 
cells that have been described in MST1, the lateral portion of MST. This leads to 
a testable prediction concerning these cells--that they would exhibit similar local 
selectivities on these full-field and within-RF flow selectivity experiments. 
We have thus demonstrated that a network constructed to model MT-MST cortical 
processing is capable of learning (via an unsupervised procedure) to group compo- 
nents of the optical flow field for a variety of images. This grouping is accomplished 
through the cooperative activity of several model MST units, each of which accounts 
for a portion of the field indicative of coherent motion. Adopting a novel approach 
to the question of what MST is encoding has produced an alternative derivation of 
its response characteristics. 
We are currently extending this model in several directions. Recent studies have 
shown that over 90% of MSTd cells are sensitive to the disparity of the visual 
stimulus (Roy et al., 1992). This disparity sensitivity provides an additional criteria 
for making segmentation decisions, as image components at similar depths may be 
grouped. Furthermore, for some MSTd cells the preferred direction of stimulus 
motion reversed as the disparity (relative to the plane of fixation) of the stimulus 
reversed. Adding disparity information to the network input should allow the hidden 
units to respond to particular combinations of these cues. 
We also intend to extend our model to consider the relations between functions 
carried out in the dorsal and lateral portions of MST. Our current results indicate 
that it may be possible to construct a model of MST that incorporates both areas. 
For both areas, evidence exists that many cells are sensitive to an extraretinal 
input (Newsome et al., 1988), and respond differently to identical flows depending 
on whether the motion is due to observer or object motion (Erickson & Thier, 1991). 
Including an extraretinal signal in the network will allow us to tie the model more 
closely to the animal's behavior. Our current hypothesis is that the two MST areas 
act in conjunction to allow an observer to track a moving object through a dynamic 
172 Richard S. Zemel, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
environment, while maintaining enough information about other objects that may 
be relevant, either for avoidance or to switch attention. 
Acknowledgement s 
We thank Thomas Albright, Peter Dayan, Alexandre Pouget, Gene Stoner, and Paul Viola 
for helpful comments, and the developers of the Persistence of Vision Ray Tracer for making 
this package pubhc. This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research. 
References 
Dayan, P., g Zemel, R. S. (1995). Competition and multiple cause models. Neural 
Computation. In press. 
Duffy, C. J., g Wurtz, R. H. (1991a). The sensitivity of MST neurons to optic flow 
stimuli. I. A continuum of response selectivity to large field stimuli. Journal of Neu- 
rophysiology, 65, 1329-1345. 
Duffy, C. J., g Wurtz, R. H. (1991b). Sensitivity of MST neurons to optic flow stimuli. 
II. Mechanisms of response selectivity revealed by small field stimuli. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 65, 1346-1359. 
Erickson, R. G., g Thier, P. (1991). A neuronal correlate of spatial stability during 
periods of self-induced visual motion. Experimental Brain Research, 86, 608-616. 
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The perception of the visual world. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Graziano, M. S. A., Andersen, R. A., g Snowden, R. J. (1994). Tuning of MST neurons 
to spiral motions. Journal of Neuroscience, 1 (1), 54-67. 
Lagae, L., Maes, H., Raiguel, S., Xiao, D.-K., g Orban, G. A. (1994). Responses of 
macaque STS neurons to optic flow components: A comparison of areas MT and 
MST. Journal of Neurophysiology, 71(5), 1597-1626. 
Lappe, M., g Rauschecker, J.P. (1993). A neural network for the processing of optic flow 
from ego-motion in man and higher mammals. Neural Computation, 5(3), 374-391. 
Nagel, H.-H. (1987). On the estimation of optical flow: relations between different ap- 
proaches and some new results. Artificial Intelligence, 33(3), 299-324. 
Newsome, W. T., Wurtz, R. H., g Komatsu, H. (1988). Relation of cortical areas MT and 
MST to pursuit eye movements. II. Differentiation of retinal from extretinal inputs. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 60,604-620. 
Perrone, J. A., g Stone, L. S. (1994). A model of self-motion estimation within primate 
extrastriate visual cortex. Vision Research, 3 (21), 2917-2938. 
Roy, J.~P., Komatsu, H., g Wurtz, R. H. (1992). Disparity sensitivity of neurons in 
monkey extrastriate area MST. Journal of Neuroscience, Iœ(7), 2478-2492. 
Tanaka, K., Hikosaka, K., Saito, H.-A., Yukie, M., Fukada, Y., g Iwai, E. (1986). Analysis 
of local and wide-field movements in the superior temporal visual areas of the macaque 
monkey. Journal of Neuroscience, 6, 134-144. 
Warren, W. H., g Harmon, D. J. (1988). Direction of self motion is perceived from optical 
flow. Nature, 336, 162-163. 
Zemel, R. S. (1993). A minimum description length framework for unsupervised learning. 
PhD thesis, University of Toronto. 
Zhang, K., Sereno, M. I., g Sereno, M. E. (1993). Emergence of position-independent 
detectors of sense of rotation and dilation with hebbian learning: An analysis. Neural 
Computation, 5(4), 597-612. 
