The Nil OO0: High Speed Parallel VLSI 
for Implementing Multilayer Perceptrons 
Michael P. Perrone 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center 
P.O. Box 704 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
mppatson. ibm. com 
Leon N Cooper 
Institute for Brain nd Neural Systems 
Brown University 
Providence, Ri 02912 
lnccns. brown. edu 
Abstract 
In this paper we present a new version of the standard multilayer 
perceptton (MLP) algorithm for the state-of-the-art in neural net- 
work VLSI implementations: the Intel Nil000. This new version of 
the MLP uses a fundamental property of high dimensional spaces 
which allows the /2-norm to be accurately approximated by the 
/x-norm. This approach enables the standard MLP to utilize the 
parallel architecture of the Nil000 to achieve on the order of 40000, 
256-dimensional classifications per second. 
1 The Intel Nil000 VLSI Chip 
The Nestor/Intel radial basis function neural chip (Nil000) contains the equivalent 
of 1024 256-dimensional artificial digital neurons nd can perform at least 40000 
classifications per second [Sullivan, 1993]. To attain this great speed, the Nil000 
was designed to calculate "city block" distances (i.e. the /-norm) nd thus to 
avoid the large number of multiplication units that would be required to calculate 
Euclidean dot products in parallel. Each neuron calculates the city block distance 
between its stored weights nd the current input: 
neuron activity =  Iw- x] (1) 
i 
where w is the neuron's stored weight for the ith input nd x is the ith input. 
Thus the Nil000 is ideally suited to perform both the RCE [Reilly et al., 1982] and 
748 Michael P. Perrone, Leon N. Cooper 
PRCE [Scofield et al., 1987] algorithms or any of the other commonly used radial 
basis function (R. BF) algorithms. However, dot products are central in the calcula- 
tions performed by most neural network algorithms (e.g. MLP, Cascade Correlation, 
etc.). Furthermore, for high dimensional data, the dot product becomes the compu- 
tation bottleneck (i.e. most of the network's time is spent calculating dot products). 
If the dot product can not be performed in parallel there will be little advantage 
using the Nil000 for such algorithms. In this paper, we address this problem by 
showing that we can extend the Nil000 to many of the standard neural network 
algorithms by representing the Euclidean dot product as a function of Euclidean 
norms and by then using a city block norm approximation to the Euclidean norm. 
Section 2, introduces the approximate dot product; Section 3 describes the City 
Block MLP which uses the approximate dot product; and Section 4 presents ex- 
periments which demonstrate that the City Block MLP performs well on the NIST 
OCR. data and on human face recognition data. 
2 Approximate Dot Product 
Consider the following approximation [Pertone, 1993]: 
1 
IIz-'11  l (2) 
where ' is some n-dimensional vector, II. II is the Euclidean length (i.e. the h- 
norm) and I' I is the City Block length (i.e. the/-norm). This approximation is 
motivated by the fact that in high dimensional spaces it is accurate for a majority 
of the points in the space. In Figure 1, we suggest an intuitive interpretation of why 
this approximation is reasonable. It is clear from Figure 1 that the approximation 
is reasonable for about 20% of the points on the arc in 2 dimensions. 1 As the 
dimensionality of the data space increases, the tangent region in Figure 1 expands 
asymptotically to fill the entire space and thus the approximation becomes more 
valid. Below we examine how accurate this approximation is and how we can use 
it with the Nil000, particularly in the MLP context. Given a set of vectors, V, all 
with equal city block length, we measure the accuracy of the approximation by the 
ratio of the variance of the Euclidean lengths in V to the squared mean Euclidean 
lengths in V. If the ratio is low, then the approximation is good and all we must 
do is scale the city block length to the mean Euclidean length to get a good fit? In 
particular, it can be shown that assuming all the vectors of the space are equally 
likely, the following equation holds [Pertone, 1993]: 
rrr < o(n q- 1) 1 ower, (3) 
where n is the dimension of the space; p. is the average Euclidean length of the 
' is the variance about the average 
set of vectors with fixed city block length S; 
Euclidean length; Plower is the lower bound for p,, and is given by Plower --: 
In fact, approximately 20% of the points are within 1% of each other and 40% of the 
points are within 5% of each other. 
2Note that in Equation 2 we scale by 1/V/-d. For high dimensional spaces this is a good 
approximation to the ratio of the mean Euclidean length to the City Block length. 
VLSl for Implementing Multilayer Perceptrons 749 
Figure 1: Two dimensional interpretation of the city block approximation. The 
circle corresponds to all of the vectors with the same Euclidean length. The inner 
square corresponds to all of the vectors with city block length equal the Euclidean 
length of the vectors in the circle. The outer square (tangent to the circle) corre- 
sponds to the set of vectors over which we will be making our approximation. In 
order to scale the outer square to the inner square, we multiple by 1/V where 
n is the dimensionality of the space. The outer square approximates the circle in 
the regions near the tangent points. In high dimensional spaces, these tangent re- 
gions approximate a large portion of the total hypersphere and thus the city block 
distance is a good approximation along most of the hypersphere. 
and an is defined by 
an -- 1 + + --. (4) 
n + 1 2'(n- 1) n + 1 
' to Po,er in the large n limit is 
From this equation we see that the ratio of a n 
bounded above by 0.4. This bound is not very tight due to the complexity of the 
calculations required; however Figure 3 suggests that a much tighter bound must 
exist. A better bound exists if we are willing to add a minor constraint to our 
high dimensional space [Pertone, 1993]. In the case in which each dimension of the 
vector is constrained such that the entire vector cannot lie along a single axis, a we 
can show that 
+ - 1 ,ower (S) 
where S is the city block length of the vector in question. Thus in this ce, the ratio 
2 to 2 decre,es at let  ft as 1/n since n/S will be some fixed constant 
of fin 1ower 
independent of n. 4 This dependency on n and S is shown in Figure 2. This result 
suggests that the approximation will be very accurate for many real-world pattern 
aFor example, when the axes are constrained to be in the range [0, 1] and the city block 
length of the vector is greater than 1. Note that this is true for the majority of the points 
in a n dimensional unit hypercube. 
*Thus the accuracy improves as S increases towards its maximum value. 
750 Michael P. Perrone, Leon N. Cooper 
recognition tasks such as speech nd high resolution image recognition which can 
typically have thousand or even tens of thousands of dimensions. 
I I  \ S/n -- 0.025 
I  \ S/n -- O.OS ...... 
/  \ S/n = 0.1 ....... 
0.8 I- !  S/n = 0.2 - - - 
li\ S/n -- 0.3 ....... 
0.4 
0 100 200 300 400 500 
Figure 2: Plot of O'/Plower VS.  for constrained vectors with varying values of S/. 
As S grows the ratio shrinks and consequently, accuracy improves. If we ssume 
that all of the vectors are uniformly distributed in an n-dimensional unit hypercube, 
it is easy to show that the average city block length is n/2 and the variance of the 
city block length is n/12. Since S/n will generally be within one standard deviation 
of the mean, we find that typically 0.2 < S/ < 0.8. We can use the same analysis 
on binary valued vectors to derive similar results. 
We explore this phenomenon further by considering the following Monte Carlo simu- 
lation. We sampled 200000 points from a uniform distribution over an n-dimensional 
cube. The Euclidean distance of each of these points to a fixed corner of the cube 
was calculated and all the lengths were normalized by the largest possible length, 
v. Histograms of the resulting lengths are shown in Figure 3 for four different val- 
ues of . Note that as the dimension increases the variance about the mean drops. 
From Figure 3 we see that for s few as 100 dimensions, the standard deviation is 
approximately 5% of the mean length. 
3 The City Block MLP 
In this section we describe how the approximation explained in Section 2 can be 
used by the Nil000 to implement MLPs in parallel. Consider the following formula 
for the dot product 
37-- + I1'- z711 (6) 
VLSI for Implementing Multilayer Perceptrons 751 
0 
0.4 
0 
0. 
0 
0 .1 
0.1 
0.0 
0 
0. 
Figure 3: Probability distributions for randomly draw lengths. Note that as the 
dimension increases the variance about the mean length drops. 
where I1' II is the Euclidean length (i.e. h-norm).  Using Equation 2, we can 
approximation Equation 6 by 
where n is the dimension of the vectors and [. ] is the city block length. The 
advantage to the approximation in Equation 7 is that it can be implemented in 
parallel on the Nil000 while still behaving like a dot product. Thus we can use this 
approximation to implement MLP's on an Nil000. The standard functional form 
for MLP's is given by [Rumelhart et al., 1986] 
JV d 
(; =,)= (o + Z (o + 
j=l i=1 
(8) 
were rr is a fixed ridge function chosen to be a(a) - (1 + e-)-l; N is the number 
of hidden units; k is the class label; d is the dimensionality of the data space; and c 
and/3 are adjustable parameters. The alternative which we propose, the City Block 
MLP, is given by [Pertone, 1993] 
N d d 
1( 1( 
(; ,) = (o +  (o +  Z I, + ,1) '-  Z I,- , I)')) 
j=l i=1 i=1 
(9) 
or 
SNote also that depending on the information available to us, we could use either 
.  -- (11 q- 12 - I1112 -I11 ) 
752 Michael P. Perrone, Leon N. Cooper 
DATA SET HIDDEN STANDARD CITYBLOCK ENSEMBLE 
UNITS % CORRECT % CORRECT CITYBLOCK 
Faces 12 94.6+ 1.4 92.2+ 1.9 96.3 
Numbers 10 98.4-t-0.17 97.3-t-0.26 98.3 
Lowercase 20 88.9+0.31 84.0ñ0.48 88.6 
Uppercase 20 90.5+0.39 85.6+0.89 90.7 
Table 1: Comparison of MLPs classification performance with and with out the 
city block approximation to the dot product. The final column shows the effect of 
function space averaging. 
where the two city block calculation would be performed by neurons on the Nil000 
chip. 6 The City Block MLP learns in the standard way by minimizing the mean 
square error (MSE), 
MSE= - (10) 
ik 
where tii is the value of the data at xi for a class k. The MSE is minimir. ed using 
the backpropagation stochastic gradient descent learning rule [Werbos, 1974]: For 
a fixed stepsir. e r/and each k, randomly choose a data point zi and change 7 by the 
mount 
c(MSE,) (11) 
A 7 = -r/ 7 ' 
where 7 is either a or/3 and MSEi is the contribution to the MSE of the ith data 
point. Note that although we have motivated the City Block MLP above as an 
approximation to the standard MLP, the City Block MLP can also be thought of 
as special case of radial basis function network. 
4 Experimental Results 
This section describes experiments using the City Block MLP on a 120-dimensional 
representation of the NIST Handwritten Optical Character Recognition database 
and on a 2294-dimensional grayscale human face image database. The results in- 
dicate that the performance of networks using the approximation is as good as 
networks using the exact dot product [Pertone, 1993]. 
In order to test the performance of the City Block MLP, we simulated the behav- 
ior of the Nil000 on a SPARC station in serial We used the approximation only 
on the first layer of weights (i.e. those connecting the inputs to the hidden units) 
where the dimensionality is highest and the approximation is most accurate. The 
approximation was not used in the second layer of weights (i.e. those connecting 
the hidden units to the output units were calculated in serial) since the number of 
hidden units was low and therefore do not correspond to a major computational 
bottleneck. It should be noted that for a 2 layer MLP in which the number of 
hidden units and output units are much lower than the input dimensionality, the 
6The dot product between the hidden and the output layers may also be approximated 
in the same way but it is not shown here. In fact, the Nil000 could be used to perform all 
of the functions required by the network. 
VLSI for Implementing Multilayer Perceptrons 753 
DATA SET HIDDEN STANDARD CITYBLOCK ENSEMBLE 
UNITS FOM FOM CITYBLOCK 
Numbers 10 92.14-0.57 87.44-0.83 92.5 
Lowercase 20 59.74-1.7 44.4+ 2.0 62.7 
Uppercase 20 60.04-1.8 44.64-4.5 66.4 
Table 2: Comparison of MLPs FOM. The FOM is defined as the 100 minus the 
number rejected minus 10 time the number incorrect. 
majority of the computation is in the calculation of the dot products in the first 
weight layer. So even using the approximation only in the first layer will signifi- 
cantly accelerate the calculation. Also, the Nil000 on-chip math coprocessor can 
perform a low-dimensional, second layer dot product while the high-dimensional, 
first layer dot product is being approximated in parallel by the city block units. In 
practice, if the number of hidden units is large, the approximation to the dot prod- 
uct may also be used in the second weight layer. In the simulations, the networks 
used the approximation when calculating the dot product only in the feedforward 
phase of the algorithm. For the feedbackward phase (i.e. the error backpropagation 
phase), the algorithm was identical to the original backward propagation algorithm. 
In other words the approximation was used to calculate the network activity but 
the stochastic gradient term was calculated as if the network activity was generated 
with the real dot product. This simplification does not slow the calculation because 
all the terms needed for the backpropagation phase are calculated in the forward 
propagation phase In addition, it allows us to avoid altering the backpropagation 
algorithm to incorporate the derivative of the city block approximation. We are 
currently working on simulations which use city block calculations in both the for- 
ward and backward passes. Since these simulations will use the correct derivative 
for the functional form of the City Block MLP, we expect that they wi]] have better 
performance. In practice, the price we pay for making the approximation is reduced 
performance. We can avoid this problem by increasing the number of hidden units 
and thereby allow more flexibility in the network. This increase in size will not 
significantly slow the algorithm since the hidden unit activities are calculated in 
parallel. In Table i and Table 2, we compare the performance of a standard MLP 
without the city block approximation to a MLP using the city block approximation 
to calculate network activity. In all cases, a population of 10 neural networks were 
trained from random initial weight configurations and the means and standard de- 
viations were listed. The number of hidden units was chosen to give a reasonable 
size network while at the same time reasonably quick training. Training was halted 
by cross-validating on an independent hold-out set. From these results, one can 
see that the relative performances with and with out the approximation are simi- 
lar although the City Block is slightly lower. We also perform ensemble averaging 
[Pertone, 1993, Pertone and Cooper, 1993] to further improve the performance of 
the approximate networks. These results are given in the last column of the table. 
From these data we see that by combining the city block approximation with the 
averaging method, we can generate networks which have comparable and sometimes 
better performance than the standard MLPs. In addition, because the Nil000 is 
running in parallel, there is minimal additional computational overhead for using 
754 Michael P. Perrone, Leon N. Cooper 
the averaging. 7 
5 Discussion 
We have described a new radial basis function network architecture which can be 
used in high dimensional spaces to approximate the learning characteristics of a 
standard MLP without using dot products. The absence of dot products allows us 
to implement this new architecture efficiently in parallel on an Nil000; thus enabling 
us to take advantage of the Ni1000's extremely fast classification rates. We have 
also presented experimental results on real-world data which indicate that these 
high classifications rates can be achieved while maintaining or improving classifica- 
tion accuracy. These results illustrate that it is possible to use the inherent high 
dimensionality of real-world problems to our advantage. 
References 
[Pertone, 1993] Pertone, M.P. (1993). Improving Regression Estimation: Averaging 
Methods for Variance Reduction with Eztensions to General Convez Measure 
Optimization. PhD thesis, Brown University, Institute for Brain and Neural 
Systems; Dr. Leon N Cooper, Thesis Supervisor. 
[Pertone and Cooper, 1993] Pertone, M.P. and Cooper, L. N. (1993). When net- 
works disagree: Ensemble method for neural networks. In Mummone, R. J., 
editor, Artificial Neural Networks for Speech and Vision. Chapman-Hall. Chap- 
ter 10. 
[Reilly et al., 1982] Reilly, D. L., Cooper, L. N., and Elbanm, C. (1982). A neural 
model for category learning. Biological Cybernetics, 45:35-41. 
[Rumelhart et al., 1986] Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., and the PDP Re- 
search Group (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing, Volume 1: Foundations. 
MIT Press. 
[Scofield et al., 1987] Scofield, C. L., Reilly, D. L., Elbaum, C., and Cooper, L. N. 
(1987). Pattern class degeneracy in an unrestricted storage density memory. 
In Anderson, D. Z., editor, Neural Information Processing Systems. American 
Institute of Physics. 
[Sullivan, 1993] Sullivan, M. (1993). Intel and Nestor deliver second-generation 
neural network chip to DARPA: Companies launch beta site program. Intel 
Corporation News Release. Feb. 12. 
[Werbos, 1974] Werbos, P. (1974). Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction 
and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences. PhD thesis, Harvard University. 
?The averaging can also be applied to the standard MLPs with a corresponding im- 
provement in performance. However, for serial machines averaging slows calculations by a 
factor equal to the number of averaging nets. 
