Pulsestream Synapses with Non-Volatile 
Analogue Amorphous-Silicon Memories. 
A.J. Holmes, A.F. Murray, S. Churcher and J. Hajto 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, EH9 3JL 
M. J. Rose 
Dept. of Applied Physics and Electronics, 
Dundee University 
Dundee DD1 4HN 
Abstract 
A novel two-terminal device, consisting of a thin 1000J layer ofp + 
a-Si:H sandwiched between Vanadium and Chromium electrodes, 
exhibits a non-volatile, analogue memory action. This device stores 
synaptic weights in an ANN chip, replacing the capacitor previously 
used for dynamic weight storage. Two different synapse designs are 
discussed and results are presented. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Analogue hardware implementations of neural networks have hitherto been ham- 
pered by the lack of a straightforward (local) analogue memory capability. The 
ideal storage mechanism would be compact, non-volatile, easily reprogrammable, 
and would not interfere with the normal silicon chip fabrication process. 
Techniques which have been used to date include resistors (these are not generally 
reprogrammable, and suffer from being large and difficult to fabricate with any accu- 
racy), dynamic capacitive storage [4] (this is compact, reprogrammable and simple, 
but implies an increase in system complexity, arising from off-chip refresh circuitry), 
764 A. J. Holmes, A. F. Murray, S. Churcher, J. Hajto, M. J. Rose 
EEPROM ("floating gate") memory [5] (which is compact, reprogrammable, and 
non-volatile, but is slow, and cannot be reprogrammed in situ), and local digital 
storage (which is non-volatile, easily programmable and simple, but consumes area 
horribly). 
Amorphous silicon has been used for synaptic weight storage [1, 2], but only as 
either a high-resistance fixed weight medium or a binary memory. 
In this paper, we demonstrate that novel amorphous silicon memory devices can be 
incorporated into standard CMOS synapse circuits, to provide an analogue weight 
storage mechanism which is compact, non-volatile, easily reprogrammable, and sim- 
ple to implement. 
2 a-Si:H MEMORY DEVICES 
The a-Si:H analogue memory device [3] comprises a 1000 thick layer of amorphous 
silicon (p+ a-Si:H) sandwiched between Vanadium and Chromium electrodes. 
The a-Si device takes the form of a two-terminal, programmable resistor. It is an 
"add-on" to a conventional CMOS process, and does not demand that the normal 
CMOS fabrication cycle be disrupted. The a-Si device sits on top of the completed 
chip circuitry, making contact with the CMOS arithmetic elements via holes cut in 
the protective passivation layer, as shown in Figure 1. 
Chromium  a-Si /Vanadium 
'::::-:il .............. '¾ii!::!! \ / / Photoresist 
[ / Metal2 X CMOS Passivation / Meta12X 
Figure 1: The construction of a-Si:H Devices on a CMOS chip 
After fabrication a number of electronic procedures must be performed in order to 
program the device to a given resistance state. 
Programming, and Pre-Programming Procedures 
Before the a-Si device is usable, the following steps must be carried out: 
ß Forming: This is a once-only process, applied to the a-Si device in its 
"virgin" state, where it has a resistance of several M. A series of 300ns 
pulses, increasing in amplitude from 5v to 14v, is applied to the device 
electrodes. This creates a vertical conducting channel or filament whose 
approximate 'resistance is 1K. This filament can then be programmed to 
a value in the range 1K to 1M. The details of the physical mechanisms 
are not yet fully established, but it is clear that conduction occurs through 
a narrow (sub-micron) conducting channel. 
Pulsestream Synapses with Non-Volatile Analogue Amorphous-Silicon Memories 765 
ß Write: To decrease the device's resistance, negative "Write", pulses are 
applied. 
ß Erase: To increase the device's resistance, positive "Erase", pulses are ap- 
plied. 
ß Usage: Pulses below 0.5v do not change the device resistance. The resis- 
tance can therefore be utilised as a weight storage medium using a voltage 
of less than 0.5v without causing reprogramming. 
Programming pulses, which range between 2v and 5v, are typically 120ns in du- 
ration. Programming is therefore much faster than for other EEPROM (floating 
gate) devices used in the same context, which use a series of 100ps pulses to set the 
threshold voltage [5]. 
The following sections describe synapse circuits using the a-Si:H devices. These 
synapses use the reprogrammable a-Si:H resistor in the place of a storage capacitor 
or EEPROM cell. These new synapses were implemented on a chip referred to as 
ASiTEST2, consisting of five main test blocks, each comprising of four synapses 
connected to a single neuron. 
3 The EPSILON based synapse 
The first synapse to be designed used the a-Si:H resistor as a direct replacement for 
the storage capacitor used in the EPSILON [4] synapse. 
Mst 
- +Sv  "- +$v 
Resistor 
Mh'r Set a-Si --> Vw 
 1.5v 
Vsy_z 
_ Nuron 
 I +/- Iw 
.. t.. Storase 
; Capacitor 
---0.5v 
EPSILON Synapse 
Figure 2: The EPSILON Synapse with a-Si:H weight storage 
In the original EPSILON chip the weight voltage was stored as a voltage on a 
capacitor. In this new synapse design, shown in Figure 2, the a-Si:H resistance is 
set such that the voltage drop produced by Iset is equivalent to the original weight 
voltage, Vw, that was stored dynamically on the capacitor. 
A new, simpler, synapse, which can be operated from a single +5v supply, was also 
be included on the ASiTEST2 chip. 
766 A. J. Holmes, A. F. Murray, S. Churcher, J. Hajto, M. J. Rose 
4 The MklI synapse 
The circuit is shown in Figure 3. The a-Si:H memory is used to store a current, 
Iasi. This current is subtracted from a zero current, Isy_z, to give a weight current 
, +/-Iw, which adds or subtracts charge from the activity capacitor, Cact, thus 
implementing excitation or inhibition respectively. 
For the circuit to function correctly we must limit the voltage on the activity ca- 
pacitor to the range [1.5v,3.5v], to ensure that the transistors mirroring Isy_z and 
Iasi remain in saturation. As Figure 3 shows, there are few reference signals and 
the circuit operates from a single +5v power supply rail, in sharp contrast to many 
earlier analogue neural circuits, including our own. 
Isy_z [- 
Mset 
Ra-Si Iasi 
-- Vprg 
Mirror Set 
+5v 
PWin 
Iasi 
+/- Iw 
Synapse 
- Vrstv 
Vsel 
] Comparator 
 Cact 
Vramp '-V- 
Neuron 
Power Supplies References Tail Currents 
Vrstv = 2.5v 
V5_0 = 5.0v Isy_z --- 5uA Ineu = 4uA 
Figure 3: The MklI synapse 
PWout 
.J--l_ 
On first inspection the main drawback of this design would appear to be a reliance 
on the accuracy with which the zero current Isy_z is mirrored across an entire chip. 
The variation in this current means that two cells with the same synapse resistance 
could produce widely differing values of Iw. However, during programming we 
do not use the resistance of the a-Si:H device as a target value. We monitor the 
voltage on Cact for a given PWin signal, increasing or decreasing the resistance 
of the a-Si:H device until the desired voltage level is achieved. 
Example: To set a weight to be the maximum positive value, we adjust the a-Si 
resistance until a PWin signal of 5us, the maximum input signal, gives a voltage of 
3.5v on the integration capacitor. 
We are able to set the synapse weight using the whole integration range of [1.5v,3.5v] 
by only closing Vsel for the desired synapse during programming. In normal op- 
erating mode all four Vsel switches will be closed so that the integration charge is 
summed over all four local capacitors. 
Pulsestream Synapses with Non- Volatile Analogue Amorphous-Silicon Memories 76 7 
4.1 Example - Stability Test 
As an example of the use of integration voltage as means of monitoring the resistance 
of a particular synapse we have included a stability test. This was carried out on 
one of the test chips which contained the MkII synapse. 
The four synapses on the test chip were programmed to give different levels of 
activation. The chip was then powered up for 30mins each day during a 7-day 
period, and the activation levels for each synapse were measured three times. 
3.5 
3 
2 
1.5 0 
Stability Test - PWin = 3us 
I , I I I ' I I' I 
testl test2 test3 test4 test5 test6 test7 
- -  , - -0 .... - ':- -:- -e- - - o- 'i - -eOO -S4 
. _ ' _, _ _!_o_ _ :.  -  -sl 
: ,, ' no , , 
, ', 
_ ',___._____: _: _ ',__: 
-- ---  -- -s3- 
': : 
: , 
., 
I I  I ' I ' I t I' I 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Measurement Index 
Figure 4: ASiTEST2- Stability Test 
As figure 4 shows, the memories remain in the same resistance state (i.e retain their 
programmed weight value) over the whole 7-day period. Separate experiments on 
isolated devices indicate much longer hold times - of the order of months at least. 
5 ASiTEST3 
Recently we have received our latest, overtly neural, a-Si:H based test chip. This 
contains an 8x8 array of the MkII synapses. 
The circuit board for this device has been constructed and partially tested while 
the ASiTEST3 chips are awaiting the deposition of the a-Si:H layers. We have been 
able to use an ASiTEST2 chip containing two of the MkII synapse test blocks i.e. 
8 synapses and 2 neurons to exercise much of the board's functionality. 
The test board contains a simple state machine which has four different states: 
ß State 0: Load Input Pulsewidths into SRAM from PC. 
ß State 1: Apply Input Pulsewidth signals to chip1. 
ß State 2: Use Vramp to generate threshold function for chip1. The resulting 
Pulsewidth outputs are used as the inputs to chip2, as well as being stored 
768 A. J. Holmes, A. F. Murray, S. Churcher, J. Hajto, M. J. Rose 
in SRAM. 
ß State 3: Use Vramp to generate threshold function for chip2. Read resulting 
Pulsewidth Outputs into SRAM. 
ß State 0: Read Output Pulsewidths from SRAM into PC. 
The results obtained during a typical test cycle are shown in Figure 5. 
3v 
2v 
lv 
ov 
3.5v 
3.or 
2.5v 
2.or 
1.5v 
5v 
4v 
3v 
2v 
Iv 
ov 
_. Statel -- -.< State2 . < State3 
 PWo_0 
Figure 5' ASiTEST3 Board Scope Waveforms 
As this figure shows different ramp signals, corresponding to different threshold 
functions, can be applied to chip1 and chip2 neurons. 
10.0 
9.0, 
8.O 
7.o 
6.O 
5.0 
4.0 
:3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.o 
0 
Sinc Buffer PulseWidth Swceps 
Neu2-Syn3 
 ^ Neul-Syn4 
Neul-Syn3 
Nel-Synl 
Neu2-$ynl 
Neu2-$yn2 
0.5 1.0 1 .$ 2.0 2.5 3.0 
Palscwidth Input [us] 
Figure 6:ASiTEST3 Board - MkII Synapse Characteristic 
While the signals shown in Figure 5 appear noisy the multiplier characteristic that 
the chip produces is still admirably linear, as shown in Figure 6. In this experiment 
all eight synapses on a test chip were programmed into different resistance states 
and PWin was swept from 0 to 3us. 
Pulsestream Synapses with Non-Volatile Analogue Amorphous-Silicon Memories 769 
6 Conclusions 
We have demonstrated the use of novel a-Si:H analogue memory devices as a means 
of storing synaptic weights in a Pulsewidth ANN. We have also demonstrated the 
operation of an interface board which allows two 8x8 ANN chips, operating as a 
two layer network, to be controlled by a simple PC interface card. 
This technology is most suitable for small networks in, for example, remote con- 
trol and other embedded-system applications where cost and power considerations 
favour a single all-inclusive ANN chip with non-volatile, but programmable weights. 
Another possible application of this technology is in large networks constructed 
using Thin Film Technology(TFT). If TFT's were used in place of the CMOS tran- 
sistors then the area constraint imposed by crystalline silicon would be removed, 
allowing truly massively parallel networks to be integrated. 
In summary- the a-Si:H analogue memory devices described in this paper provide a 
route to an analogue, non-volatile and fast synaptic weight storage medium. At the 
present time neither the programming nor storage mechanisms are fully understood 
making it difficult to compare this new device with more established technologies 
such as the ubiquitous Floating-Gate EEPROM technique. Current research is 
focused on firstly, improving the yield on the a-Si:H device which is unacceptably 
low at present, a demerit that we attribute to imperfections in the a-Si fabrication 
process and secondly, improving understanding of the device physics and hence the 
programming and storage mechanisms. 
Acknowledgements 
This research has been jointly funded by BT, and EPSRC (formerly SERC), the 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. 
References 
[1] W. Hubbard et a1.(1986) Electronic Neural Networks AIP Conference Proceed- 
ings - Snowbird 1986:227-234 
[2] H.P. Graf (1986) VLSI Implementation of a NN memory with several hundreds 
of neurons AIP Conference Proceedings - Snowbird 1986:182-187. 
[3] M.J. Rose et al (1989) Amorphous Silicon Analogue Memory Devices Journal 
of Non-Crystalline Solids 1(115):168-170 
[4] A.Hamilton et al. (1992) Integrated Pulse-Stream Neural Networks- Results, 
Issues and Pointers IEEE Transactions on N.N.s 3(3):385-393 
[5] M.Holler, S.Tam, H.Castro and R.Benson (1989) An Electrically Trainable ANN 
with 10240 Floating Gate Synapses. Int Conf on N.N.s Proc :191-196 
[6] A.F.Murray and A.V.W.Smith.(1987) Asynchronous Arithmetic for VLSI Neu- 
ral Systems. Electronics Letters 23(12):642-643 
[7] A.J. Holmes et al. (1993) Use of a-Si:H Memory Devices for Non-volatile Weight 
Storage in ANNs. Proc ICAS 15:817-820 
