A Charge-Based CMOS Parallel Analog 
Vector Quantizer 
Gert Cauwenberghs 
Johns Hopkins University 
ECE Department 
3400 N. Charles St. 
Baltimore, MD 21218-2686 
gert@j hunix. hc f. j hu. edu 
Volnei Pedroni 
California Institute of Technology 
EE Department 
Mail Code 128-95 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
pedroni@romeo. caltech. edu 
Abstract 
We present an analog VLSI chip for parallel analog vector quantiza- 
tion. The MOSIS 2.0 tzm double-poly CMOS Tiny chip contains an 
array of 16 x 16 charge-based distance estimation cells, implementing a 
mean absolute difference (MAD) metric operating on a 16-input analog 
vector field and 16 analog template vectors. The distance cell includ- 
ing dynamic template storage measures 60 x 78 /xm 2. Additionally, 
the chip features a winner-take-all (WTA) output circuit of linear com- 
plexity, with global positive feedback for fast and decisive settling of a 
single winner output. Experimental results on the complete 16 x 16 VQ 
system demonstrate correct operation with 34 dB analog input dynamic 
range and 3 tzsec cycle time at 0.7 mW power dissipation. 
1 Introduction 
Vector quantization (VQ) [ 1] is a common ingredient in signal processing, for applications 
of pattern recognition and data compression in vision, speech and beyond. Certain neural 
network models for pattern recognition, such as Kohonen feature map classifiers [2], are 
closely related to VQ as well. The implementation of VQ, in its basic form, involves a 
search among a set of vector templates for the one which best matches the input vector, 
whereby the degree of matching is quantified by a given vector distance metric. Effi- 
780 Gert Cauwenberghs, Volnei Pedroni 
cient hardware implementation requires a parallel search over the template set and a fast 
selection and encoding of the "winning" template. The chip presented here implements 
a parallel synchronous analog vector quantizer with 16 analog input vector components 
and 16 dynamically stored analog template vectors, producing a 4-bit digital output word 
encoding the winning template upon presentation of an input vector. The architecture is 
fully scalable as in previous implementations of analog vector quantizers, e.g. [3,4,5,6], 
and can be readily expanded toward a larger number of vector components and template 
vectors without structural modification of the layout. Distinct features of the present 
implementation include a linear winner-take-all (WTA) structure with globalized posi- 
tive feedback for fast selection of the winning template, and a mean absolute difference 
(MAD) metric for the distance estimations, both realized with a minimum amount of 
circuitry. Using a linear charge-based circuit topology for MAD distance accumulation, 
a wide voltage range for the analog inputs and templates is achieved at relatively low 
energy consumption per computation cycle. 
2 System Architecture 
The core of the VQ consists of a 16 x 16 2-D array of distance estimation cells, configured 
to interconnect columns and rows according to the vector input components and template 
outputs. Each cell computes in parallel the absolute difference distance between one 
component xj of the input vector x and the corresponding component yij of one of the 
template vectors yi, 
d(xj, yij) __ [Xj -- yij[ , i, j = 1... 16. (1) 
The mean absolute difference (MAD) distance between input and template vectors is 
accumulated along rows 
^ 1 16 
- -- Ixj - y'jl, i = 1... 16 (2) 
d(x, yi) 16 j= 
and presented to the WTA, which selects the single winner 
k TM = argm.in3(x, y/) . (3) 
! 
Additional parts are included in the architecture for binary encoding of the winning 
output, and for address selection to write and refresh the template vectors. 
3 VLSI Circuit Implementation 
The circuit implementation of the major components of the VQ, for MAD distance 
estimation and WTA selection, is described below. Both MAD distance and WTA cells 
operate in clocked synchronous mode using a precharge/evaluate scheme in the voltage 
domain. The approach followed here offers a wide analog voltage range of inputs and 
templates at low power weak-inversion MOS operation, and a fast and decisive settling of 
the winning output using a single communication line for global positive feedback. The 
output encoding and address decoding circuitry are implemented using standard CMOS 
logic. 
A Charge-Based CMOS Parallel Analog Vector Quantizer 781 
WRi 
WR 
ß  0.2 pF 
4/2 y Z j 
8/2 
DIST 
LO HI z i 
Cc --0.1pF 
z i 
Vref 
(a) (b) 
PRE 
Figure 1: Schematic of distance estimation circuitry. (a) Absolute distance cell. (b) 
Output precharge circuitry. 
3.1 Distance Estimation Cell 
The schematic of the distance estimation cell, replicated along rows and columns of 
the VQ array, is shown in Figure 1 (a). The cell contains two source followers, which 
buffer the input voltage xj and the template voltage ytj. The template voltage is stored 
dynamically onto Cstore, written or refreshed by activating WRi while the yj value is 
presented on the xj input line. The WRi and WRi signal levels along rows of the VQ 
array are driven by the address decoder, which selects a single template vector yi to be 
written to with data presented at the input x when WR is active. 
Additional lateral transistors connect symmetrically to the source follower outputs xj' 
i t 
and y j. By means of resi.stive division, the lateral transistors construct the maximum 
! 
and minimum of xj' and y' ai ,i Lo 
j on j and aij , respectively. In particular, when xj is 
much larger than y t j, the voltage z  j HI approaches x/ and the voltage zij Lø approaches 
i t 
y.j. By symmetry, the complementary argument holds in case xj is much smaller than 
ß LO 
y'j. Therefore, the differential component of aij"I and  approximately represents the 
absolute difference value of x and y'j: 
i m_gi LO i t i / 
a    max(x', y  ) - min(xj', y  ) (4) 
-- Ixd' - yidt[  tc Ixj - Y'jl , 
with tc the MOS back gate effect coefficient [7]. 
The mean absolute difference (MAD) distances (2) are obtained by accumulating con- 
782 Gert Cauwenberghs, Volnei Pedroni 
tributions (4) along rows of cells through capacitive coupling, using the well known 
technique of correlated double sampling. To this purpose, a coupling capacitor Cc is 
provided in every cell, coupling its differential output to the corresponding output row 
line. In the precharge phase, the maximum values zij  are coupled to the output by 
activating HI, and the output lines are preset to reference voltage Vref by activating PRE, 
Figure 1 (b). In the evaluate phase, PRE is de-activated, and the minimum values zi? ø 
are coupled to the output by activating LO. From (4), the resulting voltage outputs on 
the floating row lines are given by 
z i 
1 i I.O. 
= Vf (z? -z j ) (5) 
j=l 
1 6 
 Vref--s: 'ij__  [xj--yij[. 
The last term in (5) corresponds directly to the distance measure t(x, yi) in (2). Notice 
that the negative sign in (5) could be reversed by interchanging clocks HI and LO, if 
needed. Since the subsequent WTA stage searches for maximum z i, the inverted distance 
metric is in the form needed for VQ. 
Characteristics of the MAD distance estimation (5), measured directly on the VQ ar- 
ray with uniform inputs xj and templates yij, are shown in Figure 2. The magnified 
view in Figure 2 (b) clearly illustrates the effective smoothing of the absolute difference 
function (4) near the origin, xj  yij. The smoothing is caused by the shift in xj' and 
yij  due to the conductance of the lateral coupling transistors connected to the source 
follower outputs in Figure 1 (a), and extends over a voltage range comparable to the 
thermal voltage kT/q depending on the relative geometry of the transistors and current 
bias level of the source followers. The observed width of the flat region in Figure 2 
spans roughly 60 mV, and shows little variation for bias current settings below 0.5 
Tuning of the bias current allows to balance speed and power dissipation requirements, 
since the output response is slew-rate limited by the source followers. 
3.2 Winner-Take-All Circuitry 
The circuit implementation of the winner-take-all (WTA) function combines the com- 
pact sizing and modularity of a linear architecture as in [4,8,9] with positive feedback 
for fast and decisive output settling independent of signal levels, as in [6,3]. Typical 
positive feedback structures for WTA operation use a logarithmic tree [6] or a fully 
interconnected network [3], with implementation complexities of order O(n log n) and 
O(n 2) respectively, n being the number of WTA inputs. The present implementation fea- 
tures an O(n) complexity in a linear structure by means of globalized positive feedback, 
communicated over a single line. 
The schematic of the WTA cell, receiving the input z i and constructing the digital output 
d/through global competition communicated over the COMM line, is shown in Figure 3. 
The global COMM line is source connected to input transistor Mi and positive feedback 
transistor Mf, and receives a constant bias current lb (^) from Mbl. Locally, the WTA 
operation is governed by the dynamics of d.' on (parasitic) capacitor Cp. A high pulse 
A Charge-Based CMOS Parallel Analog Vector Quantizer 783 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.8 
-1.0 
xj (v) 
-0.12 
.-.. -0.14 
 -0.16 
 -0.18 
! 
-0.20 
-0.22 
I I I I I 
X j- y j (V) 
(a) (b) 
Figure 2: Distance estimation characteristics, (a) for various values of i . 
Y j, 
(b) magnified view. 
on RST, resetting di' to zero, marks the beginning of the WTA cycle. With Mf initially 
inactive, the total bias current n lb (wT^ through COMM is divided over all competing 
WTA cells, according to the relative z i voltage levels, and each cell fraction is locally 
mirrored by the Mml-Mm2 pair onto d/, charging Cp. The cell with the highest z i input 
voltage receives the largest fraction of bias current, and charges C/ at the highest rate. 
The winning output is determined by the first &' reaching the threshold to turn on the 
corresponding Mf feedback transistor, say i = k. This threshold voltage is given by the 
source voltage on COMM, common for all cells. The positive feedback of the state dk' 
through Mf, which eventually claims the entire fraction of the bias current, enhances and 
latches the winning output level dk' to the positive supply and shuts off the remaining 
losing outputs d/' to zero, i  k. The additional circuitry at the output stage of the cell 
serves to buffer the binary d/value at the di output terminal. 
No more than one winner can practically co-exist at equilibrium, by nature of the com- 
bined positive feedback and global renormalization in the WTA competition. Moreover, 
the output settling times of the winner and losers are fairly independent of the input signal 
levels, and are given mainly by the bias current level lb <wr^ and the parasitic capacitance 
Cp. Tests conducted on a separate 16-element WTA array, identical to the one used on 
the VQ chip, have demonstrated single-winner WTA operation with response time below 
0.5/sec at less than 2/W power dissipation per cell. 
4 Functionality Test 
To characterize the performance of the entire VQ system under typical real-time condi- 
tions, the chip was presented a periodic sequence of 16 distinct input vectors x(i), stored 
and refreshed dynamically in the 16 template locations yi by circularly incrementing the 
template address and activating WR at the beginning of every cycle. The test vectors rep- 
784 Gert Cauwenberghs, Volnei Pedroni 
VbWTA 
RST 
Mi Mf 
11/2 11/2 
It WrA 
Mbl 
11/2  11/2 
Mm2 
22/2 
d i/ 
22/2 
t8/2 COMM 
Figure 3: Circuit schematic of winner-take-all cell. 
resent a single triangular pattern rotated over the 16 component indices with single index 
increments in sequence. The fundamental component xo(i) is illustrated on the top trace 
of the scope plot in Figure 4. The other components are uniformly displaced in time over 
one period, by a number of cycles equal to the index, xj (i) = xo(i -j mod 16). Figure 4 
also displays the VQ output waveforms in response to the triangular input sequence, with 
the desired parabolic profile for the analog distance output z ø and the expected alternating 
bit pattern of the WTA least significant output bit. ] The triangle test performed correctly 
at speeds limited by the instrumentation equipment, and the dissipated power on the chip 
measures 0.7 mW at 3 ttsec cycle time 2 and 5 V supply voltage. 
An estimate for the dynamic range of analog input and template voltages was obtained 
directly by observing the smallest and largest absolute voltage difference still resolved 
correctly by the VQ output, uniformly over all components. By tuning the voltage range 
of the triangular test vectors, the recorded minimum and maximum voltage amplitudes 
for 5 V supply voltage are Frei n -'- 87.5 mV and Vma x -- 4 V, respectively. The estimated 
analog dynamic range Vmax/Vmin is thus 45.7, or roughly 34 dB, per cell. The value 
obtained for Vmin indicates that the dynamic range is limited mainly by the smoothing 
of the absolute distance measure characteristic (1) near the origin in Figure 2 (b). We 
notice that a similar limitation of dynamic range applies to other distance metrics with 
vanishing slope near the origin as well, the popular mean square error (MSE) formulation 
in particular. The MSE metric is frequently adopted in VQ implementations using strong 
inversion MOS circuitry, and offers a dynamic range typically worse than obtained here 
regardless of implementation accuracy, due to the relatively wide flat region of the MSE 
distance function near the origin. 
1The voltages on the scope plot are inverted as a consequence of the chip test setup. 
2including template write operations 
A'Charge-Based CMOS Parallel Analog Vector Quantizer 785 
Figure 4: Scope plot of VQ waveforms. Top: Analog input x0. Center: Analog 
distance output z ø. Bottom: Least significant bit of encoded output. 
Table 1: Features of the VQ chip 
Technology 
Supply voltage 
Power dissipation 
VQ chip 
Dynamic range 
inputs, templates 
Area 
VQ chip 
distance cell 
WTA cell 
2 lain p-well double-poly CMOS 
+5V 
0.7 mW 
34 dB 
(3 lasec cycle time) 
2.2 mm X 2.25 mm 
60 gm X 78 gm 
76 gm X 80 llm 
786 Gert Cauwenberghs, Volnei Pedroni 
5 Conclusion 
We proposed and demonstrated a synchronous charge-based CMOS VLSI system for 
parallel analog vector quantization, featuring a mean absolute difference (MAD) metric, 
and a linear winner-take-all (WTA) structure with globalized positive feedback. By virtue 
of the MAD metric, a fairly large (34 dB) analog dynamic range of inputs and templates 
has been obtained in the distance computations through simple charge-based circuitry. 
Likewise, fast and unambiguous settling of the WTA outputs, using global competition 
communicated over a single wire, has been obtained by adopting a compact linear circuit 
structure to implement the positive feedback WTA function. The resulting structure of 
the VQ chip is highly modular, and the functional characteristics are fairly consistent 
over a wide range of bias levels, including the MOS weak inversion and subthreshold 
regions. This allows the circuitry to be tuned to accommodate various speed and power 
requirements. A summary of the chip features of the 16 x 16 vector quantizer is presented 
in Table I. 
Acknowledgments 
Fabrication of the CMOS chip was provided through the DARPA/NSF MOSIS service. 
The authors thank Amnon Yariv for stimulating discussions and encouragement. 
References 
[1] A. Gersho and R.M. Gray, Vector Quantization and Signal Compression, Norwell, 
MA: Kluwer, 1992. 
[2] T. Kohonen, Self-Organisation and Associative Memory, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
1984. 
[3] Y. He and U. Cilingiroglu, "A Charge-Based On-Chip Adaptation Kohonen Neural 
Network," IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 4 (3), pp 462-469, 1993. 
[4] J.C. Lee, B.J. Sheu, and W.C. Fang, "VLSI Neuroprocessors for Video Motion De- 
tection," IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 4 (2), pp 78-191, 1993. 
[5] R. Tawel, "Real-Time Focal-Plane Image Compression," in Proceedings Data Com- 
pression Conference,, Snowbird, Utah, IEEE Computer Society Press, pp 401-409, 1993. 
[6] G.T. Tuttle, S. Fallahi, and A.A. Abidi, "An 8b CMOS Vector A/D Converter," in 
ISSCC Technical Digest, IEEE Press, vol. 36, pp 38-39, 1993. 
[7] C.A. Mead, Analog VLSI and Neural Systems, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989. 
[8] J. Lazzaro, S. Ryckebusch, M.A. Mahowald, and C.A. Mead, "Winner-Take-All Net- 
works of O(n) Complexity," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, San 
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman, vol. 1, pp 703-711, 1989. 
[9] A.G. Andreou, K.A. Boahen, P.O. Pouliquen, A. Pavasovic, R.E. Jenkins, and K. Stro- 
hbehn, "Current-Mode Subthreshold MOS Circuits for Analog VLSI Neural Systems," 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 2 (2), pp 205-213, 1991. 
