An Auditory Localization 
and Coordinate Transform Chip 
Timothy K. Horiuchi 
timmer@cns.caltech.edu 
Computation and Neural Systems Program 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
The localization and orientation to various novel or interesting 
events in the environment is a critical sensorimotor ability in all 
animals, predator or prey. In mammals, the superior colliculus 
(SC) plays a major role in this behavior, the deeper layers ex- 
hibiting topographically mapped responses to visual, auditory, and 
somatosensory stimuli. Sensory information arriving from differ- 
ent modalities should then be represented in the same coordinate 
frame. Auditory cues, in particular, are thought to be computed 
in head-based coordinates which must then be transformed to reti- 
nal coordinates. In this paper, an analog VLSI implementation for 
auditory localization in the azimuthal plane is described which ex- 
tends the architecture proposed for the barn owl to a primate eye 
movement system where further transformation is required. This 
transformation is intended to model the projection in primates from 
auditory cortical areas to the deeper layers of the primate superior 
colliculus. This system is interfaced with an analog VLSI-based 
saccadic eye movement system also being constructed in our labo- 
ratory. 
Introduction 
Auditory localization has been studied in many animals, particularly the barn owl. 
Most birds have a resolution of only 10 to 20 degrees, but owls are able to orient 
788 Timothy Horiuchi 
to sound with an accuracy of 1 to 2 degrees which is comparable with humans. 
One important cue for localizing sounds is the relative time of arrival of a sound 
to two spatially separated ears. A neural architecture first described by Jeffress 
(1948) for measuring this time difference has been shown to exist in the barn owl 
auditory localization system (Konishi 1986). An analog VLSI implementation of 
the barn owl system constructed by Lazzaro (1990) is extended here to include a 
transformation from head coordinates to retinal coordinates. 
In comparison to the barn owl, the neurophysiology of auditory localization in cats 
and primates is not as well understood and a clear map of auditory space does not 
appear to be present in the inferior colliculus as it is in the owl. It has been suggested 
that cortical auditory regions may provide the head-based map of auditory space 
(Groh and Sparks 1992). 
In primates, where much of the oculomotor system is based in retinotopic coordi- 
nates, head-based information must ultimately be transformed in order to be used. 
While other models of coordinate transformation have been proposed for visual 
information (e.g. Zipset and Andersen 1988, Krommenhoek et al. 1993) and for 
auditory information (Groh and Sparks 1992), the model of coordinate transforma- 
tion used in this system is a switching network which shifts the entire projection of 
the head-based map of auditory space onto a retinotopic "colliculus" circuit. This 
particular model is similar to a basis function approach where intermediate units 
have compact receptive fields in an eye-position / head-based azimuth space and 
the output units sum the outputs of a subset of these units. 
The auditory localization system described here provides acoustic target information 
to an analog VLSI-based saccadic eye movement system (Horiuchi, Bishofberger, 
and Koch 1994) being developed in our laboratory for multimodal operation. 
Thrholded 
Zcro-crossinõs 
Bandpass 
Filtering 
@ 3.2kHz 
eleetret 
condenser 
micr Bandpass 
Filtering 
@ 3.2kHz 
Thresholded 
Zero-crossings 
Localization 
and 
Coordinate 
Transform 
Chip 
Eye Position 
Sound Source Location 
(in retinal coordinates) 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the auditory localization system. The analog front end 
consists of external discrete analog electronics. 
An Auditory Localization and Coordinate Transform Chip 789 
'T 
ß 4 ! 
0 1 
Finer Snap at 45 degrees R of Center 
I I I I I 
 (,,) (1o -' ) 
Finger Snap at Cent' Posilion 
$, 
1. 
.1. 
.2, 
I I I I I I 
t, (,,k) ({o ' ) 
4. 
$. 
2. 
1. 
o 
4. 
.4 
o 
Finger Snap at 45 degrees L of Center 
I I I I I I 
t,(,,k) (lO ') 
Figure 2: Filtered signals of the left and right microphones from 3 different angles. 
790 Timothy Horiuchi 
The Localization System 
The analog front-end of the system (see figure 1) consists of three basic components, 
the microphones, the filter stage, and the thresholded, zero-crossing stage. Two 
microphones are placed with their centers abotit 2 inches apart. For any given 
time difference in arrival of acoustic stimuli, there are many possible locations from 
which the sound could have originated. These points describe a hyperbola with 
the two microphones as the two foci. If the sound source is distant enough, we 
can estimate the angle since the hyperbola approaches an asymptote. The current 
system operates on a single frequency and the inter-microphone distance has been 
chosen to be just under one wavelength apart at the filter frequency. The filter 
frequency chosen was 3.2 kHz because the author's finger snap, used extensively 
during development contained a large component at that frequency. The next step 
in the computation consists of triggering a digital pulse at the moment of zero- 
crossing if the acoustic signal is large enough. 
-2 
Throlded Zo-rossing n Pulses 
I I I I I 
-3 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
am,(,,m) (10 a) 
ß 7.5 
ß 5.0 
ß2.5 
ß 0.0 
ß 
ß -5,0 
ß 
ß -10.0 
ß -12.5 
ß -15.0 
-17.5 
6 
Figure 3: Example of output pulses from the external circuitry. Zero phase is chosen 
to be the positive-slope zero-crossing. Top: Digital pulses are generated at the time 
of zero phase for signals whose derivative is larger than a preset threshold. Bottom: 
3.2 kHz Bandpass filtered signal for a finger snap. 
Phase Detection and Coordinate Transform in Analog VLSI 
The analog VLSI component of the system consists of two axon delay lines (Mead 
1988) which propagate the left and right microphone pulse signals in opposing 
directions in order to compute the cross correlation (see Fig 4.) The location of the 
peak in this correlation technique represents the relative phase of the two signals. 
An Auditory Localization and Coordinate Transform Chip 791 
This technique is described in more detail and with more biological justification by 
Lazzaro (1990). The current implementation contains 15 aaron circuits in each delay 
line. This is shown in figure 4. At each position in the correlation delay line are 
logical AND circuits which output a logic one when there are two active aaron units 
at that location. Since these units only turn on for specific time dlays, they define 
auditory "receptive fields". The output of this subsystem are 15 digital lines which 
are passed on to the coordinate transform. 
Sight 
Channel 
Figure 4: Diagram of the double axon delay line which accepts digital spikes on the 
inputs and propagates them across the array. Whenever two spikes meet, a pulse 
is generated on the output AND units. The position of the AND circuit which gets 
activated indicates the relative time of arrival of the left and right inputs. NOTE: 
the actual circuit contains 15 aaron units. 
Head-based Auditory Units 
eye positioa 
Retinotopic Auditory Units 
Figure 5: 
For the one-dimensional case described in this project, the appropriate transform 
from head to retinal coordinates is a rotation which subtracts the eye position. The 
eye position information on the chip is represented as a voltage which activates one 
of the eye position units. The spatial pattern of activation from the auditory units 
is then "steered" to the output stage with the appropriate shift. (See figure 5). This 
792 Timothy Horiuchi 
is similar to a shift scheme proposed by Pitts and McCulloch (1947) for obtaining 
pitch invariance for chord recognition. The eye position units are constructed from 
an array of "bump" circuits (Delbriick 1993) which compare the eye position voltage 
with its local voltage reference. The two dimensional array of intermediate units 
take the digital signal from the auditory units and switch the "bump" currents onto 
the output lines. The output current lines drive the inputs of a centroid circuit. 
The current implementation of the shift can be viewed as a basis function approach 
where a population of intermediate units respond to limited "ball-like" regions in 
the two-dimensional space of horizontal eye position and sound source azimuth 
(head-coordinates). The output units then sum the outputs of only those interme- 
diate units which represent the same retinal location. It should be noted that this 
coordinate transformation is closely related to the "dendrite model" proposed for 
the projection of cortical auditory information to the deep SC by Groh and Sparks 
(1992). 
The final output stage converts this spatial array of current carrying lines into 
a single output voltage which represents the centroid of the stimulus in retinal 
coordinates. This centroid circuit (DeWeerth 1991) is intended to represent the 
primate SC where a similar computation is believed to occur. 
Results and Conclusions 
Figure 6 shows three plots of the chip's output voltage as a function of the inter- 
pulse time interval. Figure 7 shows three plots of the full system's output voltage for 
different eye position voltages. The output is roughly linear with azimuth and linear 
with eye position voltage. In operation, the system input consists of a sound entering 
the two microphones and the output consists of an analog voltage representing the 
position of the sound source and a digital signal indicating that the analog data is 
valid. 
The auditory localization system described here is currently in use with an analog 
VLSI-based model of the primate saccadic system to expand its operation into 
the auditory domain (Horiuchi, Bishofberger, & Koch 1994). In addition to the 
effort of our laboratory to model and understand biological computing structures 
in real-time systems, we are exploring the use of these low power integrated sensors 
in portable applications such as mobile robotics. Analog VLSI provides a compact 
and efficient implementation for many neuromorphic computing architectures which 
can potentially be used to provide, small, fast, low power sensors for a wide variety 
of applications. 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to acknowledge Prof. Christof Koch for his academic support 
and use of laboratory facilities for this project, Brooks Bishofberger for his assistance 
in constructing some of the discrete electronics and Prof. Carver Mead for running 
the CNS184 course under which this chip was fabricated. 
The author is supported by an AASERT grant from the Office of Naval Research. 
An Auditory Localization and Coordinate Transform Chip 793 
Output vs. Arrival Time Difference (3 eye positions) 
3.1 
3.0 
2.9 
2.8 
2.7 
2.6 
2.5 
2.4 
2.3 
2.2 
2.1 
-600 400 -200 0 200 400 600 
R toL delay (microooonds) 
Figure 6: Chip output vs. input pulse timing: The chip was driven with a signal 
generator and the output voltage was plotted for three different eye position volt- 
ages. Due to the discretized nature of the axon, there are only 15 axon locations at 
which pulses can meet. This creates the staircase response. 
References 
T. Delbriick (1993) Investigations of Analog VLSI Visual Transduction and Motion 
Processing, Ph.D. Thesis, California Institute of Technology 
J. Groh and D. Sparks (1992) 2 Models for Transforming Auditory Signals from 
Head-Centered to Eye-Centered Coordinates Biol. Cybern. 67(4) 291-302. 
T. Horiuchi, B. Bishofberger, & C. Koch, (1994) An Analog VLSI-based Saccadic 
System, In (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6 San Mateo, 
CA: Morgan Kaufman 
L. A. Jefftess (1948) A Place Theory of Sound Localization J. Comp. Physiol. 
Psychol. 41: 35-39. 
M. Konishi (1986) Centrally Synthesized Maps of Sensory Space. TINS April, pp. 
163-168. 
K. P. Krommenhoek, A. J. Van Opstal, C. C. A.M. Gielen, J. A. ,M. Van Gisbergen. 
(1993) Remapping of Neural Activity in the Motor Colliculus: A Neural Network 
Study. Vision Research 33(9):1287-1298. 
794 Timothy Horiuchi 
J. Lazzaro. (1990) Silicon Models of Early Audition, Ph.D. Thesis, California In- 
stitute of Technology 
C. Mead, (1988) Analog VLSI and Neural Systems Menlo Park: Addison-Wesley 
W. Pitts and W. S. McCulloch, (1947) How we know universals: the perception of 
auditory and visual forms. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 9:127-147. 
D. Zipser and R. A. Andersen (1988) A back-propagation programmed network 
that simulates response properties of a subset of posterior parietal neurons. Nature 
331:679-684. 
3.6 
3.4 
3.2 
3.0 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
-20 
Localifion Output vs. Sound Source Azimuth 
I I I I I I I I I I 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Sou Azlmum (des) 
Figure 7: Performance of the full system on continuous input (sinusoidal) delivered 
by a speaker from different angles. Note that 90 degrees denotes the center position. 
The three plots are the outputs for three different settings of the eye position input 
voltage. 
