Pattern Playback in the '90s 
Malcolm Slaney 
Interval Research Corporation 
1801-C Page Mill Road, 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 
malcolm@interval.com 
Abstract 
Deciding the appropriate representation to use for modeling human 
auditory processing is a critical issue in auditory science. While engi- 
neers have successfully performed many single-speaker tasks with LPC 
and spectrogram methods, more difficult problems will need a richer 
representation. This paper describes a powerful auditory representation 
known as the correlogram and shows how this non-linear representation 
can be converted back into sound, with no loss of perceptually impor- 
tant information. The correlogram is interesting because it is a neuro- 
physiologically plausible representation of sound. This paper shows 
improved methods for spectrogram inversion (conventional pattern 
playback), inversion of a cochlear model, and inversion of the correlo- 
gram representation. 
1 INTRODUCTION 1 
My interest in auditory models and perceptual displays [2] is motivated by the problem of 
sound understanding, especially the separation of speech from noisy backgrounds and 
interfering speakers. The correlogram and related representations are a pattern space 
within which sounds can be "understood" and "separated" [3][4]. I am therefore interested 
in resynthesizing sounds from these representations as a way to test and evaluate sound 
separation algorithms, and as a way to apply sound separation to problems such as speech 
enhancement. The conversion of sound to a correlogram involves the intermediate repre- 
sentation of a cochleagram, as shown in Figure 1, so cochlear-model inversion is 
addressed as one piece of the overall problem. 
1. Much of this work was performed by Malcolm Slaney, Daniel Naar and Rich- 
ard F. Lyon while all three were employed at Apple Computer. The mathematical 
details of this work were presented at the 1994 ICASSP[1]. 
828 Malcolm Slaney 
Waveform 
Cochleagram Correlogram 
 I '':::; :...:.._.:œ?:i!:. ::il  ......... . .................................. 
...... 1 I 
oo :?::::'':':'J"":.-:l I Stions [/ ::::2::::': :':::.g 
 lime 8  3 & 4 Auocorrolatlon Lag I 
Figure 1. Three stages in low-level auditory perception are shown here. Sound waves are con- 
vetted into a detailed representation with broad spectral bands, known as cochleagrams. The 
correlogram then summarizes the periodicities in the cochleagram with short-time autocorrela- 
tion. The result is a perceptual movie synchronized to the acoustic signal. The two inversion 
problems addressed in this work are indicated with arrows from right to left. 
There are three factors which can be used to judge the quality of an auditory model: psy- 
choacoustic comparisons, neurophysiological plausibility, and does it represent the per- 
ceptually relevant information? First, the correlogram has been shown to simply and 
accurately predict human pitch perception [5]. The neurophysiological basis for the corre- 
logram has not been found, but there are neural circuits performing the same calculation in 
the mustached bat's echolocation system [6]. Finally, from an information representation 
point of view, does the correlogram preserve the salient information? The results of this 
paper show that no information has been lost. Since the psychoacoustic, neurophysiologi- 
cal, and information representation measures are all positive, perhaps the correlogram is 
the basis of most auditory processing. 
The inversion techniques described here are important because they allow us to readily 
evaluate the results of sound separation models that "zero out" unwanted portions of the 
signal in the correlogram domain. This work extends the convex projection approach of 
Irino [7] and Yang [8] by considering a different cochlear model, and by including the cor- 
relogram inversion. The convex projection approach is well suited to "filling in" missing 
information. While this paper only describes the process for one particular auditory 
model, the techniques are equally useful for other models. 
This paper describes three aspects of the problem: cochleagram inversion, conversion of 
the correlogram into spectrograms, and spectrogram inversion. A number of reconstruc- 
tion options are explored in this paper. Some are fast, while other techniques use time-con- 
suming iterations to produce reconstructions perceptually equivalent to the original sound. 
Fast versions of these algorithms could allow us to separate a speaker's voice from the 
background noise in real time. 
2 COCHLEAGRAM INVERSION 
Figure 2 shows a block diagram of the cochlear model [9] that is used in this work. The 
basis of the model is a bank of filters, implemented as a cascade of low-pass filters, that 
splits the input signal into broad spectral bands. The output from each filter in the bank is 
called a channel. The energy in each channel is detected and used to adjust the channel 
gain, implementing a simple model of auditory sensitivity adaptation, or automatic gain 
control (AGC). The half-wave rectifier (HWR) detection nonlinearity provides a wave- 
form for each channel that roughly represents the instantaneous neural firing rate at each 
position along the cochlea. 
Cochlear 
Filterbank 
Detector 
(HWR) 
AdaPotration 
AGC 
Figure 2. Three stages of the simple cochlear model used in this paper are shown above. 
Pattern Playback in the '90s 829 
The cochleagram is converted back into sound by reversing the three steps shown in Fig- 
ure 2. First the AGC is divided out, then the negative portions of each cochlear channel are 
recovered by using the fact that each channel is spectrally limited. Finally, the cochlear fil- 
ters are inverted by running the filters backwards, and then correcting the resulting spec- 
tral slope. 
The AGC stage in this cochlear model is controlled by its own output. It is a combination 
of a multiplicative gain and a simple first-order filter to track the history of the output sig- 
n fl. Since the controlling signal is directly available, the AGC can be inverted by tracking 
the output history and then dividing instead of multiplying. The performance of this algo- 
rithm is described by Naar [10] and will not be addressed here. It is worth noting that AGC 
inversion becomes more difficult as the level of the input signal is raised, resulting in more 
compression in the forward path. 
The next stage in the inversion process can be done in one of two ways. After AGC inver- 
sion, both the positive values of the signal and the spectral extant of the signal are known. 
Projections onto convex sets [11], in this case defined by the positive values of the detec- 
tor output and the spectral extant of the cochlear filters, can be used to find the original 
signal. This is shown in the left half of Figure 3. Alternatively, the spectral projection filter 
can be combined with the next stage of processing to make the algorithm more efficient. 
The increased efficiency is due to better match between the spectral projection and the 
cochlear filterbank, and due to the simplified computations within each iteration. This is 
shown in the right half of Figure 3. The result is an algorithm that produces nearly perfect 
results with no iterations at all. 
Bank , - o 5 ]l 
Inversiøn I . , I. I Inversiøn/u) AGC I l Filter ' 
[Spectrall Inversiønl ,.I Bank 
- IPrbjectiønJ ' Other --T]. InversionJ ) 
e Channels --[ 
o : 
Figure 3. Them arc two ways to use convex projections to recover the information lost 
by the detectors. The convcntionaJ aDDrOaCh is shown on the left. The right figure 
shows a more efficient aDDrOaCh where the sp½ctr projection has been combined with 
Finally, the multiple outputs from the cochlear filterbank are converted back into a single 
waveform by correcting the phase and summing all channels. In the ideal case, each 
cochlear channel contains a unique portion of the spectral energy, but with a bit of phase 
delay and amplitude change. For example, if we run the signal through the same filter the 
spectral content does not change much but both the phase delay and amplitude change will 
be doubled. More interestingly, if we run the signal through the filter backwards, the for- 
ward and backward phase changes cancel out. After this phase correction, we can sum all 
channels and get back the original waveform, with a bit of spectral coloration. The spec- 
tral coloration or tilt can be fixed with a simple filter. A more efficient approach to correct 
the spectral tilt is to scale each channel by an appropriate weight before summing, as 
shown in Figure 4. The result is a perfect reconstruction, over those frequencies where the 
cochlear filters are non-zero. 
Figure 5 shows results from the cochleagram inversion procedure. An impulse is shown on 
the left, before and after 10 iterations of the HWR inversion (using the algorithm on the 
right half of Figure 3). With no iterations the result is nearly perfect, except for a bit of 
noise near the center. The overall curvature of the baseline is due to the fact that informa- 
830 Malcolm Slaney 
,., . Reversed Filter to -o o  = Scaling of [ Reversed 
  Filter for Correct  Each  Filter for 
-O Inversion 'RIt /, i-½O Channel i-- Inversion 
Figure 4. Two approaches are shown here to invert the filterbank. The left diagram shows the 
normal approach, the right figure shows a more efficient approach where the spectral-tilt filter 
is converted to a simple multiplication. 
tion near DC has been lost as it travels through the auditow system and there is no way to 
recover it with the information that we have. A more interesting example is shown on the 
right. Here the word "tap"l has been reconstructed, with and without the AGC inversion. 
With the AGC inversion the result is nearly identical to the original. The auditow system 
is very sensitive to onsets and quickly adapts to steady state sounds like vowels. It is inter- 
esting to compare this to the reconstruction without AGC inversion. Without the AGC, the 
result is similar to what the ear hears, the onsets are more prominent and the vowels are 
deemphasized. This is shown in the right half of Figure 5. 
Impulse inversion 
with no iterations 
Impulse iteration 
with 10 iterations 
"Tap" reconstruction "Tap" Reconstruction 
with AGC Inversion without AGC Inversion 
Figure 5. The cochlear reconstructions of an impulse and the word "tap" are shown here. The 
first and second reconstructions show an impulse reconstruction with and without iterations. 
The third and fourth waveforms are the word "tap" with and without the AGC inversion. 
3 CORRELOGRAM INVERSION 
The correlogram is an efficient way to capture the short-time periodicities in the auditow 
signal. Many mechanical measurements of the cochlea have shown that the response is 
highly non-linear. As the signal level changes there are large variations in the bandwidth 
and center frequency of the cochlear response. With these kinds of changes, it is difficult 
to imagine a system that can make sense of the spectral profile. This is especially true for 
decisions like pitch determination and sound separation. 
But through all these changes in the cochlear filters, the timing information in the signal is 
preserved. The spectral profile, as measured by the cochlea, might change, but the rate of 
glottal pulses is preserved. Thus I believe the auditory system is based on a representation 
of sound that makes short-time periodicities apparent. One such representation is the cor- 
relogram. The correlogram measures the temporal correlation within each channel, either 
using FFTs which are most efficient in computer implementations, or neural delay lines 
much like those found in the binaural system of the owl. 
1. The syllable "tap", samples 14000 through 17000 of the "train/dr5/fcdfl/ 
sx106/sx106.adc" utterance on the TIMIT Speech Database, is used in all voiced 
examples in this paper. 
Pattern Playback in the '90s 831 
The process of inverting the correlogram is simplified by noting that each autocorrelation 
is related by the Fourier transform to a power spectrum. By combining many power spec- 
trums into a picture, the result is a spectrogram. This process is shown in Figure 6. In this 
way, a separate spectrogram is created for each channel. There are known techniques for 
convening a spectrogram, which has amplitude information but no phase information, 
back into the original waveform. The process of convening from a spectrogram back into 
a waveform is described in Section 4. The correlogram inversion process consists of 
inverting many spectrograms to form an estimate of a cochleagram. The cochleagram is 
inverted using the techniques described in Section 2. 
Frame 42 of Correlogram 
I:..gii:;:tl::lgi::i:i ß '- I 
Frame 43 of Correlogram 
Autocorrelation Delay 
IFFT to get 
of spectrogram 
One line of Cochleagram 
mverson  
. :3:"' ":'::::?:':'"":':':':'"'"':':':::::':':':,?:':':':': .:.::' ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 
:': i:: '::::>:. '.%,.:::c-..::::-. 
II ':: :: ::mz:.-.: :'.:'.?..-.... ,,, ... ..:..,.-?::.:$:::r4.-..ff...., , ..... ,......,.e.'.'.m...)i i 
Time Time 
Figure 6. Correlogram inversion is possible by noting that each row of the correlogram con- 
rains the same information as a spectrogram of the same row of cochleagram output. By con- 
vening the correlogram into many spectrograms, the spectrogram inversion techniques 
described in Section 4 can be used. The lower horizontal stripe in the spectrogram is due to the 
narrow passband of the cochlear channel. Half-wave rectification of the cochlear filter output 
causes the upper horizontal stripes. 
One important improvement to the basic method is possible due to the special characteris- 
tics of the correlogram. The essence of the spectrogram inversion problem is to recover 
the phase information that has been thrown away. This is an iterative procedure and would 
be costly if it had to be performed on each channel. Fortunately, there is quite a bit of over- 
lap between cochlear channels. Thus the phase recovered from one channel can be used to 
initialize the spectrogram inversion for the next channel. A difficulty with spectrogram 
inversion s that the absolute phase is lost. By using the phase from one channel to initial- 
ize the next, a more consistent set of cochlear channel outputs is recovered. 
4 SPECTROGRAM INVERSION 
While spectrograms are not an accurate model of human perception, an implementation of 
a correlogram includes the calculation of many spectrograms. Mathematically, an autocor- 
relation calculation is similar to a spectrogram or short-time power spectrum. One column 
of a conventional spectrogram is related to an autocorrelation of a portion of the original 
waveform by a Fourier transform (see Figure 6). Unfortunately, the final representation of 
both spectrograms and autocorrelations is missing the phase information. The main task of 
a spectrogram inversion algorithm is to recover a consistent estimate of the missing phase. 
This process is not magical, it can only recover a signal that has the same magnitude spec- 
trum as the original spectrogram. But the consistency constraint on the time evolution of 
the signal power spectrum also constrains the time evolution of the spectral phase. 
832 Malcolm Slaney 
The basic procedure in spectrogram inversion [12] consists of iterating between the time 
and the frequency domains. Starting from the frequency domain, the magnitude but not 
the phase is known. As an initial guess, any phase value can be used. The individual power 
spectra are inverse Fourier transformed and then summed to arrive at a single waveform. 
If the original spectrogram used overlapping windows of data, the information from adja- 
cent windows either constructively or destructively interferes to estimate a waveform. A 
spectrogram of this new data is calculated, and the phase is now retained. We know the 
original magnitude was correct. Thus we can estimate a better spectrogram by combining 
the original magnitude information with the new phase information. It can be shown that 
each iteration will reduce the error. 
Figure 7 shows an outline of steps that can be used to improve the consistency of phase 
estimates during the first iteration. As each portion of the waveform is added to the esti- 
mated signal, it is possible to add a linear phase so that each waveform lines up with the 
proceedings segments. The algorithm described in the paragraph above assumes an initial 
phase of zero. A more likely phase guess is to choose a phase that is consistent with the 
existing data. The result with no iterations is a waveform that is often closer to the original 
than that calculated assuming zero initial phase and ten iterations. 
The total computational cost is minimized by combining these improvements with the ini- 
tial phase estimates from adjacent channels of the correlogram. Thus when inverting the 
first channel of the correlogram, a cross-correlation is used to pick the initial phase and a 
few more iterations insure a consistent result. After the first channel, the phase of the pro- 
ceeding channel is used to initialize the spectrogram inversion and only a few iterations 
are necessary to fine tune the waveform. 
Reconstructions from 
segments 1 through N 
0 
400 
Segment N+I 
0 
400 
Cross Correlation 
I 
300 
Maximize fit by 
choosing peak 
Rotated Segment N+I 
0 
New Reconstruction 
0 
400 
400 
Figure 7. A procedure for adjusting the phase of new segments when inverting a spectrogram is 
shown above. As each new segment (bottom left) is converted from a power spectrum into a 
waveform, a linear phase is added to maximize the fit with the existing segments (top left.) The 
amount of rotation is determined by a cross correlation (middle). Adding the new segment with 
the proper rotation (top righ0 produces the new waveform (bottom right.) 
Pattern Playback in the '90s 833 
5 PUTTING IT TOGETHER 
This paper has described two steps to convert a correlogram into a sound. These steps are 
detailed below: 
1) 
2) 
For each row of the correlogram: 
a) Convert the autocorrelation data into power spectrum (Section 
3). 
b) Use spectrogram inversion (Section 4) to convert the spectro- 
grams into an estimate of cochlear channel output. 
c) Assemble the results of spectrogram inversion into an estimate 
of the cochleagram. 
Invert the cochleagram using the techniques described in Section 2. 
This process is diagrammed in Figures 1 and 6. 
6 RESULTS 
Figure 8 shows the results of the complete reconstruction process for a 200Hz impulse 
train and the word "tap." In both cases, no iterations were performed for either the spectro- 
gram or filterbank inversion. More iterations reduce the spectral error, but do not make the 
graphs look better or change the perceptual quality much. It is worth noting that the "tap" 
reconstruction from a correlogram looks similar to the cochleagram reconstruction with- 
out the AGC (see Figure 5.) Reducing the level of the input signal, thus reducing the 
amount of compression performed by the AGC, results in a correlogram reconstruction 
similar to the original waveform. 
0.02 0.05 
0.01 
0 0 
-0.01 
-0.02 -0.05 
50 100 150 200 0 1000 2000 3000 
Figure 8. Reconstructions from the correlogram representation of an impulse train and the word 
"tap" are shown above. Reducing the input signal level, thus minimizing the effect of errors 
when inverting the AGC, produces results identical to the original "tap." 
It is important to note that the algorithms described in this paper are designed to minimize 
the error in the mean-square sense. This is a convenient mathematical definition, but it 
doesn't always correlate with human perception. A trivial example of this is possible by 
comparing a waveform and a copy of the waveform delayed by 10ms. Using the mean- 
squared error, the numerical error is very high yet the two waveforms are perceptually 
equivalent. Despite this, the results of these algorithms based on mean-square error do 
sound good. 
7 CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has described several techniques that allow several stages of an auditory model 
to be converted back into sound. By converting each row of the correlogram into a spec- 
trogram, the spectrogram inversion techniques of Section 4 can be used. The special char- 
acteristics of a correlogram described in Section 3 are used to make the calculation more 
efficient. Finally, the cochlear filterbank can be inverted to recover the original waveform. 
The results are waveforms, perceptually identical to the original waveforms. 
834 Malco#n Slaney 
These techniques will be especially useful as part of a sound separation system. I do not 
believe that our auditory system resynthesizes partial waveforms from the auditory scene. 
Yet, all research systems generate separated sounds so that we can more easily perceive 
their success. More work is still needed to fine-tune these algorithm and to investigate the 
ability to reconstruct sounds from partial correlograms. 
Acknowledgments 
I am grateful for the inspiration provided by Frank Cooper's work in the early 1950's on 
pattern playback[13][14]. His work demonstrated that it was possible to convert a spectro- 
gram, painted onto clear plastic, into sound. 
This work in this paper was performed with Daniel Naar and Richard F. Lyon. We are 
grateful for the help we have received from Richard Duda (San Jose State), Shihab 
Shamma (U. of Maryland), Jim Boyles (The MathWorks) and Michele Covell (Interval 
Research). 
References 
[1] Malcolm Slaney, D. Naar, R. F. Lyon, "Auditory model inversion for sound separa- 
tion," Proc. oflEEE ICASSP, Volume II, pp. 77-80, 1994. 
[2] M. Slaney and R. F. Lyon, "On the importance of time--A temporal representation of 
sound," in Visual Representations of Speech Signals, eds. M. Cooke, S. Beet, and M. 
Crawford, J. Wiley and Sons, Sussex, England, 1993. 
[3] R. F. Lyon, "A computational model of binaural localization and separation," Proc. of 
IEEEICASSP, 1148-1151, 1983. 
[4] M. Weintraub, "The GRASP sound separation system," Proc. oflEEE ICASSP, pp. 
18A.6.1-18A.6.4, 1984. 
[5] D. Hermes, "Pitch analysis," in Visual Representations of Speech Signals, eds. M. 
Cooke, S. Beet, and M. Crawford, J. Wiley and Sons, Sussex, England, 1993. 
[6] N. Suga, "Cortical computational maps for auditory imaging," Neural Networks, 3, 3- 
21, 1990. 
[7] T. Irino, H. Kawahara, "Signal reconstruction from modified auditory wavelet trans- 
form," IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, 41, 3549-3554, Dec. 1993. 
[8] X. Yang, K. Wang, and S. Shamma, "Auditory representations of acoustic signals," 
IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, 38, 824-839, 1992. 
[9] R. E Lyon, "A computational model of filtering, detection, and compression in the 
cochlea," Proc. of the IEEE ICASSP, 1282-1285, 1982. 
[ 10] D. Naar, "Sound resynthesis from a correlogram," San Jose State University, Depart- 
ment of Electrical Engineering, Technical Report #3, May 1993. 
[11] R. W. Papoulis, "A new algorithm in spectral analysis and band-limited extrapola- 
tion," IEEE Trans. Circuits Sys., vol. 22, 735, 1975. 
[ 12] D. Griffin and J. Lim, "Signal estimation from modified short-time Fourier trans- 
form," IEEE Trans. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 32, 236-242, 1984. 
[ 13] F. S. Cooper, "Some Instrumental Aids to Research on Speech," Report on the Fourth 
Annual Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and Language Teaching, Georgetown Uni- 
versity Press, 46-53, 1953. 
[14] E S. Cooper, "Acoustics in human communications: Evolving ideas about the nature 
of speech," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 68(1), 18-21, July 1980. 
