A 
Convolutional Neural Network 
Hand Tracker 
Steven J. Nowlan 
Synaptics, Inc. 
2698 Orchard Parkway 
San Jose, CA 95134 
nowlan@synaptics.com 
John C. Platt 
Synaptics, Inc. 
2698 Orchard Parkway 
San Jose, CA 95134 
platt@synaptics.com 
Abstract 
We describe a system that can track a hand in a sequence of video 
frames and recognize hand gestures in a user-independent manner. 
The system locates the hand in each video frame and determines 
if the hand is open or closed. The tracking system is able to track 
the hand to within -t-10 pixels of its correct location in 99.7% of 
the flames from a test set containing video sequences from 18 dif- 
ferent individuals captured in 18 different room environments. The 
gesture recognition network correctly determines if the hand being 
tracked is open or closed in 99.1% of the frames in this test set. 
The system has been designed to operate in real time with existing 
hardware. 
I Introduction 
We describe an image processing system that uses convolutional neural networks to 
locate the position of a (moving) hand in a video frame, and to track the position of 
this hand across a sequence of video frames. In addition, for each frame, the system 
determines if the hand is currently open or closed. The input to the system is a 
sequence of black and white, 320 by 240 pixel digitized video frames. We designed 
the system to operate in a user-independent manner, using video frames from indoor 
scenes with natural clutter and variable lighting conditions. For ease of hardware 
implementation, we have restricted the system to use only convolutional networks 
and simple image filtering operations, such as smoothing and frame differencing. 
902 Steven J. Nowlan, John C. Platt 
Figure 1: Average over all examples of each of the 10 classes of handwritten digits, 
after first aligning all of the examples in each class before averaging. 
Our motivation for investigating the hand tracking problem was to explore the limits 
of recognition capability for convolutional networks. The structure of convolutional 
networks makes them naturally good at dealing with translation invariance, and 
with coarse representations at the upper layers, they are also capable of dealing 
with some degree of size variation. Convolutional networks lave been successfully 
applied to machine print OCR (Platt et al, 1992), machine print address block 
location (Wolf and Platt, 1994), and hand printed OCR (Le Cun et al, 1990; Martin 
and Rashid, 1992). In each of these problems, convolutional networks perform very 
well on simultaneously segmenting and recognizing two-dimensional objects. 
In these problems, segmentation is often the most difficult step, and once accom- 
plished the classification is simplified. This can be illustrated by examining the 
average of all of the examples for each class after alignment and scaling. For the 
case of hand-printed OCR (see Fig. 1), we can see that the average of all of the 
examples is quite representative of each class, suggesting that the classes are quite 
compact, once the issue of translation invariance has been dealt with. This compact- 
ness makes nearest neighbor and non-linear template matching classifiers reasonable 
candidates for good performance. 
If you perform the same trick of aligning and averaging the open and closed hands 
from our training database of video sequences, you will see a quite different result 
(Fig. 2). The extreme variability in hand orientations in both the open and closed 
cases means that the class averages, even after alignment, are only weakly char- 
acteristic of the classes of open and closed hands. This lack of clean structure in 
the class average images uggested that hand tracking is a challenging recognition 
problem. This paper examines whether convolutional networks are extendable to 
hand tracking, and hence possibly to other problems where classification remains 
difficult even after segmentation and alignment. 
2 System Architecture 
The overall architecture of the system is shown in Fig. 3. There are separate hand 
tracking and gesture recognition subsystems. For the hand tracking subsystem, 
each video frame is first sub-sampled and then the previous video frame (stored) is 
subtracted from the current video frame to produce a difference frame. These dif- 
ference frames provide a crude velocity signal to the system, since the largest signals 
in the difference frames tend to occur near objects that are moving (Fig. 5). Inde- 
pendent predictions of hand locations are made by separate convolutional networks, 
which look at either the intensity frame or the difference frame. A voting scheme 
then combines the predictions from the intensity and difference networks along with 
predictions based on the hand trajectory computed from 3 previous frames. 
A Convolutional Neural Network Hand Tracker 903 
Figure 2: Average over all examples of open and closed hands from the database of 
raining video sequences, after first aligning all of the examples in each class before 
averaging. 
Previous . Difference 
Subsampled ..r I .. Difference 
Video Frame _. Subtraction I  Frame 
Current .j 
Video -] Subsamp 
Frame 
Intensity 
Hand Locator 
Network 
Hand Locator 
Network 
Position Hypotheses 
Cropping Network 
:> Is Hand Open? 
Position in 
Previous Frames 
.1 I 
ProcedureJ 
Hand Position 
Figure 3: Architecture of object recognition system for hand tracking and open- 
versus-closed hand identification. 
904 Steven J. Nowlan, John C. Platt 
O Output 
\ 8x8x10 Convolutional Window  ,?,' Subsampling Layer 
10 Subsampling Layer 5 
3x3 Window 
10 5 [ Hidden Layer 
26x26 Convolutional Window 
/ /;oo 
Input / Input 
8O 100 
Figure 4: Network architectures. The network on the left will find a hand in either 
an intensity or difference low-resolution image. The output of the left network is 
a single convolutional image for encoding the presence of the hand at a location. 
The network on the right recognizes whether the hand is open or closed in a full 
resolution image. The output of the right network is a single value that identifies 
whether the hand is open or closed. 
3x3 Window 
Hidden Layer 
8x8 Convolutional Window 
The gesture recognition subsystem takes a 100 by 100 pixel full resolution subimage 
of the current video frame as input. The position of this subimage is centered 
around the location output by the hand-tracking subsystem, thus the performance 
of the gesture recognition subsytem is dependent on the success of the tracking 
subsystem. A single convolutional network looks at this intensity subimage and 
indicates if the hand contained in the image is open or closed. 
The tracking and gesture recognition subsystems were trained separately, and will 
be described in detail in the following subsections. 
2.1 Hand Tracking 
The intensity pathway of the hand tracking subsystem takes the original video im- 
ages subsampled to 1/4 their original resolution (Fig. 5). The network architecture 
used to locate the hand position is a fully convolutional network with one hidden 
layer, a subsampling layer, and an output layer (Fig. 4). The output layer con- 
tains a single convolutional unit, which when active above threshold indicates the 
(possible) presence of the hand at that location. 
The difference image pathway of the hand tracking system subtracts the previous 
subsampled video image from the current subsampled video image, and uses these 
1/4 resolution difference images as input (Fig. 5). The network used to locate the 
hand location in the difference pathway is identical in structure to that used for 
hand location in the intensity pathway (Fig. 4). 
The intensity and difference hand location networks were trained independently to 
A Convolutional Neural Network Hand Tracker 905 
Figure 5: Sample video frames used by the hand tracking subsystem. The upper 
frames are used by the intensity pathway. The lower frames are corresponding 
difference images used by the difference pathway. The white cross indicates the 
position of the hand predicted by the network. 
locate the position of the hand in each training frame to within +10 pixels (at full 
resolution). The details of training and the performance of the trained networks 
is discussed in the following section (see Table 1). In order to provide adequate 
overall tracking performance, it was necessary to combine information from both 
hand location networks, using a voting scheme. This voting scheme also takes 
advantage of the fact that we are attempting to track a smoothly moving object, 
by using information from the estimated position in previous frames to predict the 
position of the hand in the current frame. 
A simple rule based scheme is used to combine the predictions of hand location from 
the different sources. We first predict the current position of the hand based on a 
trajectory computed from 3 previous frames, and construct a plausible bounding 
box centered at this position. This bounding box represents about one third of the 
original image. We next find all above threshold network responses from both the 
intensity and difference networks. If there is a strong response from both of the 
networks in a similar spatial location, we choose that location. Otherwise, we use 
the location of the strongest response from the difference network. If there are no 
above threshold responses from the difference network, we use the response from the 
intensity network. If there are no above threshold responses from either network, 
we use the location predicted by the trajectory from previous frames. All thresholds 
used in this voting scheme are estimated from the training/cross-validation set. 
2.2 Recognition of Open versus Closed Hands 
The gesture recognition subsystem takes as input a 100 pixel by 100 pixel piece 
of the original video frame, centered at the location output by the hand tracking 
subsystem (and usually not centered on the hand itself). This image is only about 
906 Steven J. Nowlan, John C. Platt 
50 percent larger than the largest hands in our image database, so the gesture 
recognition subsystem is dependent on a high quality hand tracking system. The 
100 by 100 pixel size chosen for input to the gesture recognition system allows 
positional errors of up to 25 pixels while still maintaining most of the hand in the 
input image. The largest positional error made by the hand location subsystem was 
11 pixels, well within the tolerance of the gesture recognition subsystem. 
The network architecture used to identify if the hand is open or closed is similar 
to the networks used to track the hand position with a convolutional hidden layer, 
a subsampling layer, and an output layer (Fig. 4). The primary difference from 
the hand location networks is that the output layer is non-convolutional and fully 
connected to the outputs of the subsample layer. The single output unit looks at 
this entire image at once, and if this unit is active above threshold, it indicates that 
the hand is open; if the unit is below threshold, the hand is closed. 
3 Training and Performance 
Our simulations have been conducted on a database of 900 video images from 18 
different subjects. These images were captured from a video input in real time, at 
the rate of 10 frames per second with a resolution of 320 by 240 pixels per image. 
Each sequence represents a sample of 10 seconds of continuous motion from each 
subject. Subjects were requested to move one hand about freely, opening and closing 
the hand as it moved. Video of subjects was taken using a hand-held camcorder 
under natural lighting conditions in a variety of different rooms containing complex 
clutter, windows, etc. (Fig. 5). This varied and complicated background greatly 
increases the difficulty of segmenting the hand from background clutter in many 
circumstances. Thirty of the frames from each subject were used for training/cross- 
validation purposes with the remaining nineteen frames reserved for testing. In 
addition, we obtained a sequence of blind test frames from an individual not part 
of the original training set, and in a different room environment than any of the 
original training data. 
Both location networks were training using the ISR (Keeler et al 1991) training 
procedure. The gesture network was trained using online back-propagation. 
Table i summarizes the performance of the two tracking networks individually, as 
well as the performance of the overall system, on the set of 342 test images. The 
intensity network alone locates the hand to within 4-10 pixels in 91.8% of the test 
frames. A large portion of the errors made by this network are due to confusions 
caused by complex structured backgrounds that can have color and texture very 
similar to the hand in the intensity image. Another common source of errors are 
portions of the arms and face, particularly when the hand is closed. 
Much of the background complexity can be eliminated by looking at the difference 
images, which allows the difference network to outperform the intensity network. 
However, the difference network still has a fairly high error rate. These remaining 
errors are due to three factors: One cannot move the hand without also moving other 
parts of the arm and in many cases the head and torso. In addition, when the hand 
stops, as when reversing direction, it may disappear entirely from the difference 
frames. Finally, there are instances in our database in which large objects were 
A Convolutional Neural Network Hand Tracker 907 
Table 1: Summary of test set performance for hand location. 
Information Used Test Error Rate 
Intensity 
Difference 
Intensity -{- Difference 
Intensity -{- Difference -{- 3 Frames 
8.2% 
6.4% 
3.2% 
0.3% 
moving in the background of the scene. 
The error rate is improved dramatically when the predictions from the intensity 
and difference networks are combined. This is a strong indication that the errors 
made by the intensity and difference networks are only weakly correlated, so a 
nearly maximal gain is obtained by combining their predictions. The most dramatic 
performance gain is obtained when the predictions of the network are combined with 
the trajectory information in the final voting procedure. 
The gesture recognition network correctly identifies whether the hand is open or 
closed in 99.1% of the 342 test images. In contrast, a nearest neighbor classifier 
using the same training set and using a convolutional euclidean distance metric (i.e. 
the minimum euclidean distance between the training and test pattern allowing up 
to 10 pixels of misalignment in both x and y directions) could achieve only 43.2% 
correct classification. This empirically verifies that this is a difficult classification 
task even if misalignment is taken into account. 
To provide a more rigorous test of the generalization ability of the hand tracking and 
gesture recognition system a second blind performance evaluation was performed, 
using a sequence of 50 frames from a subject who was not part of the original 18 
subjects used for gathering the training and testing images. These frames were 
shot using a different video camera, and were shot in an open lab area, which was 
considerably different from the office environments most of the original training 
data was gathered in. 
The hand tracking subsystem performed perfectly on this blind test set, correctly 
determining the position of the hand within 4-10 pixels in all 50 frames. The 
gesture recognition system correctly classified 94% of the test frames as open or 
closed, which corresponds to three errors out of 50. For these three frames, the 
hand was totally blended into the background, and a human observer could not 
determine from these individual frames whether the hand was open or closed. 
4 Discussion and Conclusions 
The system we have developed could be extended to recognize a broader range of 
hand gestures. One problem remaining to be solved is how to deal with relative 
motion signals in situations which involve moving background or camera. 
The speed of the hand tracking and gesture recognition system is dominated by the 
time required to evaluate the two hand position networks and the gesture recognition 
908 Steven J. Nowlan, John C. Platt 
network. The evaluation of these three networks requires approximately 25 million 
operations per frame, which would allow real time operation at video frame rates 
using existing convolutional hardware (Sickinger, 1992). 
We have demonstrated that convolutional neural networks can be used to solve 
both the hand tracking and gesture recognition problems. The networks can find 
the hand in 99.7% of the test frames and recognize whether the hand was open 
or closed in 99.1% of the test frames. The system has demonstrated the ability 
to generalize to both novel users and novel indoor environments. In addition, the 
performance requirements of the system allow it to operate at video frame rates 
with existing hardware. 
The high accuracy achieved on the hand tracking and gesture recognition tasks il- 
lustrates that convolutional networks can work on very general visual object recog- 
nition problems; problems where both segmentation and classification are difficult. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was carried out under an SBIR Phase I grant (contract N00014-93-C- 
0101) from the Office of Naval Research. We wish to thank Joel Davis of the ONR 
for useful suggestions and discussion. 
References 
J. D. Keeler, D. E. Rumelhart and W-K Leow. (1991) Integrated Segmentation and 
Recognition of Hand-Printed Numerals. In R. Lippmann, J. Moody, D. Touretzky 
(eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 3, 557-563. San Mateo, 
CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Y. Le Cun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard 
and L. D. Jackel. (1990) Handwritten Digit Recognition with a Back Propagation 
Network. In D. S. Touretzky (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems œ, 396-404. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
G. Martin, M. Rashid. (1992) Recognizing Overlapping Hand-Printed Characters 
by Centered-Object Integrated Segmentation and Recognition. In J. Moody, S. 
Hanson, R. Lippmann (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 
J, 504-511. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
J. Platt, J. Decker, and J. LeMoncheck. (1992) Convolutional Neural Networks for 
the Combined Segmentation and Recognition of Machine Printed Characters, USPS 
5th Advanced Technology Conference, 2, 701-713. 
E. Sickinger, B. Boser, J. Bromley, Y. LeCun, L. Jackel. (1992) Application of the 
ANNA neural network chip to high-speed character recognition, IEEE Trans. Neural 
Networks, 3, (3), 498-505. 
R. Wolf, J. Platt. (1994) Postal Address Block Location Using a Convolutional 
Locator Network. In J. Cowan, G. Tesauro, J. Alspector (eds.), Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 6, 745-752. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
