An Integrated Architecture of Adaptive Neural Network 
Control for Dynamic Systems 
Liu Ke '2 Robert L. Tokaf Brian D.McVey z 
Center for Nonlinear Studies, 2Applied Theoretical Physics Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alarnos, NM, 87545 
Abstract 
In this study, an integrated neural network control architecture for nonlinear dynamic systems is 
presented. Most of the recent emphasis in the neural network control field has no error feedback as the 
control input, which rises the lack of adaptation problem. The integrated architecture in this paper 
combines feed forward control and error feedback adaptive control using neural networks. The paper 
reveals the different internal functionality of these two kinds of neural network controllers for certain 
input styles, e.g., state feedback and error feedback. With error feedback, neural network controllers 
learn the slopes or the gains with respect to the error feedback, producing an error driven adaptive 
contrbl systems. The results demonstrate that the two kinds of control scheme can be combined to 
realize their individual advantages. Testing with disturbances added to the plant shows good tracking 
and adaptation with the integrated neural control architecture. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Neural networks are used for control systems because of their capability to approximate nonlinear 
system dynamics. Most neural network control architectures originate from work presented by 
Narendra[1], Psaltis[2] and Lightbody[3]. In these architectures, an identification neural network is 
trained to function as a model for the plant. Based on the neural network identification model, a neural 
network controller is trained by backpropagating the error through the identification network. After 
training, the identification network is replaced by the real plant. As is illustrated in Figure 1, the 
controller receives external inputs as well as plant state feedback inputs. Training procedures are 
employed such that the networks approximate feed forward control surfaces that are functions of 
external inputs and state feedbacks of the plant (or the identification network during training). 
It is worth noting that in this architecture, the error between the plant output and the desired output of 
the reference model is not fed back to the controller, after the training phase. In other words, this error 
information is ignored when the neural network applies its control. It is well known in control theory 
that the error feedback plays a significant role in adaptation. Therefore, when model uncertainty or 
noise/disturbances are present, a feed forward neural network controller with only state feedback will 
not adaptively update the control signal. On line training for the neural controller has been proposed to 
obtain adaptive ability[Ill3]. However, the stability for the on line training of the neural network 
controller is unresolved[ 1] [4]. 
In this study, an additional nonlinear recurrent network is combined with the feed forward neural 
network controller to form an adaptive controller. This added neural network uses feedback error 
between the reference model output and the plant output as an input. In addition, the system's external 
1032 Liu Ke, Robert L. Tokar, Brian D. McVey 
inputs and the plant states are also input to the feedback network. This architecture is used in the control 
community, but not with neural network components. The approach differs from a conventional error 
feedback controller, such as a gain scheduled PID controller, in that the neural network error feedback 
controller implements a continuous nonlinear gain scheduled hypersurface, and after training, adaptive 
model reference control for nonlinear dynamic systems is achieved without further parameter 
computation. The approach is tested on well-known nonlinear control problems in the neural network 
literature, and good results are obtained. 
2 NEURAL NETWORK CONTROL 
In this section, several different neural network control architectures are presented. In these structures, 
identification neural networks, viewed as accurate models for real plants, are used. 
2.1 NEURAL NETWORK FEED FORWARD CONTROL 
The neural network controllers are trained by backpropagation of errors through a well trained neural 
identification network. In this architecture, the state variable y(t) of the system is sent back to the neural 
network, and the external input x(t) also is input to the network. With these inputs, the neural network 
establishes a feed forward mapping from the external input x(t) to the control signal u(t). This control 
mapping is expressed as a function of the external input x(t) and the plant state y(t): 
u(t)=f(x(t), y(t)) (1) 
where x(t)=[x(t), x(t-1) .... ]*, andy(t)=[y(t), y(t-1) .... ]*. 
This neural network control architecture is denoted in this study as feed forward neural control even 
though it includes state feedback. Neural control with error feedback is denoted as feedback neural 
control. 
x(t) qRef. Model] x(t) 
 Control NN 
e(t+l) 
ID NN 
4 
) I qRef' Modell e(t+l)( 
 NN ID NN 
y(t+l) 
Figure 1 Neural Network Control Architecture. 
ID NN represents the identification network. 
Ref. Model means reference model, and NN 
means neural network. 
Figure 2 Neural Network Feedback Control 
Architecture 
) 
y(t+l) 
During the training phases, based on the assumption that the neural identification network provides a 
model for the plant, the gradient information needed for error backpropagation is obtained by calculating 
the JacobJan of the identification network. The following equation describes this process for the control 
architecture shown in Figure 1. If the cost function is defined as E, then the gradient of the cost function 
with respect to weight w of the neural controller is 
An Integrated Architecture of Adaptive Neural Network Control for Dynamic Systems 1033 
E E u 
w uw 
I3 3u 3E 
+ + 
3Yt_l 3 Yt-1 
 Yt-1 
w 
(2) 
where u is the control signal andyt4 is the plant feedback state. 
After the training stage, the neural network supplies a control law. Because neural networks have the 
ability to approximate any arbitrary nonlinear functions[5], a feed forward neural network can build a 
nonlinear controller, which is crucial to the use of the neural network in control engineering. Also, since 
all the parameters of the neural network identification model and the neural network controller are 
obtained from learning through samples, mathematically untraceable features of the plant can be 
extracted from the samples and imbedded into the control system. 
However, because the feed forward controller has no error feedback, the controller can not adapt to the 
disturbances occurring in the plant or the reference model. This problem is of substantial importance in 
the context of adaptive control. In the next subsection, error feedback between the reference models 
and the plant outputs is introduced into neural network controllers for adaptation. 
2.2 NEURAL ADAPTIVE CONTROL WITH ERROR FEEDBACK 
It is known that feedback errors from the system are important for adaptation. Due to the flexibility of the 
neural network architecture, the error between the reference model and the plant can be sent back to the 
controller as an extra input. In such an architecture, neural networks become nonlinear gain scheduled 
controllers with smooth continuous gains. Figure 2 shows the architecture for the feedback neural control. 
With this architecture, the neural network control surface is not the fixed mapping from the x(t) to u(t) 
for each state y(t), but instead it learns the slope or the gain referring to the feedback error e(t) for 
control. This gain is a continuous nonlinear function of the external input x(t) and the state feedback 
y(t). Figure 3 shows the recurrent network architecture of the feedback neural controller. The output 
node needs to be recurrent because the output without the recurrent link from the neural controller is 
only a correction to the old control signal, and the new control signal should be the combination of old 
control signal and the correction. The other nodes of the network can be feed forward or recurrent. If 
we denote the weight for the output node's recurrent link as wb, then the output from the recurrent link is 
wbu(t-1). The following equation describes the feedback network. 
u(t) = wbu(t- 1)+f(x(t), y(t), e(t)) (3) 
where f(.) is a nonlinear function established by the network for which the recurrent link output is not 
included and e(t)=[e(t), e(t-1) .... ]*. 
To compare the control gain expression with conventional control theory, consider the Taylor series 
expansion of the network forward mapping f(.), equation (3) becomes 
u(t) = %u(t- 1) + f'(x(t), y(t)) e(t)+ f"(x(t), y(t)) e2(t)+... 
where f'(x(t), y(t))=[ 3f(x(t), y(t), e(t))/3e(t), 3f(x(t), y(t), e(t))/3e(t-1) .... ]. If high 
ignored and g(.) representsf'(.), we get 
(4) 
order terms are 
u(t) = wbu(t-1)+ g(x(t), y(t)) e(t) (5) 
1034 Liu Ke, Robert L. Tokar, Brian D. McVey 
which is a gain scheduled controller and the gain is the function of external input x(t) and the plant state 
y(t). It is clear that when %=1.0, g(.) is a constant vector and e(t)=[e(0, e(t-1), e(t-2)] T, the feedback 
neural network controller degenerates to a discrete PID controller. Because the neural network can 
approximate arbitrary nonlinear functions through learning, the neural network feedback controller can 
generate a nonlinear continuous gain hypersurface. 
x(t) 
e(t) 
y(t) 
Figure 3 Feedback Neural Network Controller 
FF control 
control 
qReL Model[ 
ID NN [_.1) 
Z[' I (t+l) 
Figure 4 Integrated NN Control Architeture. 
In the training process, error backpropagating through the identification network is used. The process is 
similar to the training of a feed forward neural controller, but the resulting control surface is completely 
different due to the different inputs. After training, the neural network is able to provide a nonlinear 
control law, that is, the desired model following response can be obtained with fixed controller 
parmeters for nonlinear dynamic systems. Traditionally, the control of the nonlinear plant is derived 
from continuous computing of the controller gains. 
This feedback controller is error driven. As long as an error exists, the control signal is updated 
according to the error and the gain. This kind of neural controller is an adaptive controller in principle. 
2.3 INTEGRATED NEURAL NETWORK CONTROLLER 
The characteristics of feed forward and error feedback neural control networks are described in the 
previous subsections. In this section, the two controllers are combined. Figure 4 shows the architecture. 
In this architecture, we include both feed forward and feedback neural network controllers. The control 
signal is the combination from these two networks' outputs. In the training stage, it is our experience 
that the feed forward network should be trained first. The feedback network is not included while 
training the feed forward network. After training the feed forward controller, the error feedback network 
is trained with the feed forward network, but the feed forward networks' weights are unchanged. 
Backpropagating the error through the identification network is applied for the training of both 
networks. 
When training the feedback control network, the feed forward calculation is 
u(t) = ufit)+u(t), (6) 
y(t+ 1) = P(x(t), y(t), u(t)), (7) 
where u(t) is the output from the feed forward controller network and u,(t) is the output from the 
feedback controller network, P(.) is the identification mapping. 
An Integrated Architecture of Adaptive Neural Network Control for Dynamic Systems 1035 
3 CONTROL ON EXAMPLE PROBLEMS 
In this section, the control architecture described above is applied to a well-known problem from the 
literature[1]. The plants and the reference model of the sample problems are described by difference 
equations 
y(t) 
plant: y(t + 1) = 1.0 + y2 (t) + (u(t) - 1.O)u(t)(u(t) + 1.0) (11) 
reference model: y(t + 1) = 0.6y(t) + u(t) (12) 
This is a nonlinear time varying dynamic system with no analytical inverse. 
3.1 FEED FORWARD CONTROL 
A feed forward neural network is trained to control the system to follow the reference model. The plant 
state y(t) and external input x(t) are fed to the controller. During the training, the x(t) is randomly 
generated. After training, the controller generates a control signal u(t) such that the plant can follow the 
reference model output. Figure 5 shows the testing result of the reference model output and the 
controlled plant output. The input function is x(t)=sin(2ra/25)+sin(2ra/10). The controller network 
architecture is (2, 20, 1). 
4 
-4 
0 
20 40 60 80 O0 
Figure 5 Tracking Result From the Feed Forward NN. 
Output of reference (solid line) and plant (dash line). 
1 0 
0 ..1 
-2  4 
4 2 
Figure 6 Feed Forward Control Surface 
2 
The output surface of the controller network is shown in Figure 6. By examining the controller output 
surface, we can see that the neural network builds a feed forward mapping from x(t) to u(t). This feed 
forward mapping is also a function of the plant state y(t). Under each state, the neural network 
controller accepts input x(t) to produce control signal u(t) such that the plant follows the reference model 
reasonably well. In Figure 6, the x axis is the external input x(t) and the y axis is the plant feedback 
output y(t). The z axis represents the control surface. 
The feed forward controller lacks the ability to adapt to plant uncertainty, noise or changes in the 
reference model. As an example, we apply this feed forward controller to the disturbed plant with a bias 
0.5 added to the original plant. The tracking result is shown in Figure 7. With this slight bias, the plant 
does not follow the reference model. Clearly, the feed forward controller has no adaptive ability to this 
model bias. 
1036 Liu Ke, Robert L. Tokar, Brian D. McVey 
3.2 FEEDBACK CONTROL 
First, we compare the neural network feedback controller with fixed gain PID controllers. For many 
nonlinear systems, the fixed gain PID controllers will give poor tracking and continuous adaptation of 
the controller parameters is needed. The neural network approach offers an alternative control approach 
for nonlinear systems. Through the training, control gains, imbedded in the neural network, are 
established as a continuous function of system external inputs x(t) and plant states y(t). 
The sample problem in the above section is now employed to describe how the neural network creates a 
nonlinear control gain surface with error feedback and additional inputs. First, we show one simple case 
of neural adaptive feedback controller. This controller can only adapt to the system nonlinearity with a 
fixed linear input pattern. The reason to show this simple adaptation case first is that its control gain 
surface can be illustrated graphically. 
Figure 8 illustrates, for the system in equations (11) and (12) that a fixed gain PI controller fails to track 
the reference model, for even one fixed linear input pattern x(t)=O.2t-2.5, because the plant nonlinearity. 
Figure 9 illustrates the result from a recurrent neural network with feedback error e(t) and x(t) as inputs. 
The neural network is trained by backpropagation error through the identification network. Compared to 
the fixed gain PI controller, the neural network improves the tracking ability significantly. 
e- 
e- 
4 
o 
-4 
o 
20 40 60 80 1 O0 
t 
Figure 7 Tracking Result for Shifted Plant, plant 
output (dash line) and reference output (solid line). 
c 
> 
o 
> 
t I ' I ' I ' I ' [ ' I ' I Frill'  
o 
-3 
-t5 
I  I  I i I  I , I  I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
t 
Figure 8 Reference Model Output (solid line) 
and PID Controlled Plant Output (dashed line) 
The control surface of the updating output f(.) is shown in Figure 10, which is the output from the neural 
network controller without recurrent link (see equation (3)). We plot the surface of the updating output 
from the controller with respect to input x(t) and error feed back input e(t). The gain of the controller is 
equivalent to the updating output from the network when error=-1.0. As shown in the figure, the gain in 
the neighborhood about x(t)=0 changes largely according to the direction of changes in the plant in the 
corresponding region. The updating surface for a PID controller is a plane. The neural network 
implements a nonlinear continuous control gain surface. 
For a more complicated case, we addx(t-1) as another input to the neural network as well as e(t-1), and 
train by error backpropagation through the identification network. These two inputs, x(t) and x(t-1) add 
difference information to the network. The network can adapt to not only different operating regions 
indicated by x(t), but also different input patterns. Figure 11 shows the tracking results with two 
different input patterns. In Figure 11 (a), input pattern is x(t)=4.0sin(t/4.0). In Figure 11 (b) input 
pattern is x(t)=sin(2t/25)+sin(2t/10). 
An Integrated Architecture of Adaptive Neural Network Control for Dynamic Systems 1037 
0 5 10 15 20 25 50 35 
Figure 9 Reference Model Output (solid line) and 
Neural Network Controled Output (dashed line) 
o 
} . 0u 
 .2 
 0 
2 ecro ½ 
Figure 10 Feedback Neural Controller Updating Surface 
o 20 60 so 
(a) t 
5 
 2 
M o 
>, -1 
o 
>, --4- 
-5 
-6 
0 
20 40 60 80 
t 
Figure 11 Output of the Reference Model (solid line) and the Plant (dash line) 
oo 
3.3 INTEGRATED NEURAL CONTROLLER 
As shown in the above section, when only error feedback neural controller is used, the control result is 
not very accurate. Now we combine feed forward and feedback control to realize good tracking and 
adaptation. Figure 12 shows the control result from the integrated controller when the plant is shifted 
0.5. Compared to only feed forward control(Figure 7), the integrated controller has much better 
adaptation to the shifted plant. 
When the plant changes, adding an extra feed back controller can avoid on-line training of feed forward 
network which may induce potential instability, and the adaptation is achieved. The output from the 
feedback network controller is driven by the error between the reference model and the plant. 
4 DISCUSSIONS 
We have emphasized in the above sections that a feed forward controller with only state feedback does 
not adapt when model uncertainties or noise/disturbance are present. The presence of a feed back 
controller can make the on line training of the feed forward network unnecessary, thus avoiding 
potential instability. The main reason for the instability of on-line training is the incompleteness of 
sample sets, which is referred to as a lack of persistent excitation in control theory[6]. First, it leads to 
an inaccurate identification network. Training with this network can result in an unstable controller. 
Second, it makes the training of controller away from global representation. With an error feedback 
adaptive network, the output from the feedback network controller is driven by the error between the 
reference model and the plant. In the simplest case when all the activity functions are linear and only 
the feedback errors are inputs, this kind of neural network is equivalent to a PID controller. However, 
1038 Liu Ke, Robert L. Tokar, Brian D. McVey 
beyond the scope of PID controllers, the neural networks are capable to approximating nonlinear time 
variant control gain surfaces corresponding to different operating regions. Also, unlike a PID controller, 
the coefficients for the neural adaptive controller are obtained through a training procedure. 
o 2o 4o 60 80 00 
Figure 12 tegrated Neork Conoller Trg Result for Shift Plt, 
Plt Ouut (dh line) d Referrace Ouut (mlid line). 
The error feedback network behaves as a gain scheduling controller. It has rise time, overshoot 
consideration and delay problem. Feed forward control can compensate for these problems to some 
degree. For example, the feed forward network can perform a nonlinear mapping with designed time 
delay. Therefore with the feed forward network, the delay problem maybe overcame significantly. Also 
the feed forward controller can help to reduce rise time compare to use only feedback controller. 
With the feed forward network, the feedback network controller can have much smaller gains compared 
to using a feedback network alone. This increases the noise rejection ability. Also this reduces the 
overshoot as well as settle time. 
The neural network control architecture offers an alternative to the conventional approach. It gives a 
generic model for the broadest class of systems considered in control theory. However this model needs 
to be configured depending on the details of the control problem. With different inputs, the neural 
network controllers establish different internal hyperstates. When plant states are fed back to the 
network, a feed forward mapping is established as a function of the plant states by the neural network 
controller. When the errors between the reference model and the plant are used as the error feedback 
inputs to a dynamic neural network controller, the network functions as an associative memory 
nonlinear gain scheduled controller. The above two kinds of neural controller can be combined and 
complemented to achieve accurate tracking and adaptation. 
References 
[1] Kumpati S. Narendra and Kannan Parthasarathy, "Gradient Methods for the Optimization of Dynamical 
Systems Containing Neural Networks," IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 2. pp252-262 Mar. 1991 
[2] Psaltis, D., Sideris, A. and Yamamura, A., "Neural controllers," Proc. of 1st International Conference on 
Neural Networks, Vol. 4, pp551-558, San Diego, CA, 1987 
[3] G. Lightbody, Q. H. Wu and G. W. Irwin, "Control applications for feed forward networks," Chapter 4, 
Neural Networks for Control and Systems, Edited by K.warwich, G. W. Irwin and K. J. Hunt 1992 
[4] R. Abikowski and P. J. Gawthrop, "A survey of neural networks for control" Chapter 3, Neural Networks 
for Control and Systems, ISBN 0-86341-279-3, Edited by K.warwich, G. W. Irwin and K. J. Hunt 1992 
[5] John Hertz, Anders Krogh and Richard G. Palmer, "Introduction to the Theory of Neural Computation," 
[6] Thomas Miller, Richard S. Sutton and Paul J. Werbos, "Neural Networks for Control" 
