Adaptive Elastic Input Field for 
Recognition Improvement 
Minoru Asogawa 
C&C Research Laboratories, 51EC 
Miyamae, Miyazaki, Kawasaki Kanagawa 213 Japan 
asogaacs. c .nec. co. jp 
Abstract 
For machines to perform classification tasks, such as speech and 
character recognition, appropriately handling deformed patterns 
is a key to achieving high performance. The authors presents a 
new type of classification system, an Adaptive Input Field Neu- 
ral Network (AIFNN), which includes a simple pre-trained neural 
network and an elastic input field attached to an input layer. By 
using an iterative method, AIFNN can determine an optimal afIine 
translation for an elastic input field to compensate for the original 
deformations. The convergence of the AIFNN algorithm is shown. 
AIFNN is applied for handwritten numerals recognition. Conse- 
quently, 10.83% of originally misclassified patterns are correctly 
categorized and total performance is improved, without modifying 
the neural network. 
I Introduction 
For machines to accomplish classification tasks, such as speech and character recog- 
nition, appropriately handling deformed patterns is a key to achieving high perfor- 
mance [Simard 92] [Simard 93] [Hinton 92] [Barnard 91]. The number of reasonable 
deformations of patterns is enormous, since they can be either linear translations 
(an afIine translation or a time shifting) or non-linear deformations (a set of com- 
binations of partial translations), or both. 
Although a simple neural network (e.g. a 3-1ayered neural network) is able to adapt 
1102 Minoru Asogawa 
Bottom.up 
Process 
Elastic 
ConsWaint 
Figure 1: AIFNN 
Jut Field 
Image 
Pre-trained 
Neural Netwjk  
netj 
j-th Input Cell 
ß.,..:.::.:.: i' '.:::i:i:i.:.:::;::: 
ß :: 155i:iii:'.:ii!iii:i:.".:.-'.:iiiF 
I 
I ,, 
$j 
Position 
Figure 2: Delta Force 
non-linear deformations and to discriminate noises, it is still necessary to have 
additional methods or data to appropriately process deformations. 
This paper presents a new type of classification system, an Adaptive Input Field 
Neural Network (AIFNN), which includes a simple pre-trained neural network and 
an elastic input field attached to an input layer. The neural network is applied to 
non-linear deformation compensations and the elastic input field to linear deforma- 
tions. 
The AIFNN algorithm can determine an optimal affine translation for compensating 
for the original patterns' deformations, which are misclassified by the pre-trained 
neural network. As the result, those misclassified patterns are correctly classified 
and the final classification performance is improved, compared to that for the orig- 
inal neural network, without modifying the neural network. 
2 Adaptive Input Field Neural Network (AIFNN) 
AIFNN includes a pre-trained neural network and an elastic input field attached to 
an input layer (Fig. 1). The elastic input field contains receptors sampling input 
patterns at each location. Each receptor connects to a cell in the input layer. Each 
receptor links to its adjacent receptors with an elastic constraint and can move over 
Adaptive Elastic Input Field for Recognition Improvement 1103 
the input pattern independently, as long as its relative elastic constraint is satisfied. 
The affine translation of the whole receptor (e.g. a shift, rotation, scale and slant 
translation) satisfies an elastic constraint, since a constraint violation is induced by 
the receptors' relative locations. 1 Partial deformations are also allowed with a 
little constraint violation. 
This feature of the elastic constraint is similar to that of the Elastic Net method 
[Durbin 87], which can solve NP-hard problems. Although this elastic net method 
is directly applicable to the template matching method, the performance is highly 
dependent on the template selection. Therefore, an elaborated feature space for 
non-linear deformations is mandatory [Hinton 92]. AIFNN utilizes something like 
an elastic net constraint, but does not require any prominent templates. 
The AIFNN algorithm is a repeated sequence of a bottom-up process (calculating 
a guess and comparing with the presumption) and a top-down process (modifying 
receptor's location to decrease the error and to satisfy the input field constraints). 
For applying AIFNN as a classifier, a parallel search is performed; all categories 
are chosen as presumption categories and the AIFNN algorithm is executed. After 
hundreds of repetitions, an L score is calculated, which is the sum of the error and 
the constraint violation in the elastic input field. A category which produces the 
lowest L score is chosen as a plausible category. In Section 3, it is proved that all 
receptors will settle to an equilibrium state. In the following sections, details about 
the bottom-up and top-down processes are described. 
Bottom-Up Process: 
When a novel pattern is presented, each receptor samples activation corresponding 
to a pattern intensity at each location. Each receptor activation is directly transmit- 
ted to a corresponding neural network input cell. Those input values are forwarded 
through a pre-trained neural network and an output guess is obtained. 
This guess is compared to the presumption category, and the negative of this error 
is defined as the presumption certainty. 2 For example, using the mean squared 
error criterion, the error E D is defined as follows; 
= - 2 
2 ' 
k 
where oh is the output value, and d is the desired value determined by the pre- 
sumption category. The presumption certainty is defined as -E D . 
Top-Down Process: 
To minimize the error and to maximize the presumption certainty, each receptor 
modifies the activation by moving its location over the input pattern. The new 
location for each receptor is determined by two elements; a direction which yields 
less error and a direction which satisfies the input field elastic constraint. The 
former element is called a Delta Force, since it relates to a delta value of an input 
layer cell. The latter element is named an Address Force. Each receptor moves to 
aln previous papers, [Asogawa 90] and [Asogawa 91], a shift and rotation translation 
was taken into account. In those models, a scale and slant translation violated the elastic 
constraint. 
2Although another category coding schema is also possible, for simplicity, it is presumed 
that each output cell corresponds to one certain category. 
1104 Minoru Asogawa 
a new location, which is determined by a sum of those two forces. The sum force is 
called the Combined Force. In the next two sections, details about these forces are 
described. 
Delta Force: The Delta Force, which reduces E D by altering receptors' locations, 
is determined by two elements: a partial derivative for the input value to the error, 
and a local pattern gradient at each receptor location (Fig. 1). 
To decrease the error E D, the value divergence for the j-th cell is computed as, 
Anetj  --or D OED 
Onetj (2) 
where a D is small positive number and 5 i is a delta value for the j-th input cell 
and computed by the back-propagation [Yamada 91]. Anetj and a local pattern 
gradient V4j are utilized to calculate a Delta Force sff; a scalar value of sff is 
given as, 
netj 
The direction of the Delta Force As is chosen  being parallel 
Consequenfiy, As is given as, 
s = netj V4j aD 
= (4) 
To avoid Asff becoming infinity, when is almost equal to 0, a small constant 
c(= ) is added to the denonator; therefore, Asff is defined , 
IV4 I"+ c 
Address Force: If each receptor is moved iteratively following only the Delta Force, 
the error becomes its minimum. However, receptors may not satisfy the input field 
constraint and induce a large constraint violation E a. Here, E a is defined by a 
distance between a receptor's lattice S and a lattice which is derived by an affine 
translation from the original lattice. Therefore, E a is defined as follows; 
1 
E A ---- 21-d(S N, S) =  E IIs - s, II 2 
i 
= t), s), (6) 
where d(.,.) is a distance measure for two receptor's lattices. S is a current re- 
ceptor lattice. S N is the receptor lattice given by the affine translation T(.) with 
parameters t and S O. S ø is the original receptor lattice. 
Therefore, as long as the receptor's lattice can be driven by some affine translation, 
there is no constraint violation. 
The affine parameters t are estimated so as to minimize EA; 
OE A 
-0 for i = 1,...,6. 
Oti 
(7) 
Adaptive Elastic Input Field for Recognition Improvement 1105 
Since E A is quadratic with respect to ti, computing ti is moderate. The Address 
Force for the j-th receptor As.  is defined as the partial derivative to E A with 
ß $ 
respect to the receptor's location sj; 
A$ - O A O EA 
- 0sj ' (s) 
where a n is a small positive constant. 
Combined Force: Here, all receptors are moved by a Combined Force As, which is 
a sum of the Delta Force As D and the Address Force As n. 
After one hundred iterations, all receptors are moved to the location which produces 
the minimum output error and the minimum constraint violation. Final states are 
evaluated with a new measurement L score, which is the sum of the error E D and 
the constraint violation EA; i.e. L - E D q- E A. 
This L score is utilized to choose the correct category in a parallel search. In a par- 
allel search, each category is temporarily chosen as a presumption and converged 
L scores are calculated. Those scores are compared and the category yielding the 
smallest L score is chosen as the correct category. This method fully exploits the 
features of AIFNN, but it requires a large amount of computation, which can fortu- 
nately be processed totally in parallel. In the following section, convergence of the 
AIFNN is shown. 
3 Convergence 
Convergence is shown by proving that the L is a Lyapunov function. When the L is 
a Lyapunov function, all receptors converge to some locations after iterations. The 
necessary and sufficient conditions for a Lyapunov function are (1) L has a lower 
bound and (2) L monotonically decreases by applying the Combined Forces. 
( Lower Bound: 
is the squared error at the output layer. Therefore, E D >_ O. E A is the con- 
straint violation, which is defined with a distance between two lattices. Therefore, 
E n > 0. Since the L is a sum of E D and E n, the existence of a lower bound for 
the L is proved. [] 
(2) Monotonically Decrease: 
The derivative of the L is calculated to show that the L decreases monotonically. 
d L d E D d E A 
dt dt dt 
( OED d si } { OEA d si} 
= E as, +E as, 
$ $ 
-- E{( OED OEA 
d si 
where  is the Combined Force d given , 
dsi = As D +AsA. 
dt 
(9) 
(lo) 
1106 Minoru Asogawa 
When a source image is smooth and IVil is smaller than c, the following approxi- 
mation is satisfied; 
(11) 
IV½,l + c 
By using Eq. (11), the Delta Force is approximated as follows; 
As D = aD Vbi 6i ~_a D0E D 
[V4i[ + c V4i 0si 
(12) 
By using Eqs. 
as follows; 
(8) and (12), and by letting 
__ (A the L derivative is computed 
, 
.., ( OED OEA) 2 
Os, <o 
dt - . - ' 
$ 
With Eq. (13), it is proved that L decreases monotonically. D 
(13) 
4 Experiments and Results 
Hand-written numerals recognition is chosen as one of the applications of AIFNN, 
since performance improvement is shown by compensating for deformations 
[Simard 92] [Simard 93] [Hinton 92]. The numeral inputs are bi-level images of 
32x40. They are blurred with a 5x5 Gaussian kernel and resampled to 14x 18 pixel 
gray level images. To calculate an intensity and a local gradient between grids, 
bi-linear Lagrange interpolation is utilized. 
A neural network is 3 layered. The numbers of cells for the input layer, the hid- 
den layer and the output layer are 252, 20 and 10, respectively. To obtain a 
simpler weight configuration, two techniques are utilized; a constant weight de- 
cay [Ishikawa 89] and a small constant addition to output function derivatives 
[Fahlman 88]. Training is repeated for 180 epochs with 2500 numerals, and tested 
with another 2500. Since image edges are almost blank, about 2400 connections 
between the input layer and the hidden layer are equal to 0; therefore, the number 
of parameters is reduced to 2870. 
In this experiment, a simple decision method is used; the maximum output cell is 
chosen as a guess and patterns are rejected when the error of the guess is greater 
than a threshold value. Naturally, a low threshold yields a low misclassification 
rate, but also yields a high rejection rate [Martin 92]. With the maximum thresh- 
old, the rates of rejection, correct classification and misclassification are 0.00%(0 
patterns), 95.20%(2380 patterns) and 4.80%(120 patterns), respectively. For the 
2500 numerals learning data, these rates are 0.00%(0 patterns), 99.40%(2485 pat- 
terns) and 0.60%(15 patterns). When a threshold is 0.001, the rates of rejection, 
correct classification and misclassification are 43.52%(1088 patterns), 56.40%(1410 
patterns) and 0.08%(2 patterns), respectively. 
AIFNN is applied to these 1088 rejected patterns. and classifies 997 patterns cor- 
rectly. Therefore, total performances for rejection, correct classification and mis- 
classification become 0.00%(0 patterns), 95.72%(2393 patterns) and 4.28%(107 pat- 
terns), respectively. As the classification performance is improved; the number of 
Adaptive Elastic Input Field for Recognition Improvement 1107 
misclassified patterns reduces from 120 to 107 without modifying the neural net- 
work. 10.83% of the originally misclassified patterns are correctly categorized. Fig. 
3 shows an input field after one hundred iterations. 
i : 
: 
1 
: ,, 
Output Activation 
0123456789 
In the figure on the left, receptors re located t ech grid point in  gry lttice. The 
circle diameter corresponds to the pttern intensity at ech receptor's loction. The bot- 
tom right figure indicates the source image, nd the top right figure indicates the neural 
network input. This image was initially misclassified as 3 instead of 8. After iteration 
with presumption as 8, ctegory 8 gets the highest ctivtion nd the receptor's lttice is 
rotated to compensate for the initial deformation. 
Figure 3: Input Field After Adaptation 
5 Discussion 
It is shown that the AIFNN can improve the classification performance for the 
original neural network, without modifications. This performance improvement is 
caused by an optimal arline translations estimation for rejected patterns. 
Although an arline translation is discussed in this paper, the algorithm is applica- 
ble to any deformation mechanism; such as a gain and offset equalization and 3D 
perspective deformation. 
1108 Minoru Asogawa 
The requirement for a neural network in AIFNN is the capability of calculating 
partial derivatives for an input layer, so a layered neural network is utilized in 
this paper. Since partial derivative can be computed by numerical approximation, 
practically any neural network is applicable for AIFNN. Moreover, any differentiable 
error criterion is applicable; such as, a KL information and a likelihood. 
To reduce computation, a sequential searching is also possible; a presumption is 
chosen as the most plausible category, e.g. the smallest error category. If the L 
score falls behind a threshold, this presumption is regarded as correct. If it's not, 
another plausible category is chosen as a presumption and tested [Asogawa 91]. 
References 
[Asogawa 90] M. Asogawa, "Adaptive Input Field Neural Network - that can rec- 
ognize rotated and/or shifted character -", Proceedings of IJCNN '90 at San 
Diego, vol. 3. pp. 733-738. June 1990. 
[Asogawa 91] M. Asogawa, "Adaptive Input Field Neural Network", Proceedings of 
IJCNN '91 at Singapore, vol. 1. pp. 83-88. November 1991. 
[Barnard 91] E. Barnard et al., "Invariance and Neural Nets", IEEE trans. on Neu- 
ral Networks, vol. 2. no. 5, pp. 498-508. 1992. 
[Durbin 87] R. Durbin et al., "An analogue approach to the traveling salesman 
problem using an elastic net method", Nature, vol. 326. pp. 689-691. 1987. 
[Fahlman 88] S. Fahlman, "An empirical study of learning speed in back- 
propagation networks", CMU-CS-88-162, 1988. 
[Hinton 92] G.E. Hinton et al., "Adaptive Elastic Models for Hand-Printed Char- 
acter Recognition", Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 
4. pp. 512-519. 1992. 
[Ishikawa 89] M. Ishikawa, "A structural learning algorithm with forgetting of link 
weights", Proceedings of lJCNN '89 at Washington DC., vol. 2, pp. 626, 1989. 
[Martin 92] G. L. Martin et al., "Recognizing Overlapping Hand-Printed Charac- 
ters by Centered-Object Integrated Segmentation and Recognition", Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 4. pp. 504-511. 1992. 
[Simard 92] P. Simard et al., "Tangent Prop - A Formalism for Specifying Selected 
Invariances in an Adaptive Network", Advances in Neural Information Pro- 
cessing Systems, vol. 4. pp. 895-903. 1992. 
[Simard 93] P. Simard et al., "Efficient Pattern Recognition Using a New Transfor- 
mation Distance", Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 5. 
pp. 50-58. 1993. 
[Yamada 91] K. Yamada, "Learning of category boundaries based on inverse recall 
by multilayer neural network", Proceedings of IJCNN '91 at Seattle, pp. 7-12 
vol.2 1991. 
