57 
Self Organizing Neural Networks for the 
Identification Problem 
Manoel Fernando Tenorio 
School of Electrical Engineering 
Purdue University 
W. Lafayette, IN. 47907 
tenorio@ ee.ecn.purdue.edu 
Wei-Tsih Lee 
School of Electrical Engineering 
Purdue University 
W. Lafayette, IN. 47907 
lwl@ ed.ecn.purdue.edu 
ABSTRACT 
This work introduces a new method called Self Organizing 
Neural Network (SONN) algorithm and demonstrates its use in a 
system identification task. The algorithm constructs the network, 
chooses the neuron functions, and adjusts the weights. It is compared to 
the Back-Propagation algorithm in the identification of the chaotic time 
series. The results shows that SONN constructs a simpler, more 
accurate model, requiring less training data and epochs. The algorithm 
can be applied and generalized to appilications as a classifier. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 THE SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION PROBLEM 
In various engineering applications, it is important to be able to estimate, interpolate, 
and extrapolate the behavior of an unknown system when only its input-output pairs are 
available. Algorithms which produce an estimation of the system behavior based on these 
pairs fall under the category of system identification techniques. 
1.2 SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION USING NEURAL 
NETWORKS 
A general form to represent systems, both linear and nonlinear, is the Kolmogorov- 
Garbor polynomial [Garbor, 1961 ] shown below: 
y = a0 + Z aixi + X E aijxixj +'" 
i i j (1) 
58 Tenorio and Lee 
where the y is the output, and x the input to the system. [Garbor ,1961] proposed a 
learning method that adjuswat the coefficient of (1) by minimizing the mean square error 
between each desired output sample and the actual output. 
This paper describes a supervised learning algorithm for structure construction and 
adjustment. Here, systems which can be described by (1) are presented. The computation 
of the function for each neuron performs a choice from a set of possible functions 
previously assigned to the algorithm, and it is general enough to accept a wide range of 
both continuous and discrete functions. In this work, the set is taken from variants of the 
2-input quadratic polynomial for simplicity, although there is no requirement making it 
so. This approach abandons the simplistic mean-square error for performance measure in 
favor of a modified Minimum Description Length (MDL) criterion [Rissanen,1975], with 
provisions to measure the complexity of the model generated. The algorithm searches for 
the simplest model which generates the best estimate. The modified MDL, from hereon 
named the Structure Estimation Criterion (SEC), is applied hierarchically in the selection 
of the optimal neuron transfer function from the function set, and then used as an optimal 
criterion to guide the construction of the structure. The connectivity of the resulting 
structure is.arbitrary, and under the correct conditions [Geman&Geman, 84] the estimation 
of the structure is optimal in terms of the output error and low function complexity. This 
approach shares the same spirit of GMDH-type algorithms. However, the concept of 
parameter estimation from Information Theory, combined with a stochastic search 
algorithm - Simulated Annealing, was used to create a new tool for system identification. 
This work is organized as follows: section II presents the problem formulation and the 
Self Organizing Neural Network (SONN) algorithm description; section III describes the 
results of the application of SONN to a well known problem tested before using other 
neural network algorithms [Lapedes&Farber, 1987; Moody, 1988]; and finally, section IV 
presents a discussion of the results and future directions for this work. 
II. THE SELF ORGANIZING NEURAL NETWORK 
ALGORITHM 
II.1 SELF ORGANIZING STRUCTURES 
The Self Organizing Neural Network (SONN) algorithm performs a search on the model 
space by the construction of hypersurfaces. A network of nodes, each node representing a 
hypersurface, is organized to be an approximate model of the real system. SONN can be 
fully characterized by three major components, which can be modified to incorporate 
knowledge about the process: (1) a generating rule of the primitive neuron transfer 
functions, (2) an evaluation method which accesses the quality of the model, and, (3) a 
structure search strategy. Below, the components of SONN are discussed. 
II.2 THE ALGORITHM STRUCTURE 
Self Organizing Neural Networks 59 
II.2.1 The Generating Rule 
Given a set of observations S: 
S = {(Xl, Y1),(X2, Y2),...,(Xl, Vl)} 
Yi = f(Xi) + 1 
(2) 
where f(.) is represented by a Kolmogorov-Garbor polynomial, and the random variable 
'1 is normally distributed, N(O,1). The dimensions of Y is m, and the dimensions of X is 
n. Every component Yk of Y forms a hypersufface Yk = fk(X) in the space of dim (X) + 
1. The problem is to find f(.), given the observations S, which is a corrupted version of 
the desired function. In this work, the model which estimates f(.) is desired to be as 
accurate and simple (small number of parameters, and low degree of non linearity) as 
possible. 
The approach taken here is to estimate the simplest model which best describes f(.) by 
generating optimal functions for each neuron, which can be viewed as the construction of 
a hypersurface based on the observed data. It can be described as follows: given a set of 
observations S; use p components of the n dimensional space of X to create a 
hypersurface which best describes Yk = f(X), through a three step process. First, given X 
= [x 1, x 2, x 3, ..., x n] and Yk' and the mapping t'n: [x 1, x2, x3, ..., Xn] -> [xt,(1), 
xt,(2 ), xt,(3 ), ..., xt,(n)], construct the hypersurface hl(Xt,(1), xt,(2), xt,(3), ..., 
xt,(n)) (h i after the first iteration) of p+l dimensions, where t' n is a projection from n 
dimensions to p dimensions. The elements of the domain of t' n are called terminals. 
Second, If the global optimality criterion is reached by the construction of hi(xt,(l ), 
xt,(2 ), xt,(3 ), ..., xt,(n)), then stop, otherwise continue to the third step. Third, 
generate from [x 1, x 2, x 3, ..., xn,hl(Xt,(1), xt,(2), xt,(3), ..., xt,(n)) ] a new p+l 
dimensional hypersurface hi+ 1 through the extended mapping t'n+l(. ), and reapply the 
second step. The resulting model is a multilayered neural network whose topology is 
arbitrarily complex and creawxi by a stochastic search guided by a structure estimation 
criterion. For simplicity in this work, the set of prototype functions (F) is reslricWxl to be 
2-input quadratic surfaces or smaller, with only four possible types: 
y = ao+alxl+a2x2 (3) 
y = ao+alxl+a2x2+a3xlx2 (4) 
Y = ao+alxl+a2x21 (5) 
Y = ao+alxl+a2x2+a3xlx2+a4x21+asx (6) 
II.2.2 Evaluation of the Model Based on the MDL Criterion 
The selection rule (T) of the neuron transfer function was based on a modification of the 
Minimal Description Length (MDL) information criterion. In [Rissanen, 1975] the 
principle of minimal description for statistical estimation was developed. The MDL 
provides a wade-off between the accuracy and the complexity of the model by including 
the structure estimation term of the final model. The final model (with the minimal 
60 Tenorio and Lee 
MDL) is optimum in the sense of being a consistent estimate of the number of 
parameters while achieving the minimum error [Rissanen, 1980]. Given a sequence of 
observation x10t20t3,...,x N from the random variable X, the dominant term of the MDL 
in [Rissanen, 1975] is: 
MDL = - log f(xl0) + 0.5 k log N 
where f(x10) is the estimated probability density function of the model, k is the number 
of parameters, and N is the number of observations. The first term is actually the negative 
of the maximum likelihood (ML) with respect to the estimated parameter. The second 
term describes the structure of the models and it is used as a penalty for the complexity of 
the model. In the case of linear polynomial regression, the MDL is: 
MDL = - 0.5 N log S2n + 0.5 k log N 
where k is the number of coefficients in the model selected. 
In the SONN algorithm, the MDL criterion is modified to operate both recursively and 
hierarchically. First, the concept of the MDL is applied to each candidate prototype 
surface for a given neuron. Second, the acceptance of the node, based on Simulated 
Annealing, uses the MDL measure as the system energy. However, since the new neuron 
is generateA from terminals which can be the output of other neurons, the original 
definition of the MDL is unable to compute the true number of system parameters of the 
final function. Recall that due to the arbitrary connectivity, feedback loops and other 
configurations it is non trivial to compute the number of parameters in the entire 
structure. In order to reflect the hierarchical nature of the model, a modified MDL called 
Structure Estimation Criterion (SEC) is used in conjunction with an heuristic estimator 
of the number of parameters in the system at each stage of the algorithm. A 
computationally efficient heuristic for the estimation of the number of parameters in the 
model is based on the fact that SONN creates a tree-like structure with multiple roots at 
the input terminals. Then k, in expression (8), can be estimated recursively by: 
k = kL + kR + (no. of parameters of the current node) (9) 
where kL and kR are the estimated number of parameters of the left and right parents of 
the current node, respectively. This heuristic estimator is neither a lower bound nor an 
upper bound of the true number of parameter in the model. 
II.2.3 The SONN Algorithm 
To explain the algorithm, the following definitions are necessary: Node - neuron and the 
associated function, connections, and SEC; BASIC NODE - A node for the system input 
variable; FRONT NODE - A node without children; INTERMIDIATE NODE - The nodes 
that are neither front or basic nodes; STATE - The collection of nodes, and the 
configuration of their interconnection; INITIAL STATE (SI) - The state with only basic 
nodes; PARENT AND CHILD STATE - The child state is equal to the parent state except 
for f a new node and its interconnection generated on the parent state structure; 
NEIGHBOR STATE - A state that is either a child or a parent state of another; ENERGY 
Self Organizing Neural Networks 6! 
OF THE STATE (SEC-Si) - The energy of the state is defined as the minimum SEC of 
all the front nodes in that state. 
In the SONN algorithm, the search for fie correct model structure is done via Simulated 
Annealing. Therefore the algorithm at times can accept partial structures that look less 
than ideal. In the same way, it is able to discard partially constructed substructures in 
search for better results. The use of this algorithm implies that the node accepting rule 
(R) varies at run-time according to a cooling temperature (T) schedule. The SONN 
algorithm is as follows: 
Initialize T, and SI 
Repeat 
Repeat 
Sj = generate (Si), - application of P. 
If accept ( SEC_Sj, SEC_Si, T) then Si = S j, - application of R. 
until the number of new neurons is greater than N. 
Decrease the temperature T. 
until The temperature T is smaller than Ten d (Terminal temperature for Simulated 
Annealing). 
Each neuron output and the system input variables are called terminals. Terminals are 
viewed as potential dimensions from which a new hypersurface can be constructed. Every 
terminal represents the best tentative to approximate the srstem function with the 
available infation, and are therefore treateA equally. 
HI. EXAMPLE - THE CHAOTIC TIME SERIES 
In the following results, the chaotic time series generated by the Mackay-Glass 
differential equations was used. The SONN with fle $EC, and its heuristic variant were 
used to obtain the approximate model of the system. The result is compared with those 
obtained by using the nonlinear signal processing method [Lapedes&Farber, 1987]. The 
advantages and disadvantages of both approaches are analyzed in the next section. 
III. 1 Structure of the Problem 
The MacKay-Glass differential equation used here can be described as: 
)x(t___) _ a x(t- :) - b x(t) 
t 1 + xø(t- x) (10) 
By setting a = 0.2, b = 0.1, and  = 17, a chaotic time series with a'strange attractor of 
fractal dimension about 3.5 will be produced [Lapedes&Farber, 1987]. To compare the 
accuracy of prediction the normalized root mean square error is used as a performance 
index: 
62 Tenorio and Lee 
normalized RMSE = RMSE 
Standard Deviation 
(11) 
III.2. SONN WITH THE HEURISTIC SEC (SONN-H) 
In the following examples, a modified heuristic version of the SEC is used. The estimator 
of the number of parameters is given by (9), and the f'mal configuraion is shown in figure 
1. 
III.2.1 Node 19 
In this subsection, SONN is allowed to generate up to the 19th accepted node. In this 
first version of the algorithm, all neurons have the same number of interconnections, and 
therefore draw their transfer function from the same pool of functions.. Generalizations of 
the algorithm can be easily made to accommodate multiple input functions, and neuron 
transfer function assignment being drawn from separate pools. In this example, the first 
one hundred points of the time series was used for training, and samples 101 through 400 
used for prediction testing. The total number of weights in the network is 27. The 
performance index average 0.07. The output of the network is overlapped in the figure 2 
with the original time series. 
For comparison purposes, a GDR network with the structure used in [Lapedes&Farber, 
1987] is trained for 6500 epochs. The training data consisted of the first 500 points of the 
time series, and the testing data ran from the 501st sample to the 832nd. The total 
number of weights is 165, and the final performance index equal to 0.12. This was done 
to give both algorithms similar computational resources. Figure 3 shows the original 
time series overlapped with the GDR network output. 
IH.2.2 NODE 37 
In this subsection, the model chosen was formed by the 37 th accepted node. The network 
was Wained in a similar manner to the first example, since it is part of the same run. The 
final number of weights is 40, and the performance index 0.018. Figure 4 shows the 
output of the network overlapped with the original time series. Figure 5 shows the GDR 
with 11,500 epochs. Notice that in both cases, the GDR network demands 150 
connections and 150 weights, as compared to 12 connections and 27 weights for the first 
example and 10 connections and 40 weights for the second example. The comparison of 
the performance of different models is listed in figure 6. 
IV. Conclusion and Future Work 
In this study, we proposed a new approach for the identification problem based on a 
flexible, self-organizing neural network (SONN) structure. The variable structure provides 
the opportunity to search and construct the optimal model based on input-output 
observations. The hierarchical version of the MDL, called the structure estimation criteria, 
Self Organizing Neural Networks 63 
was used to guide the trade-off between the model complexity and the accuracy of tim 
estimation. The SeNN approach demonstrates potential usefulness as a tool for system 
identification through the example of modeling a chaotic time series. 
REFERENCES
Garber, D., et. al. ,"A universal nonlinear filter, predicator and simulator which 
optimizes irsekf by a learning process," IEE Proc.,18B, pp. 422-438, 1961 
Rissanenj. "Modeling by shortest dam description," Automatica, vol. 14, pp. 465- 
471,1975 
Gemen, S, and Gemen D., "Stochastic relaxation, gibbs deisribution, and the bayesian 
restoration of images," IEEE PAMI., PAMI-6,pp.721-741, 1984 
Lapedes,A. and Farber, R. ,"Nonlinear signal processing using neural networks: 
Predicaon and system modeling," TR. LA-UR-87-2662, 1987 
Moody, I. This volume 
Rissanen:,j. "Consistent order estimation of autoregressive processing by shortest 
description of data," Analysis and optimization of stochastic system, .l'acobs et. al. Eds. 
N.Y. Academic, 1980 
Figure 1. The 37th State Generated 
5¾ll I0.. SONNimoO 
Figure 2. SONN 19th Model, P.I. = 0.06 
6 Tenorio and Lee 
SvilIiII IO 
' .y 
r 
Figure 3. GDR after 6,500 Epochs, P.I. = 0.12 
-3vslem 0.. 'ONN mode 373 
Figure 4. SONN 37th Model, P.I. = 0.038 
":;vlle I0.. Jecl( Pfe)Daqet.k)n w,ln  I 500 Pocns 
Figure 5. GDR after 11,500 Epochs, P.I. = 0.018 
Comparison ol the Perlormace hlex 
O. t2'  
O. tO - 
008 .- .,- -'"'- 
O 06 ......... ' ....... " 
O 02 , .'---.------'-' '--'""-' -'--/"'"' 
Figure 6. Performance Index 
Versus the Number of Predicted Points 
