149 
FIXED POINT ANALYSIS FOR RECURRENT 
NETWORKS 
Mary B. Ottaway 
Patrice Y. Simard 
Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Rochester 
Rochester NY 14627 
Dana H. Ballard 
ABSTRACT 
This paper provides a systematic analysis of the recurrent backpropaga- 
tion (RBP) algorithm, introducing a number of new results. The main 
limitation of the RBP algorithm is that it assumes the convergence of 
the network to a stable fixed point in order to backpropagate the error 
signals. We show by experiment and eigenvalue analysis that this condi- 
tion can be violated and that chaotic behavior can be avoided. Next we 
examine the advantages of RBP over the standard backpropagation al- 
gorithm. RBP is sitown to build stable fixed points corresponding to the 
input patterns. This makes it an appropriate tool for content address- 
able memories, one-to-many function learning, and inverse problems. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last few years tilere has been a great resurgence of interest in neural network 
learning algorithms. One of the most successful of these is the Backpropagation learning 
algorithm of [Rumelhart 86], which has shown its usefulness in a number of applications. 
This algorithm is representative of others that exploit internal units to represent very 
nonlinear decision surfaces [Lipproart 87] and thus overcomes the limits of the classical 
perceptton [Rosenblatt 62]. 
WitIt its enormous advantages, the backpropagation algorithm has a number of dis- 
advantages. Two of these are the inability to fill in patterns and the inability to solve 
one-to-many inverse problems [Jordan 88]. These limitations follow from the fact that 
the algorithm is only defined for a feedforward network. Thus if part of the pattern is 
missing or corrupted in the input, this error will be propagated through to the output and 
the original pattern ;viii not be restored. In one-to-many problems, several solutions are 
possible for a given input. On a feedforward net, the competing targets for a given input 
introduce contradictory error signals and learning in unsuccessful. 
Very recently, these limitations have been removed with the specification of a recurrent 
backpropagation algorithm [Pineda 87]. This algorithm effectively extends the backpropa- 
gation idea to networks of arbitrary connection topologies. This advantage, however, does 
not come without some risk. Since the connections in the network are not symmetric, the 
stability of the network is not guaranteed. For some choices of weights, the state of the 
units nay oscillate indefinitely. 
This paper provides a systematic analysis of the recurrent backpropagation (RBP) 
algorithn, introducing a number of new results. The main limitation of the RBP algorithm 
is that it assrunes the convergence of the network to a stable fixed point in order to 
150 Sirnard, Ottaway and Ballard 
backpropagate the error signals. We show by experiment and eigenvalue analysis that this 
condition can be violated and that chaotic behavior can be avoided. 
Next we examine the advantage in convergence speed of RBP over the standard back- 
propagation algorithm. RBP is shown to build stable fixed points corresponding to the 
input patterns. This makes it an appropriate tool for content addressable memories, many- 
to-one function learning and inverse problem. 
MODEL DESCRIPTION 
The simulations have been done on a recurrent backpropagation network with first order 
units. Using the same formalism as [Pineda 87], the vector state a: is updated according 
to the equation: 
dxi/dt = -x, + #,(u) + I, (1) 
i = 1,2,...,N (2) 
where 
Ui -'  WijXj for 
The activation function is the logistic function 
1 
#(() = 1 + e- (3) 
The networks we will consider are organized in modules (or sets) of units that perform 
similar functions. For example, we talk about fully connected module if each unit in the 
module is connected to each of the others. An input module is a set of units where each 
tinit has non-zero input function Ii. Note that a single unit can belong to more than 
one module at a time. The performance of the network is measured through the energy 
function: 
vhere 
N 
i--1 
(4) 
s, = - x?) and x? = (5) 
An output module is a set of units i such that Ji  O. Units that do not belong to any 
input or output modules are called hidden units. A unit (resp module) can be clamped 
and tinclamped. When the unit (resp module) is unclamped, Ii = Ji -' 0 for the unit 
(resp the module). If the unit is clamped, it behave according to the pattern presented to 
the network. Unclamping a unit results in making it hidden. Clamping and unclamping 
actions are handy concepts for the study of content addressable memory or generalization. 
The goal for the network is to minimize the energy function by changing the weights 
accordingly. One way is to perform a gradient descent in E using the delta rule: 
OE 
dwo/dt = --" Owij (6) 
where  is a learning rate constant. The weight variation  a function of the error is given 
by the formul [Pineda 87, Alineida 87] 
dwid/dt=nyFx F (7) 
Fixed Point Analysis for Recurrent Networks 151 
witere y? is a solution of the dynamical system 
dyi/dt = -Yi + gi(ui ) wikyk + Ji (8) 
The above discussion, assumes that the input function I and the target T are constant 
over time. In our simulation however, we have a set of patterns Pa presented to the 
network. A pattern is a tuple in ([0, 1] t (U)) r, where N is the total number of units 
and U stands for unclamped. The ita vMue of the tuple is the value signed to Ii and 
when the pattern is presented to the network (if the value is U, the unit is unclamped for 
the time of presentation of the pattern). This definition of a pattern does not allow 
and Ti to have different values. This is not an important restriction however since we 
can can always simulate such an (inconsistent) unit with two units. The energy function 
to be minimized over all the patterns is defined by the equation: 
(9) 
The gradient of Etot,t is simply the sum of the gradients of E(a), and hence the updating 
equation has the form: 
dwij/dt = r Z y?(o)x?(c) (10) 
When a pattern P, is presented to the network, an approximation of xø(e) is first 
computed by doing a few iterations using equation I (propagation). Then, an approx- 
imation of yø(e) is evaluated by iterating equation 8 (backpropagation). The weights 
are finally updated using equation 10. If we assume the number of iterations to evaluate 
xjøø(e) and yø(cr) to be constant, the total number of operations required to update the 
weights is O(N ). The validity of this assumption will be discussed in a later section. 
CONVERGENCE OF THE NETWORK 
The learning algorithm for our network assumes a correct approximation of x ø. This value 
is computed by recursively propagating the activation signals according to equation 1. The 
effect of varying the number of propagations can be illustrated with a simple experiment. 
Consider a fully connected network of eight units (it's a directed anti-reflexive graph). 
Four of them are auto-associative units which are presented various patterns of zeroes and 
ones. An auto-associative unit is best viewed as two visible units, one having all of the 
inctuning connections and one having all of the outgoing connections. When the auto- 
associative unit is not clamped, it is viewed as a hidden unit. The four remMning units 
arc hidden. The error is measured by the differences between the activations (from the 
incoming connections) of the auto-associative nnits and the corresponding target value 
/] for each pattern. In running the experiment, eight patterns were presented to the 
network perfo[213zrming I to 5 propagations of the activations using Equation 1, 20 back- 
propagations of the error signals according to Equation 8, and one update (Equation 10) 
of the weights per presentation. We define an epoch to be a sweep through the eight 
patterns using the above formula of execution on each. The corresponding results using 
a learning rate of 0.2 are shown in figure 1. It can easily be seen that using one or two 
propagations does not suffice to set the hidden units to their correct values. However, 
the network does learn correctly how to reproduce the eight patterns when 3 or more 
152 Simard, Ottaway and Ballard 
Error 2 -- 
0 
5OO 
 p. ropagations 
1000 1500 2000 
Error 2 -- 
I 1 , 4 back-propagations 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 
Figure 1' Learning curves for a recurrent network with different numbers of propa- 
gations of the activation and back-propagation of the error signals. 
Fixed Point Analysis for Recurrent Networks 153 
propagations are done after each presentation of a new pattern. This is not surprising 
since the rate of convergence to a fixed point is geometric (if the fixed point is stable), 
thus making only a few propagations necessary. We suspect that larger networks with a 
fully connected topology will still only require a few iterations of forward propagation if 
the fixed points are fairly stable. In the next section, we will study a problem, where this 
assumption is not true. In such a situation, we use an algorithm where the number of 
forward propagations varies dynamically. 
For some specialized networks such as a feed-forward one, the number of propagations 
must be at least equal to the number of layers, so that the output units receive the 
activation corresponding to the input before the error signal is sent. 
Similarly, yO is computed recursively by iterative steps. We used the same experiment 
as described above with 1 to 4 back-propagations of the error signals to evaluate the time 
yt takes to converge. The rest of this experiment remained the same as above, except 
that the number of propagations for a: t was set to 20. The learning curves are shown in 
figure 1. It is interesting to note that with only one propagation of the error signal, the 
system was able to complete the learning, for the isolated curve tends toward the other 
curves as time increases. The remaining four curves lie along the same path because the 
error signals rapidly become meaningless after few iterations. The reason for this is that 
the error signals are multiplied by g(ui) = wijzi(1 - zi) when going from unit i to unit j, 
which is usually much sinaller than one because I zi(1- zi) I is smaller than 0.25. The fact 
that one iteration of the error signal is enough to provide learning is interesting for VLSI 
applications: it enables the units to work together in an asynchronous fashion. If each unit 
propagates the activation much more often than it backpropagates the error signals the 
system is, on average, in a stable state when the backpropagation occurs and the patterns 
are learned slowly. This ability for recurrent networks to work without synchronization 
mechanisms makes them more compatible with physiological network systems. 
The above discussion assumed that z co exists and can be computed by recursively 
computing the activation function. However, it has been shown ([Simard 88]) that for 
any activation function, there are always sets of weights such that there exist no stable 
fixed points. This fact is alarming since z ø is computed recursively, which implies that 
if there is no stable fixed point, z t will fail to converge, and incorrect error signals will 
be propagated through the system. Fortunately, the absence of stable fixed points turns 
out not to be a problem in practice. One reason for this is that they are very likely to be 
present given a reasonable set of initial weights. The network almost always starts with a 
unique stable fixed point. The fixed points are searched by following the zero curve of the 
homotopy map 
)([a:i]- F([a:i])) + (1 - )0([a:i]- [ai]) (11) 
for different [ai] starting at ) = 0. The results indicate that the probability of getting 
unstable fixed points increases with the size of the network. We always found a stable 
fixed point for networks with less than 50 units. Out of 500 trials of 100 unit networks 
starting with random weights between -1 and +1, we found two set of weights with no 
stable fixed points. However, even in that case, most of the eigenvalues were much less 
than 1, which means that oscillations are limited to one or two eigenvector axes. 
Since it is possible to start with a network that has no stable fixed points, it is of 
interest whether it will still learn correctly. Since searching for all the fixed points (by 
trying different [ai] in equation 11) is computationally expensive, we choose, as before, 
a silnple learning experiment. The network's layout is the same as previously described. 
}towever, we know (froin the previous result) than it probably has no unstable fixed points 
154 Sirnard, Oftaway and Ballard 
Eigen 1 
value 
m 
Figure 2: top Maximum eigenvalues for the unstable fixed point as a function of the 
number of epochs. bottom Error as a function of the number of epochs. 
Fixed Point Analysis for Recurrent Networks 155 
since it only has four hidden units. To increase the probability of getting a fixed point that 
is unstable, we make the initial weights range from -3 to 3 and set the thresholds so that 
[0.5] is a fixed point for one of the patterns. This fixed point is more likely to be unstable 
since the partial derivative of the functions (which are equal to 
at the fixed point) are maximized at [z] = [0.5] and therefore the Jacobian is more likely 
to have big eigenvMues. Figure 2 shows the stability of that particular fixed point and 
the error as a function of the number of epochs. Three different simulations were done 
with different sets of random initial weights. As clearly shown in the figure, the network 
learns despite the absence of stable fixed points. Moreover, the observed fixed point(s) 
become stable as learning progresses. In the absence of stable fixed points, the weights 
are modified after a fixed number of propagations and backpropagations. Even though 
the state vector of the network is not precisely defined, the state space trajectory lies in 
delimited volume. As learning progresses, the projection of this volume on the visible units 
diminishes to a single point (stable) and moves toward a target point that correspond to 
the presented pattern on the visible units. Note that our energy function does not impose 
constraints on the state space trajectories projected on the hidden units [Pearlmutter 88]. 
"RUNAWAY" SIMULATIONS 
The next question that arises is whether a recurrent network goes to the same fixed point 
at successive epochs (for a given input) aud what happens if it does not. To answer this 
question, we construct two networks, one with ouly feed forward connections and one with 
feed back connections. Both networks have 3 modules (input, hidden and output) of 4 
units each. The connections of the feed forward network are between the input and the 
hidden module and between the hidden and the output module. The connections of the 
recurrent network arc identical except that the there are connections between the units of 
the hidden module. The rationale behind this layout is to ensure fairness of comparison 
between fccd forward and feedback backpropagation. Each network is presented sixteen 
distinct patterns on the iuput with sixteen different random patterns on the output. The 
patterns consist of zeros aud ones. This task is purposely chosen to be fairly difficult (16 
fixed points on the four laidden units for the recurrent net) and will make the evaluation of 
a; © difficult. The learning curves for the networks are shown in Figure 3 for a learning rate 
of 0.2. We can see that the network with recurrent connections learn a slightly faster than 
the feed forward network. However, a more careful analysis reveals that when the learning 
rate is increased, the recurrent network doesn't always learn properly. The success of the 
learning depends on the number of iterations we use in the computation of a; t. As clearly 
shown on the Figure 3, if we use 30 iterations for a: t the network fails to learn, although 
40 iterations yields reasonable results. The two cases only differ by the value of a: t used 
when the error signals are backpropagated. 
According to our interpretation, recurrent backpropagation learns by moving the fixed 
points (or small volume state trajectories) toward target values (determined by the out- 
put). As learning progresses, the distances between the fixed points and the target values 
diminish, causing the error signals to become smaller and the learning to slow down. How- 
ever if the network doesn't come close enough to the fixed point (or the small volume 
state trajectory), the new error (the distance between the current state and the target) 
eau suddenly be very large (relatively to the distance between the fixed point and the 
target). Large iucorrect error signals are then introduced into the system. There are two 
cases: if the learning rate is sraM1, a near miss has little effect on the learning curve and 
RBP learns faster than the feed forward network. If, on the other hand, the learning rate 
1 56 Simard, Ottaway and Ballard 
Error 
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 
Error 
2- 
0 
o lOO 
200 300 400 500 
Error 
6 
0 100 200 300 400 500 
Figure 3: Error as a function of the number of epochs for a feed forward net (dotted) 
and a recurrent net (solid or dashed). top: The learning rate is set to 0.2. center: 
The learning rate is set to 1.0. The solid and the dashed lines are for recurrent 
net with 30 and 40 iterations of a: t per epochs respectively. bottom: The learning 
rate is variable. The recurrent network has a variable number of iteration of x t per 
epochs. 
Fixed Point Analysis for Recurrent Networks 157 
Z2 
0 
1 
0 1 0 1 0 1 
Figure 4: State space and fixed point. xt and x2 are the activation of two units 
of a fully connected network. left: Before learning, there is one stable fixed point 
center: After learning a few pattern, there are two desired stable fixed points. right: 
After learning several patterns, there are two desired stable fixed points and one 
undesired stable fixed point. 
is big, a near miss will induce important incorrect error signals into the system which in 
turn makes the next miss more dramatic. This runaway situation is depicted on the center 
of Figure 3. To circumvent this problem we vary the number of propagations as needed 
until successive states on the state trajectory are sufficiently close. The resulting learning 
curves for feed forward and recurrent nets are plotted at the bottom of Figure 3. In these 
simulations the learning rates are adjusted dynamically so that successive error vectors 
are almost colinear, that is: 
0.7 < cos(Awi, 
A-w 0 )  0.9 
(12) 
As can be seen recurrent and feed forward nets learn at the same speed. It is interesting to 
mentiou that the average learning rate for the recurrent net is significantly smaller ( 0.65) 
than for the feed forward net ( 0.80). Surprisingly, this doesn't affect the learning speed. 
CONTENT ADDRESSABLE MEMORIES 
An interesting property of recurrent networks is their ability to generate fixed points that 
can be used to perform content addressable memory [Lapedes 86, Pineda 87]. Initially, 
a fully connected network usually has only one stable fixed point (all units unclamped) 
(see Figure 4, left). By clamping a few (autoassociative) units to given patterns, it is 
possible, by learning, to create stable fixed points for the unclamped network (Figtire 4, 
center). To illustrate this property, we build a network of 6 units: 3 autoassociative units 
158 Simard, Ottaway and Ballard 
fixed points 
autoassociative units I hidden units 
0.0402 0.0395 0.9800 0.8699 0.0763 0.0478 
0.9649 0.0476 0.0450 0.0724 0.8803 0.4596 
0.0830 0.9662 0.0658 0.2136 0.0880 0.8832 
0.9400 0.9619 0.9252 0.1142 0.1692 0.5164 
0.9076 0.5201 0.0391 0.0448 0.6909 0.7431 
Maximum 
eigenvalue 
0.4419 
0.6939 
0.8470 
0.8941 
1.2702 
Table 1: Fixed points for content addressable memory 
and 3 hidden units. The three autoassociative units are presented patterns with an odd 
number of ones in them (there are 4 such patterns on 3 units: I 0 0, 0 I 0, 0 0 I and 
I I 1). The network is fully connected. After 5000 epochs, the auto-associative units are 
unclamped for testing. All the fixed points found for the network of 6 (unclamped) units 
are given in table 1. As can be seen, the four stable fixed points are exactly the four 
patterns presented to the network. Moreover their stability guarantees that the network 
can be used for CAM (content addressable memory) or for one-to-many function learning. 
Indeed, if the network is presented incomplete or corrupted patterns (sufficiently close to a 
previously learned pattern), it will restore the pattern as soon as the incorrect or missing 
units are unclamped by converging to a stable fixed point. If there are several correct 
pattern completions for the clamped units, the network will converge to one of the pattern 
depending on the initial conditions of the unclamped units (which determine the state 
space trajectory). These highly desirable properties are the main advantages of having 
feedback connections. \re note from table I that a fifth (incorrect) fixed point has also 
be found. However, this fixed point is unstable (Maximum eigenvalue = 1.27) and will 
therefore never be found during recurslye searches. 
In the previous examplc, there are no undesired stable fixed points. They are, however, 
likely to appear if the learning task becomes more complex (Figure 4, right). The reason 
why they are difficult to avoid is that unless the units are unclamped (the learning is 
stopped), the network cannot reach them. Algorithms which eliminate spurious fixed 
points are presently under study. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have studied the effect of introducing feedback connections into feed 
forward networks. We have shown that the potential disadvantages of the algorithm, such 
as the absence of stable fixed points and chaotic behavior, can be overcome. The resulting 
systems have several interesting properties. First, allowing arbitrary connections makes a 
network more physiologically plausible by removing structural constraints on the topology. 
Second, the increased number of connections diminishes the sensitivity to noise and slightly 
improves the speed of learning. Finally, feedback connections allow the network to restore 
incomplete or corrupted patterns by following the state space trajectory to a stable fixed 
point. This property can also be used for one-to-many function learning. A limitation of 
thc algorithm, however, is that spurious stable fixed points could lead to incorrect pattern 
completion. 
Fixed Point Analysis for Recurrent Networks 159 
References 
[Ahneida 87] Luis B. Almeida, in the Proceedings of the IEEE First Annual International 
Conference on Neural Networks, San Diego, California, June 1987. 
[Lapedes 86] Alan S. Lapedes & Robert M. Farbet A self-optimizing nonsymmetrical neu- 
ral net for content addressable memory and pattern recognition. Physica D22, 24% 
259, 1986. 
[Lippman 87] Richard P. Lippman, An introduction to computing with neural networks, 
IEEE ASSP Magazine April 1987. 
[Jordan 88] Michael I. Jordan, Supervised learning and systems with excess degrees of 
freedom. COINS Technical Report 88-27. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 1988. 
[Pearlmutter 88] Barak A. Pearlmutter. Learning State Space Trajectories in Recurrent 
Neural Networks. Proceedings of the Connectionnist Models Summer School. pp. 113- 
117. 1988. 
[Pineda 87] Fernando J. Pineda. Generalization of backpropagation to recurrent and 
higher order neural networks. Neural Information Processing Systems, New York, 
1987. 
[Piueda 88] Fernando J. Pineda. Dynamics and Architecture in Neural Computation. Jour- 
nal of Complexity, special issue on Neural Network. September 1988. 
[Simard 88] Patrice Y. Simard, Mary B. Ottaway and Dana H. Ballard, Analysis of re- 
current backpropagation. Technical Report 253. Computer Science, University of 
Rochester, 1988. 
[Rosenblatt 62] F. Rosenblatt, Principles of Neurodynamics, New York: Spartam Books, 
1962. 
[Rumelhart 86] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, & R. J. Williams, Learning internal rep- 
resentations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 323,533-536. 
