256 
AN INFORMATION THEORETIC APPROACH TO 
RULE-BASED CONNECTIONIST EXPERT SYSTEMS 
Rodney M. Goodman, John W. Miller 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Caltech 116-81 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Padhraic Smyth 
Communication Systems Research 
Jet Propulsion Laboratories 238-420 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
Abstract 
We discuss in this paper architectures for executing probabilistic rule-bases in a par- 
allel manner, using as a theoretical basis recently introduced information-theoretic 
models. We will begin by describing our (non-neural) learning algorithm and theory 
of quantitative rule modelling, followed by a discussion on the exact nature of two 
particular models. Finally we work through an example of our approach, going from 
database to rules to inference network, and compare the network's performance with 
the theoretical limits for specific problems. 
Introduction 
With the advent of relatively cheap mass storage devices it is common in many 
domains to maintain large databases or logs of data, e.g., in telecommunications, 
medicine, finance, etc. The question naturally arises as to whether we can extract 
models from the data in an automated manner and use these models as the basis 
for an autonomous rational agent in the given domain, i.e., automatically generate 
%xpert systems  from data. There are really two aspects to this problem: firsfly 
learning a model and, secondly, performing inference using this model. What we 
propose in this paper is a rather novel and hybrid approach to learning and in- 
ference. EssentiMly we combine the qualitative knowledge representation ideas of 
AI with the distributed computational advantages of connectionist models, using 
an underlying theoretical basis tied to information theory. The knowledge repre- 
sentation formalism we adopt is the rule-based representation, a scheme which is 
well supported by cognitive scientists and AI researchers for modeling higher level 
symbolic reasoning tasks. We have recently developed an information-theoretic al- 
gorithm called ITRULE which extrazts an optimal set of probabilistic rules from a 
given data set [1, 2, 3]. It must be emphasised that we do not use any form of neural 
learning such as backpropagation in our approach. To put it simply, the ITRULE 
learning algorithm is far more computationally direct and better understood than 
(say) backpropagation for this particular learning task of finding the most infor- 
mative individual rules without reference to their collective properties. Performing 
useful inference with this model or set of rules, is quite a difficult problem. Exact 
theoretical schemes such as maximum entropy (ME) are intractable for real-time 
applications. 
' An Information Theoretic Approach to Expert Systems 257 
We have been investigating schemes where the rules represent links on a directed 
graph and the nodes correspond to propositions, i.e., variable-value pairs. Our 
approach is characterised by loosely connected, multiple path (arbitrary topology) 
graph structures, with nodes performing local non-linear decisions as to their true 
state based on both supporting evidence and their a priori bias. What we have in 
fact is a recurrent neural network. What is different about this approach compared 
to a standard connectionist model as learned by a weight-adaptation algorithm such 
as BP? The difference lies in the semantics of the representation [4]. Weights such 
as log-odds ratios based on log transformations of probabilities possess a clear mean- 
ing to the user, as indeed do the nodes themselves. This explicit representation of 
knowledge is a key requirement for any system which purports to perform reasoning, 
probabilistic or otherwise. Conversely, the lack of explicit knowledge representation 
in most current connectionist approaches, i.e., the "black box  syndrome, is a ma- 
jor limitation to their application in critical domains where user-confidence and 
explanation facilities are key criteria for deployment in the field. 
Learning the model 
Consider that we have M observations or samples available, e.g., the number of 
items in a database. Each sample datum is described in terms of N attributes 
or features, which can assume values in a corresponding set of N discrete alpha- 
bets. For example our data might be described in the form of 10-component binary 
vectors. The requirement for discrete rather than continuous-valued attributes is 
dictated by the very nature of the rule-based representation. In addition it is impor- 
tant to note that we do not assume that the sample data is somehow exhaustive and 
"correctf There is a tendency in both the neural network and AI learning literature 
to analyse learning in terms of learning a Boolean function from a truth table. The 
implicit assumption is often made that given enough samples, and a good enough 
learning algorithm we can always learn the function exactly. This is a fallacy, since 
it depends on the feature representation. For any problem of interest there are 
always hidden causes with a consequent non-zero Bayes misclassification risk, i.e., 
the function is dependent on non-observable features (unseen columns of the truth 
table). Only in artificial problems such as game playing is "perfect  classification 
possible -- in practical problems nature hides the real features. This phenomenon 
is well known in the statistical pattern recognition literature and renders invalid 
those schemes which simply try to perfectly classify or memorise the training data. 
We use the following simple model of a rule, i.e., 
If Y -- y then X = z with probability p 
where X and Y are two attributes (random variables) with "x" and "y"being values 
in their respective discrete alphabets. Given sample data as described earlier we 
pose the problem as follows: can we find the "best"rules from a given data set, 
say the K best rules ? We will refer to this problem as that of qeneralised rule 
induction, in or'der to distinguish it from the special case of deriving classification 
258 Goodman, Miller and Smyth 
rules. Clearly we require both a preference meure to rank the rules and a learning 
algorithm which uses the preference measure to find the K best rules. 
Let us define the information which the event y yields about the variable X, say 
f(X;y). Based on the requirements that f(X;) is both non-negative and that 
its expectation with respect to Y equals the average mutual information I(X; Y), 
Blachman [5] sixowed that the only such function is the j-meure, which is defined 
More recently we have shown that '(X; F) possesses unique properties as a rule 
information measure [6]. In general the j-measure is the average change in bits 
required to specify X between the a priori distribution (p(X)) and the a posteriori 
distribution (p(XIF)). It can also be interpreted as a special ce of the cross-entropy 
or binary discrimination (Kullback [7]) between these two distributions. We further 
define J(X;F) as the average information content where J(X;y) -- p().j(X;y). 
J(X; ) simply weights the instantaneous rule information j(X; F) by the probability 
that the left-hand side will occur, i.e., that the rule will be fired. This definition 
is motivated by considerations of learning useful rules in a resource-constrained 
environment. A rule with high information content must be both a good predictor 
and have a reonable probability of being fired, i.e., p(y) can not be too small. 
Interestingly enough our definition of J(X; F) possesses a well-defined interpretation 
in terms of classical induction theory, trading off hypothesis simplicity with the 
goodness-of-fit of the hypothesis to the data [8]. 
The ITRULE algorithm [1, 2, 3] uses the J-measure to derive the most informative 
set of rules from an input data set. The algorithm produces a set of K probabilistic 
rules, ranked in order of decreasing information content. The parameter K may be 
user-defined or determined via some statistical significance test based on the size of 
the sample data set available. The algorithm searches the space of possible rules, 
traAing off generality of the rules with their predictiveness, and using information- 
theoretic bounds to constrain the search space. 
Using the Model to Perform Inference 
Having learned the model we now have at our disposal a set of lower order con- 
straints on the N-th order joint distribution in the form of probabilistic rules. This 
is our a priori model. In a typical inference situation we are given some initial 
conditions (i.e., some nodes are clamped), we are allowed to measure the state of 
some other nodes (possibly at a cost), and we wish to infer the state or probability 
of one more goal propositions or nodes from the available evidence. It is important 
to note that this is a much more difficult and general problem than classification of 
a single, fixed, goal variable, since both the initial conditions and goal propositions 
may vary considerably from one problem instance to the next. This is the infer- 
ence problem, determining an a posteriori distribution in the face of incomplete and 
uncertain information. The exact maximum entropy solution to this problem is in- 
An Information Theoretic Approach to Expert Systems 259 
tractable and, despite the elegance of the problem formulation, stochastic relaxation 
techniques (Geman [9]) are at present impractical for real-time robust applications. 
Our motivation then is to perform an approximation to exact Bayesiax inference 
in a robust manner. With this in mind we have developed two particular models 
which we describe as the hypothesis testing network and the uncertainty network. 
Principles of the Hypothesis Testing Network 
In the first model under consideration each directed link from y to z is assigned a 
weight corresponding to the weight of evidence of y on z. This idea is not necessarily 
new, although our interpretation and approach is different to previous work [10, 4]. 
Hence we have 
log p-- 
log p(elu) and R= = -log 
p(:) 
and the node z is assigned a threshold term corresponding to a priori bias. We use 
a sigmoidal activation function, i.e., 
r-a, where AE: Wy, ß q(yi) - R 
l+e ß 
based on multiple binary inputs yx...y, to x. Let S be the set of all Yl which are 
hypothesised true (i.e., a(y,)= 1), so that 
logp-+  log p(x) 
yiS 
log P(:IYi) 
If each Yl is conditionally independent given z then we can write 
p(x]S)- p(x) II P(XlYi) 
p(l S) p() 
yiS 
Therefore the updating rule for conditionally independent Yi is: 
T.1og a() = log P(xIS) 
1- a(x) 1- p(xlS ) 
' iff p(xlS) > x and if T = 1, a(x) is exactly p(x[S). In terms of a 
Hence a(x) >   
hypothesis test, a(x) is chosen true iff: 
log p(xlyi--) > - log p(x) 
P(IYi) - P() 
Since this describes the Neyman-Pearson decision region for independent measure- 
ments (evidence or yi) with Rz - - log p [11], this model can be interpreted as 
a distributed form of hypothesis testing. 
260 aoodman, Miller and Smyth 
Principles of the Uncertainty Network 
For this model we defined the weight on a directed link from yl to z as 
wzy, = si.j(X;yi) = si.(P(xlYi) log(p(xlyi) ß ,P('lYl) ) 
p(x) ) + p(Iy') ogt ) 
where si = 1 and the threshold is the same  the hothes model. We can 
interpret wy  the change in bits to specy the a posterJori dtribution of x.  
p(z[y,)  p(z), wv, h positive support for x, i.e., si : 1.  p(x[yi)  p(x), Wy, 
h negative support for x, i.e., si = -1.  we terpret the activation a(yi)  an 
estator ((y)) for P(yi), then for multiple puts, 
i 
This sum over input links weighted by activation functions can be interpreted as 
the total directional change in bits required to specify x, as calculated locally by the 
node x. One can normalise AEz to obtain an average change in bits by dividing by 
a suitable temperature T. The node x can make a local decision by recovering l(x) 
from an inverse J-measure transformation of AE (the sigmoid is an approximation 
to this inverse function). 
Experimental Results and Conclusions 
In this section we show how rules can be generated from example data and auto- 
matically incorporated into a parallel inference network that takes the form of a 
multi-layer neural network. The network can then be "run"to perform parallel 
inference. The domain we consider is that of a financial database of mutual funds, 
using published statistical data [12]. The approach is, however, typical of many 
different real world domains. 
Figure I shows a portion of a set of typical raw data on no-load mutual funds. 
Each line is an instance of a fund (with name omitted), and each column represents 
an attribute (or feature) of the fund. Attributes can be numerical or categorical. 
Typical categorical attributes are the fund type which reflect the investment objec- 
tives of the fund (growth, growth and income, balanced, and agressive growth) and 
a typical numerical attribute is the five year return on investment expressed as a 
percentage. There are a total of 88 fund examples in this data set. From this raw 
data a second quantized set of the 88 examples is produced to serve as the input to 
ITRULE (Figure 2). In this example the attributes have been categorised to binary 
values so that they can be directly implemented as binary neurons. The ITRULE 
software then processes this table to produce a set of rules. The rules are ranked 
in order of decreasing information according to the J-measure. Figure 3 shows a 
An Information Theoretic Approach to Expert Systems 261 
portion (the top ten rules) of the ITRULE output for the mutual fund data set. The 
hypothesis test log-likelihood metric h(X; y), the instantaneous j-measure j(X;y), 
and the average :I-measure J(X; y), are all shown, together with the rule transition 
probability p(z/y). 
In order to perform inference with the ITRULE rules we need to map the rules 
into a neural inference net. This is automatically done by ITRULE which gener- 
ates a network file that can be loaded into a neural network simulator. Thus rule 
information metrics become connection weights. Figure 4 shows a typical network 
derived from the ITRULE rule output for the mutual funds data. For clarity not 
all the connections are shown. The architecture consists of two layers of neurons 
(or "nits"): an input layer and an output layer, both of which have an activation 
within the range {0, 1}. There is one unit in the input layer (and a corresponding 
unit in the output layer) for each attribute in the mutual funds data. The output 
feeds back to the input layer, and each layer is synchronously updated. The output 
units can be considered to be the right hand sides of the rules and thus receive 
inputs from many rules, where the strength of the connection is the rule's metric. 
The output units implement a sigmoid activation function on the sum of the in- 
puts, and thus compute an activation which is an estimator of the right hand side 
posteriori attribute value. The input units simply pass this value on to the output 
layer and thus have a linear activation. 
To perform inference on the network, a probe vector of attribute values is loaded 
into the input and output layers. Known values are clamped and cannot change 
while unknown or desired attribute values are free to change. The network then 
relaxes and after several feedback cycles converges to a solution which can be read 
off the input or output units. To evaluate the models we setup foqr standard clas- 
sification tests with varying number of nodes clamped as inputs. Unclamped nodes 
were set to their a priori probability. After relaxing the network, the activation of 
the "target"node was compared with the true attribute values for that sample in 
order to determine classification performance. The two models were each trained 
on 10 randomly selected sets of 44 samples. The performance results given in Table 
1 are the average classification rate of the models on the ote.r 44 unseen samples. 
The Bayes risk (for a uniform loss matrix) of each classification test was calculated 
from the 88 samples. The actual performance of the networks occasionally exceeded 
this value due to small sample variations on the 44/44 cross validations. 
Table I 
Units Clamped Uncertainty Test Hypothesis Test I - Bayes' Risk I 
9 66.8% 70.4% 88.6% 
5 70.1% 70.1% 80.6% 
2 48.2% 63.0% 63.6% 
1 51.4% 65.7% 64.8% 
262 Goodman, Miller and Smyth 
We conclude from the performance of the networks as classifiers that they have 
indeed learned a model of the data using a rule-based representation. The hypoth- 
esis network performs slightly better than the uncertainty model, with both being 
quite close to the estimated optimal rate (the Bayes' risk). Given that we know 
that the independence assumptions in both models do not hold exactly, we coin the 
term robust inference to describe this kind of accurate behaviour in the presence of 
incomplete and uncertain information. Based on these encouraging initial results, 
our current research is focusing on higher-order rule networks and extending our 
theoretical understanding of models of this nature. 
Acknowledgments 
This work is supported in part by a grant from Pacific Bell, and by Caltech's 
program in Advanced Technologies sponsored by Aerojet General, General Motors 
and TRW. Paxt of the research described in this paper was carried out by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. John Miller is supported by 
NSF grant no. ENG-8711673. 
References 
1. R. M. Goodman and P. Smyth, 'An information theoretic model for rule-based 
expert systems,' presented at the 1988 International Symposium on Information 
Theory, Kobe, Japan. 
2. R. M. Goodman and P. Smyth, 'Information theoretic rule induction,' Proceed- 
ings of the 1988 European Conference on AI, Pitman Publishing: London. 
3. R. M. Goodman and P. Smyth, 'Deriving rules from databases: the ITRULE 
algorithm,' submitted for publication. 
4. H. Geffner and J. Pearl, 'On the probabilistic semantics of connectionist net- 
works,' Proceedinqs of the 1987 IEEE ICNN, vol. II, pp. 187-195. 
5. N.M. Blachman, 'The amount of information that y gives about X,' IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-14 (1), 27-31, 1968. 
6. P. Smyth and R. M. Goodman, 'The information content of a probabilistic 
rule,' submitted for publication. 
7. S. Kullback, Information Theory and Statistics, New York: Wiley, 1959. 
8. D. Angluin and C. Smith, 'Inductive inference: theory and methods,' ACM 
Computinq Surveys, 15(3), pp. 237-270, 1984. 
9. S. Geman, 'Stochastic relaxation methods for image restoration and expert sys- 
tems,' in Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science arid Enqineerinq 
(Vol. œ), 265-311, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988. 
10. G. Hinton and T. Sejnowski, 'Optimal perceptual inference,' Proceedinqs of the 
IEEE CVPR 1983. 
11. R. E. Blahut, Principles and Practice of Information Theory, Addison-Wesley: 
Reading, MA, 1987. 
12. American Association of Investors, The individual investor's quide to no-load 
mutual funds, International Publishing Corporation: Chicago, 1987. 
An Information Theoretic Approach to Expert Systems 263 
Fund Type 5 Year Diver- Beta Bull 
(Risk) Perf. Perf. 
Bear Stocks Invest- Net Distri- 
Return sity % ment Asset butions 
% Incre. $ Value $ (%NAV) Rate % $M 
Balanced 136 C 0.8 B D 87 0.67 37.3 17.63 0.79 34 415 
Growth 32.5 C 1.05 E B 81 -0.02 12.5 0,88 1.4 200 16 
Growth&Income 88.3 A 0.96 C D 82 0.14 11.9 4.78 1.34 127 27 
Agressive -24 A 1.23 E E 95 0.02 6.45 9.30 1.4 161 64 
Growth&Income 172 E 0.59 A B 73 0.53 13.6 9.97 1.09 31 113 
Balanced 144 C 0,71 B B 51 0.72 13 10.44 0.98 239 190 
Expense T u r n- Total 
Ratio % over Assel 
Figure1. Raw Mutual Funds Data 
Type Type Type Type 5 Year Beta Stocks Turn- Assets Distri- Diver- Bull Bear 
A B G GI Return % >90% over butions sit)/ Perf. Perf. 
S&P=138% 
aboveS&P <100% <$100M <15ø/J, IAV C,D,E C,D,E C,D,E 
belowS&P >100% >$100M >15%NAV A,B ATB A,B 
no no yes no below under1 no low large high low high low 
no no yes no below over1 no high small low low low high 
no no no yes below under1 no high small low high low low 
no no no yes above under1 no low large low low high high 
no no no yes below under1 yes low small high high low high 
no no yes no above under1 no low lar,cje hi,h hi,(:jh high low 
Figure 2. 
Quantized Mutual Funds Data 
ITRULE rule output: Mutual Funds p(x/y) j(X;y) J(X;y) h(X;y)l 
1 IF 5yrRet>S&P above THEN Bull_pert high 0.97 0.75 0.235 4.741 
2 IF Bull_peri low THEN 5yrRet>S&P below 0.98 0.41 0.201 4.31: 
3 IF Assets large THEN Bull_peri high 0.81 0.28 0.127 2.02 
4 IF Bull_peri high THEN 5yrRet>S&P above 0.40 0.25 0.127 -1.71 
5 IF typeA yes THEN typeG no 0.04 0.50 0.1 23 -3.87 
6 IF Bull_peri low THEN Assets small 0.18 0.25 0.121 -1.95 
7 IF typeGI yes THEN typeG no 0.05 0.49 0.109 -3.74 
8 IF Bull_peri high THEN Assets large 0.72 0.21 0.109 1.64 
9 IF typeG yes THEN typeA no 0.97 0.27 0.108 3.54 
1 0 IF Assets small THEN Bull_peri low 0.26 0.19 0.103 -1.57 i 
Figure 
3, Top Ten Mutual Funds Rules 
weight = 1 
te 
 output layer - sigmoid units 
Figure 4. Rule Network 
