410 
NEURAL CONTROL OF SENSORY ACQUISITION: 
THE VESTIBULO-OCULAR REFLEX. 
Michael G. Paulin, Mark E. Nelson and James M. Bower 
Division of Biology 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
ABSTRACT 
We present a new hypothesis that the cerebellum plays a key role in ac- 
tively controlling the acquisition of sensory information by the nervous 
system. In this paper we explore this idea by examining the function of 
a simple cerebellar-related behavior, the vestibulo-ocular reflex or 
VOR, in which eye movements are generated to minimize image slip 
on the retina during rapid head movements. Considering this system 
from the point of view of statistical estimation theory, our results sug- 
gest that the transfer function of the VOR, often regarded as a static or 
slowly modifiable feature of the system, should actually be continu- 
ously and rapidly changed during head movements. We further suggest 
that these changes are under the direct control of the cerebellar cortex 
and propose experiments to test this hypothesis. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A major thrust of research in our laboratory involves exploring the way in which the 
nervous system actively controls the acquisition of information about the outside world. 
This emphasis is founded on our suspicion that the principal role of the cerebellum, 
through its influence on motor systems, is to monitor and optimize the quality of sensory 
information entering the brain. To explore this question, we have undertaken an investi- 
gation of the simplest example of a cerebellar-related motor activity that results in 
improved sensory inputs, the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). This reflex is responsible 
for moving the eyes to compensate for rapid head movements to prevent retinal image 
slip which would otherwise significantly degrade visual acuity (Carpenter, 1977). 
2. VESTIBULO-OCULAR REFLEX (VOR) 
The VOR relies on the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear which is an inertial sensor 
that detects movements of the head. Vestibular output caused by head movements give 
rise to compensatory eye movements through an anatomically well described neural 
pathway in the brain stem (for a review see Ito, 1984). Visual feedback also makes an 
important contribution to compensatory eye movements during slow head movements, 
Neural Control of Sensory Acquisition 411 
but during rapid head movements with frequency components greater than about 1Hz, 
the vestibular component dominates (Carpenter, 1977). 
A simple analysis of the image stabilization problem indicates that during head rotation 
in a single plane, the eyes should be made to rotate at equal velocity in the opposite 
direction. This implies that, in a simple feedforward control model, the VOR transfer 
function should have unity gain and a 180 ø phase shift. This would assure stabilized reft- 
nal images of distant objects. It tums out, however, that actual measurements reveal the 
situation is not this simple. Furman, O'Leary and Wolfe (1982), for example, found that 
the monkey VOR has approximately unity gain and 180 ø phase shift only in a narrow fre- 
quency band around 2Hz. At 4Hz the gain is too high by a factor of about 30% (fig. 1). 
1.2 
z 
0.8 
-5 
2 3 4 $ 2 3 4 
FREQUENCY (Hz) FREQUENCY (Hz) 
Figure 1: Bode gain and phase plots for the transfer function of the 
horizontal component of the VOR of the alert Rhesus monkey at high 
frequencies (Data from Furman et al. (1982)). 
Given the expectation of unity gain, one might be tempted to conclude from the monkey 
data that the VOR simply does not perform well at high frequencies. But 4Hz is not a 
very high frequency for head movements, and perhaps it is not the VOR which is 
performing poorly, but the simplified analysis using classical control theory. In this 
paper, we argue that the VOR uses a more sophisticated strategy and that the "excessive" 
gain in the system seen at higher frequencies actually improves VOR performance. 
3. OPTIMAL ESTIMATION 
In order to understand the discrepancy between the predictions of simple control theory 
models and measured VOR dynamics, we believe it is necessary to take into account 
more of the real world conditions under which the VOR operates. Examples include 
noisy head velocity measurements, conduction delays and multiple, possibly conflicting, 
measurements of head velocity, acceleration, muscle contractions, etc., generated by 
different sensory modalities. The mathematical framework that is appropriate for analyz- 
412 Paulin, Nelson and Bower 
ing problems of this kind is stochastic state-space dynamical systems theory (Davis and 
Vinter, 1985). This framework is an extension of classical linear dynamical systems the- 
ory that accommodates multiple inputs and outputs, nonlinearifies, time-varying dynam- 
ics, noise and delays. One area of application of the state space theory has been in target 
tracking, where the basic principle involves using knowledge of the dynamics of a target 
to estimate its most probable trajectory given imprecise data. The VOR can be viewed as 
a target tracking system whose target is the "world", which moves in head coordinates. 
We have reexamined the VOR from this point of view. 
The Basic VOR. 
To begin our analysis of the VOR we have modeled the eye-head-neck system as a 
damped inverted pendulum with linear restoring forces (fig. 2) where the model system is 
driven by random (Gaussian white) torque. Within this model, we want to predict the 
correct compensatory "eye" movements during "head" movements to stabilize the 
direction in which the eye is pointing. Figure 2 shows the amplitude spectrum of head 
velocity for this model. In this case, the parameters of the model result in a system that 
has a natural resonance in the range of 1 to 2 Hz and attenuates higher frequencies. 
20 
i 0 
-20 
0.1 1.0 
FREQUENCY 
Figure 2: Amplitude spectrum of model head velocity. 
We provide noisy measurements of "head" velocity and then ask what transfer function, 
or filter, will give the most accurate "eye" movement compensation? This is an estima- 
tion problem and, for Gaussian measurement error, the solution was discovered by 
Kalman and Bucy (1961). The optimal filter or estimator is often called the Kalman- 
Bucy filter. The gain and phase plots of the optimal filter for tracking movements of the 
inverted pendulum model are shown in figure 3. It can be seen that the gain of the opti- 
mal estimator for this system peaks near the maximum in the spectrum of "head-neck" 
velocity (fig. 2). This is a general feature of optimal filters. Accordingly, to accurately 
compensate for head movement in this system, the VOR would need to have a frequency 
dependent gain. 
Neural Control of Sensory Acquisition 413 
20 
1.o lO.O 
Figure 3: Bode gain plot (left) and phase plot (right) of an optimal 
estimator for tracking the inverted pendulum using noisy data. 
Time Varying dynamics and the VOR 
So far we have considered our model for VOR optimization only in the simple case of a 
constant head-neck velocity power spectrum. Under natural conditions, however, this 
spectrum would be expected to change. For example, when gait changes from walking to 
running, corresponding changes in the VOR transfer function would be necessary to 
maintain optimal performance. To explore this, we added a second inverted pendulum to 
our model to simulate body dynamics. We simulated changes in gait by changing the 
resonant frequency of the trunk. Figure 4 compares the spectra of head-neck velocity 
with two different trunk parameters. As in the previous example, we then computed 
transfer functions of the optimal filters for estimating head velocity from noisy measure- 
ments in these two cases. The gain and phase characteristics of these filters are also 
shown in Figure 5. These plots demonstrate that significant changes in the transfer 
function of the VOR would be necessary to maintain visual acuity in our model system 
under these different conditions. Of course, in the real situation head-neck dynamics will 
change rapidly and continuously with changes in gait, posture, substrate, etc. requiring 
rapid continuous changes in VOR dynamics rather than the simple switch implied here. 
HEAD 
 20 NECK 
iø 
 -20 
0.1 1.0 10.0 
FREQUENCY 
TRUNK 
Figure 4: Head velocity spectrum during "walking" (light) and "running" (heavy). 
414 Paulin, Nelson and Bower 
ß 1 1.0 10.0 .1 1.0 10.0 
Figure 5: Bode gain plots (left) and phase plots (right) for optimal estimators of 
head angular velocity during "walking" (light) and "running" (heavy). 
4. SIGNIFICANCE TO THE REAL VOR 
Our results show that the optimal VOR transfer function requires a frequency dependent 
gain to accurately adjust to a wide range of head movements under real world conditions. 
Thus, the deviations from unity gain seen in actual measurements of the VOR may not 
represent poor, but rather optimal, performance. Our modeling similarly suggests that 
several other experimental results can be reinterpreted. For example, localized peaks or 
valleys in the VOR gain function can be induced experimentally through prolonged sinu- 
soidal oscillations of subjects wearing magnifying or reducing lenses. However, this 
"frequency selectivity" is not thought to occur naturally and has been interpreted to im- 
ply the existence of frequency selective channels in the VOR control network (Lisberger, 
Miles and Optican, 1983). In our view there is no real distinction between this phenom- 
enon and the "excessive" gain in normal monkey VOR; in each case the VOR optimizes 
its response for the particular task which it has to solve. This is testable. If we are cor- 
rect, then frequency selective gain changes will occur following prolonged narrow-band 
rotation in the light without wearing lenses. In the classical framework there is no reason 
for any gain changes to occur in this situation. 
Another phenomenon which has been observed experimentally and that the current 
modeling sheds new light on is referred to as "pattern storage". After single-frequency 
sinusoidal oscillation on a turntable in the light for several hours, rabbits will continue to 
produce oscillatory eye movements when the lights are extinguished and the turntable 
stops. Trained rabbits also produce eye oscillations at the training frequency when oscil- 
lated in the dark at a different frequency (Collewijn, 1985). In this case the sinusoidal 
pattern seems to be "stored" in the nervous system. However, the effect is naturally ac- 
counted for by our optimal estimator hypothesis without relying on an explicit "pattern 
storage mechanism". An optimal estimator works by matching its dynamics to the 
dynamics of the signal generator, and in effect it tries to force an internal model to mimic 
the signal generator by comparing actual and expected patterns of sensory inputs. When 
Neural Control of Sensory Acquisition 415 
no data is available, or the data is thought to be very unreliable, an optimal estimator 
relies completely, or almost completely, on the model. In cases where the signal is pat- 
terned the estimator will behave as though it had memorized the pattern. Thus, if we 
hypothesize that the VOR is an optimal estimator we do not need an extra hypothesis to 
explain pattern storage. Again, our hypothesis is testable. If we are correct, then repeat- 
ing the pattern storage experiments using rotational velocity waveforms obtained by driv- 
ing a frequency-tuned oscillator with Gaussian white noise will produce identical dynam- 
ical effects in the VOR. There is no sinusoidal pattern in the stimulus, but we predict 
that the rabbits can be induced to generate sinusoidal eye movements in the dark after 
this training. 
The modeling results shown in figures 4 and 5 represent an extension of our ideas into 
the area of gait (or more generally "context") dependent changes in VOR which has not 
been considered very much in VOR research. In fact, VOR experimental paradigms, in 
general, are explicitly set up to produce the most stable VOR dynamics possible. 
Accordingly, little work has been done to quantify the short term changes in VOR 
dynamics that must occur in response to changes in effective head-neck dynamics. Ex- 
periments of this type would be valuable and are no more difficult technically than 
experiments which have akeady been done. For example, training an animal on a turn- 
table which can be driven randomly with two distinct velocity power spectra, i.e. two 
"gaits", and providing the animal with external cues to indicate the gait would, we 
predict, result in an animal that could use the cues to switch its VOR dynamics. A more 
difficult but also more compelling demonstration would be to test VOR dynamics with 
impulsive head accelerations in different natural situations, using an unrestrained animal. 
5. SENSOR FUSION AND PREDICTION 
To this point, we have discussed compensatory eye movements by treating the VOR as a 
single input, single output system. This allowed us to concentrate on a particular aspect 
of VOR control: tracking a time-varying dynamical system (the head) using noisy data. 
In reality there are a number of other factors which make control of compensatory eye 
movements a somewhat more complex task than it appears to be when it is modeled 
using classical control theory. For example, a variety of vestibular as well as non-vestib- 
ular signals (e.g. visual, proprioceptive) relating to head movements are transmitted to 
the compensatory eye movement control network (Ito, 1984). This gives rise to a "sen- 
sor fusion" problem where data from different sources must be combined. The optimal 
solution to this problem for a multiple input - multiple output, time-varying linear, sto- 
chastic system is also given by the Kalman-Bucy filter (Davis and Vinter, 1985). Borah, 
Young and Curry (1988) have demonstrated that a Kalman-Bucy filter model of visual- 
vestibular sensor fusion is able to account for visual-vestibular interactions in motion 
perception. Oman (1982) has also developed a Kalman-Bucy filter model of visual- 
vestibular interactions. Their results show that the optimal estimation approach is useful 
Paulin, Nelson and Bower 
for analyzing multivariate aspects of compensatory eye movement control, and comple- 
ment our analysis of dynamical aspects. 
Another set of problems arises in the VOR bemuse of small time delays in neural trans- 
mission and muscle activation. To optimize its response, the mammalian VOR needs to 
make up for these delays by predicting head movements about 10msec in advance (ref). 
Once the dynamics of the signal generator have been identified, prediction can be per- 
formed using model-based estimation (Davis and Vinter, 1985). A neural analog of a 
Taylor series expansion has also been proposed as a model of prediction in the VOR 
0aellionisz and Llinas, 1979), but this me.c.anism is extremely sensitive to noise in the 
data and was abandoned as a practical technique for general signal prediction several de- 
cades ago in favor of model-based techniques (Wiener, 1948). The later approach may 
be more appropriate for analyzing neural mechanisms of prediction (Arbib and Amari, 
1985). An elementary description of optimal estimation theory for target tracking, and 
its possible relation to cerebellar function, is given by Paulin (1988). 
6. ROLE OF CEREBELLAR CORTEX IN VOR CONTROL 
To this point we have presented a novel characterization of the problem of compensatory 
eye movement control without considering the physical circuitry which implements the 
behavior. However, there are two parts to the optimal estimation problem. At each in- 
stant it is necessary to (a) filter the data using the optimal transfer function to drive the 
desired response and (b) determine what transfer function is optimal at that instant and 
adjust the filtering network accordingly. The first problem is fairly straightforward, and 
existing models of VOR demonstrate how a network of neurons based on known 
brainstem circuitry can implement a particular transfer function (Cannon and Robinson, 
1985). The second problem is more difficult because requires continuous monitoring of 
the context in which head movements occur using a variety of sources of relevant data to 
tune the optimal filter for that context. We speculate that the cerebellar cortex performs 
this task. 
First, the cortex of the vestibulo-cerebellum is in a position to m,oke the required compu- 
tation, since it receives detailed information from multiple sensory modalities that 
provide information on the state of the motor system (Ito, 1985). Second, the cerebellum 
projects to and appears to modulate the brain stem compensatory eye movement control 
network (Mackay and Murphy, 1979). We predict that the cerebellar cortex is necessary 
to produce rapid, context-dependent optimal state dependent changes in VOR transfer 
function which we have discussed. This speculation can be tested with turntable experi- 
ments similar to those described in section 4 above in the presence and absence of the 
cerebellar cortex. 
Neural Control of Sensory Acquisition 417 
7. THE GENERAL FUNCTION OF CEREBELLAR CORTEX 
According to our hypothesis, the cerebellar cortex is required for making optimal com- 
pensatory eye movements during head movements. This is accomplished by continuous- 
ly modifying the dynamics of the underlying control network in the brainstem, based on 
current sensory information. The function of the cerebellar cortex in this case can then 
be seen in a larger context as using primary sensory information (vestibular, visual) to 
coordinate the use of a motor system (the extraoccular eye muscles) to position a sensory 
array (the retina) to optimize the quality of sensory information available to the brain. 
We believe that this is the role played by the rest of the cerebellum for other sensory 
systems. Thus, we suspect that the hemispheres of the rat cerebellum, with their peri-oral 
tactile input (Bower et al., 1983), are involved in controlling the optimal use of these 
tactile surfaces in sensory exploration through the control of facial musculature. 
Similarly, the hemispheres of the primate cerebellum, which have hand and finger tactile 
inputs (Ito, 1984), may be involved in an analogous exploratory task in primates. These 
tactile sensory-motor systems are difficult to analyze, and we are currently studying a 
functionally analogous but more accessible model system, the electric sense of weakly 
electric fish (cf Rasnow et al., this volume). 
8.CONCLUSION 
Our view of the cerebellum assigns it an important dynamic role which contrasts 
markedly with the more limited role it was assumed to have in the past as a learning 
device (Marr, 1969; Albus, 1971; Robinson, 1976). There is evidence that cerebellar 
cortex has some learning abilities (Ito, 1984), but it is recognized that cerebellar cortex 
has an important dynamic role in motor control. However, there are widely differing 
opinions as to the nature of that role (Ito, 1985; Miles and Lisberger, 1981; Pellionisz and 
Llinas, 1979). Our proposal, that the VOR is a neural analog of an optimal estimator 
and that the cerebellar cortex monitors context and sets reflex dynamics accordingly, 
should not be interpreted as a claim that the nervous system actually implements the 
computations which are involved in applied optimal estimation, such as the Kalman- 
Bucy filter. Understanding the neural basis of cerebellar function will require the 
combined power of a number of experimental, theoretical and modeling approaches (cf 
Wilson et al., this volume). We believe that analyses of the kind presented here have an 
important role in characterizing behaviors controlled by the cerebellum. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the NIH (BNS 22205), the NSF (EET-8700064), 
Joseph Drown Foundation. 
and the 
References 
Arbib M.A. and Amari S. 1985. Sensori-moto Transformations in the Brain (with a cri- 
tique of the tensor theory of the cerebellum). $. Theor. Biol. 112:123-155 
418 Paulin, Nelson and Bower 
Borah J., Young L.R. and Curry, R.E. 1988. Optimal Estimator Model for Human Spatial 
Orientation. In: Proc. N.Y. Acad. Sci. B. Cohen and V. Henn (eds.). In Press. 
Bower J.M. and Woolston D.C. 1983. The Vertical Organization of Cerebellar Cortex. J. 
Neurophysiol. 49: 745-766. 
Carpenter R.H.S. 1977. Movements of the Eyes. Pion, London. 
Davis M.B.A. and Vinter R.B. 1985. Stochastic Modelling and Control. Chapman and Hall, NY. 
Furman J.M., O'Leary D.P. and Wolfe J.W. 1982. Dynamic Range of the Frequency Response of 
the Horizontal Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex of the Alert Rhesus Monkey. Acta Otolaryngol. 93:81 
Ito, M. 1984. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. Raven Press, NY. 
Kalman R.E. 1960. A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems. J. Basic Eng., 
March 1960. 
Kalman R.E. and Bucy R.S. 1961. New Results in Linear Filtering and Prediction Theory. J. Basic 
Eng., March 1961. 
Lisberger, S.G. 1988. The Neural Basis for Learning of Simple Motor Skills. Science, 242:728- 
735. 
Lisberger S.G., Miles F.A. and Optican L.M. 1983. Frequency Selective Adaptation: Evidence for 
Channels in the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex. J. Neurosci. 3:1234-1244 
Mackay W.A. and Murphy J.T. 1979. Cerebellar Modulation of reflex Gain. Prog. Neurobiol. 
13:361-417. 
Oman C.M. 1982. A heuristic mathematical Model for the Dynamics of Sensory Conflict and 
Motion Sickness. Acta Oto-Laryngol. S392. 
Paulin M.G. 1988. A Kalman Filter Model of the Cerebellum. In: Dynamic Interactions in Neural 
Networks: Models and Data. M. Arbib and S. Amari (eds). Springer-Verlag, NY. pp239-261. 
Pellionisz A. and Llinas R. 1979. Brain Modelling by Tensor Network Theory and Computer 
Simulation. The Cerebellum: Distributed Processor for Predictive Coordination. Neuroscience 
4:323-348. 
Robinson D.A. 1976. Adaptive Control of the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex by the Cerebellum. J. 
Neurophys. 36:954-969. 
Robinson D.A. 1981. The Use of Control Systems Analysis in the Neurophysiology of Eye 
Movements. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 4:463-503. 
Wiener, N. 1948. Cybemetics: Communication and Control in the Animal and the Machine. MIT 
Press, Boston. 
