545 
DYNAMIC, NON-LOCAL ROLE BINDINGS AND 
INFERENCING IN A LOCALIST NETWORK FOR 
NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING* 
Trent E. Lange 
Michael G. Dyer 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
Computer Science Department 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Los Angeles, CA 90024 
ABSTRACT 
This paper introduces a means to handle the critical problem of non- 
local role-bindings in 1ocalist spreading-activation networks. Every 
conceptual node in the network broadcasts a stable, uniquely-identifying 
activation pattern, called its signature. A dynamic role-binding is cre- 
ated when a role's binding node has an activation that matches the 
bound concept's signature. Most importantly, signatures are propagated 
across long paths of nodes to handle the non-local role-bindings neces- 
sary for inferencing. Our 1ocalist network model, ROBIN (ROle 
Binding and Inferencing Network), uses signature activations to ro- 
bustly represent schemata role-bindings and thus perform the inferenc- 
ing, plan/goal analysis, schema instantiation, word-sense disambigua- 
tion, and dynamic re-interpretation portions of the natural language un- 
derstanding process. 
MOTIVATION 
Understanding natural language is a difficult task, often requiring a reader to make multi- 
ple inferences to understand the motives of actors and to connect actions that are unrelated 
on the basis of surface semantics alone. An example of this is the sentence: 
S 1: "John put the pot inside the dishwasher because the police were coming." 
A complex plan/goal analysis of S 1 must be made to understand the actors' actions and 
disambiguate "pot" to MARIJUANA by overriding the local context of "dishwasher". 
*This research is supported in part by a contract with the JTF program of the DOD 
and grants from the ITA Foundation and the Hughes Artificial Intelligence Center. 
546 Lange and Dyer 
DISTRIBUTED SPREADING-ACTIVATION NETWORKS 
Distributed connectionist models, such as [McClelland and Kawamoto, 1986] and 
[Touretzky and Hinton, 1985], are receiving much interest because their models are closer 
to the neural level than symbolic systems, such as [Dyer, 1983]. Despite this attention, 
no distributed network has yet exhibited the ability to handle natural language input hav- 
ing complexity even near to that of S 1. The primary reason for this current lack of 
success is the inability to perform dynamic role-bindings and to propagate these binding 
constraints during inferencing. Distributed networks, furthermore, are sequential at the 
knowledge level and lack the representation of structure needed to handle complex 
conceptual relationships [Feldman, 1986]. 
LOCALIST SPREADING-ACTIVATION NETWORKS 
Localist spreading-activation networks, such as [Cottrell and Small, 1983] and [Waltz and 
Pollack, 1985], also seem more neurally plausible than symbolic logic/Lisp-based sys- 
tems. Knowledge is represented in 1ocalist networks by simple computational nodes and 
their interconnections, with each node standing for a distinct concept. Activation on a 
conceptual node represents the amount of evidence available for that concept in the current 
context. 
Unlike distributed networks, localist networks are parallel at the knowledge level and are 
able to represent structural relationships between concepts. Because of this, many differ- 
ent inference paths can be pursued simultaneously; a necessity if the quick responses that 
people are able to generate is to be modelled. 
Unfortunately, however, the evidential activation on the conceptual nodes of previous lo- 
calist networks gives no clue as to where that evidence came from. Because of this, pre- 
vious 1ocalist models have been similar to distributed connectionist models in their in- 
ability to handle dynamic, non-local bindings -- and thus remain unsuited to higher-level 
knowledge tasks where inferencing is required. 
ROBIN 
Our research has resulted in ROBIN (ROle Binding and Inferencing Network), a localist 
spreading-activation model with additional structure to handle the dynamic role-bindings 
and inferencing needed for building in-depth representations of complex and ambiguous 
sentences, such as S 1. ROBIN's networks are built entirely with simple computational 
elements that clearly have the possibility of realization at the neural level. 
Figure 1 shows an overview of a semantic network embedded in ROBIN after input for 
sentence S 1 has been presented. The network has made the inferences necessary to form a 
plan/goal analysis of the actors' actions, with the role-bindings being instantiated 
dynamically with activation. The final interpretation selected is the most highly-activated 
path of frames inside the darkly shaded area. 
As in previous localist models, ROBIN's networks have a node for every known concept 
Dynamic, Non-Local Role Bindings and Inferencing 547 
' <S "were om 
h?or-s,ov 
Object: 
Location: 
John 
Cooking-Pot 
Marijuana, or 
Planting-Pot 
Location: Dishwasher 
Planner: John Blo0k-See 
Object: Cooking-Pot ß 
Marijuana, or Planner: John 
Planting-Pot Object: Cooking-Pot, 
Location: Dishwasher Marijuana, 
Planting-Pot 
Planner: John 
Planner: John Object: Cooking-Pot 
Object: Cooking-Pot Marijuana, or 
Location: Dishwasher Planting-Pot 
Location: Dishwashe 
:":Z': PmOn :':.'i.': ' :::f"i':" 
aal Avoid-Detefion 
Actor: John Planner: John 
Object: cooking-Pot Object: Cooking-Pot, 
Location: Dishwasher Marijuana, 
P 1 ant ing-Pot 
Planner: :.'::.  : ':::!:: ..'::i:i.:-":::'::.i :'!.::: : : :.. :" 
.. Object' J :" Object: Cking-Pot :':.}::::': ':. :'::::':::':":. '::::':-':.:: ::...':.:., ::.::....-.":........ 
. .................... :..: .::. ' '..-.?}::::?:::{:: ::.}.:'::: .?: .:{':':::'Z::.'' ::::/: ..... 
Transfer-Serf 
Actor: Police 
Location: Marijuana 
-of 
Actor: Police 
Location: Marijuana 
See-Object 
Actor: Police 
Object Marijuana 
Pol 
Actor: Police 
Evidence: Marijuana 
Police-Capture 
Actor: Police 
Cr/minal: John 
Evidence: Mart' 
Figure 1. Semantic network embedded in ROBIN, showing inferences 
dynamically made after S 1 is presented. Thickness of frame boundaries 
shows their amount of evidential activation. Darkly shaded area indicates 
the most highly-activated path of frames representing the most probable 
plan/goal analysis of the input. Dashed area shows discarded dishwasher- 
cleaning nterpretation. Frames outside of both areas show a small por- 
tion of the network that received no evidential or signature activation. 
Each frame is actually represented by the connectivity of a set of nodes. 
in the network. Relations between concepts are represented by weighted connections 
between their respective nodes. The activation of a conceptual node is evidential, 
548 Lange and Dyer 
corresponding to the amount of evidence available for the concept and the likelihood that 
it is selected in the current context. 
Simply representing the amount of evidence available for a concept, however, is not suf- 
ficient for complex language understanding tasks. Role-binding requires that some means 
exist for identifying a concept that is being dynamically bound to a role in distant areas of 
the network. A network may have never heard about JOHN having the goal of 
AVOID-DETECTION of his MARIJUANA, but it must be able to infer just such a 
possibility to understand S 1. 
SIGNATURE ACTIVATION IN ROBIN 
Every conceptual node in ROBIN's localist network has associated with it an identifica- 
tion node broadcasting a stable, uniquely-identifying activation pattern, called its 
signature. A dynamic binding is created when a role's binding node has an activation that 
matches the activation of the bound concept's signature node. 
oQ 
% 
I 
I 
! 
! 
I 
t 
I 
i 
i 
3.1 
Acto.----(Transfer-InsidO 
Figure 2. Several concepts and their uniquely-identifying signature nodes 
are shown, along with the Actor role of the TRANSFER-INSIDE frame. 
The dotted arrow from the binding node (black circle) to the signature node 
of JOHN represents the virtual binding indicated by the shared signature 
activation, and does not exist as an actual connection. 
In Figure 2, the virtual binding of the Actor role node of action TRANSFER-INSIDE to 
JOHN is represented by the fact that its binding node, the solid black circle, has the same 
activation (3.1) as JOHN's signature node. 
PROPAGATION OF SIGNATURES FOR ROLE-BINDING 
The most important feature of ROBIN's signature activations is that the model passes 
them, as activation, across long paths of nodes to handle the non-local role-bindings nee- 
essary for inferencing. Figure 3 illustrates how the structure of the network automatically 
accomplishes this in a ROBIN network segment that implements a portion of the 
semantic network of Figure 1. 
Dynamic, Non-Local Role Bindings and Inferencing 549 
Figure 3. Simplified ROBIN network segment showing parallel paths 
over which evidential activation Coottom plane) and signature activation 
(top plane) are spread for inferencing. Signature nodes (rectangles) and 
binding nodes (solid black circles) are in the top plane. Thickness of 
conceptual node boundaries (ovals) represents their level of evidential 
activation after quiescence has been reached for sentence S 1. (The names 
on the nodes are not used by ROBIN in any way, being used simply to set 
up the network's structure initially and to aid in analysis.) 
Evidential activation is spread through the paths between conceptual nodes on the bottom 
plane (i.e. TRANSFER-INSIDE and its Object role), while signature activation for dynamic 
role-bindings is spread across the parallel paths of corresponding binding nodes on the top 
plane. Nodes and connections for the Actor, Planner, and Location roles are not shown. 
Initially there is no activation on any of the conceptual or binding nbdes in the network. 
When input for S 1 is presented, the concept TRANSFER-INSIDE receives evidential acti- 
vation from the phrase "John put the pot inside the dishwasher", while the binding nodes 
of its Object role get the activations (6.8 and 9.2) of the signatures for MARIJUANA and 
COOKInG-POT, representing the candidate bindings from the word "pot". 
As activation starts to spread, INSIDE-OF receives evidential activation from 
TRANSFER-INSIDE, representing the strong evidence that something is now inside of 
something else. Concurrently, the signature activations on the binding nodes of 
TRANSFER-INSIDE's Object propagate to the corresponding binding nodes of INSIDE-OF's 
Object. The network has thus made the crucial inference of exactly which thing is inside 
of the other. Similarly, as time goes on, INSIDE-OF-DISHWASHER and INSIDE-OF- 
OPAQUE receive evidential activation, with inferencing continuing by the propagation of 
signature activation to their corresponding binding nodes. 
550 Lange and Dyer 
SPREAD OF ACTIVATION IN SENTENCE S1 
The rest of the semantic network needed to understand S 1 (Figure 1) is also built utilizing 
the structure of Figure 3. Both evidential and signature activation continue to spread from 
the phrase "John put the pot inside the dishwasher", propagating along the chain of related 
concepts down to the CLEAN goal, with some reaching goal AVOID-DETECTION. The 
phrase "because the police were coming" then causes evidential and signature activation to 
spread along a path from TRANSFER-SELF to both goals POLICE-CAPTURE and 
AVOID-DETECTION, until the activation of the network finally settles. 
SELECTING AMONG CANDIDATE BINDINGS 
In Figure 3, signature activations for both of the ambiguous meanings of the word "pot" 
were propagated along the Object roles, with MARIJUANA and COOKING-POT being the 
candidate bindings for the role. The network's interpretation of which concept is selected 
at any given time is the binding whose concept has greater evidential activation. Because 
all candidate bindings are spread along the network, with none being discarded until pro- 
cessing is completed, ROBIN is easily able to handle meaning re-interpretations without 
resorting to backtracking. For example, a re-interpretation of the word "pot" back to 
COOKING-POT occurs when S 1 is followed by "They were coming over for dinner." 
During the interpretation of S 1, COOKING-POT initially receives more evidential activa- 
tion than MARIJUANA by connections from the highly stereotypical usage of the 
dishwasher for the CLEAN goal. The network's decision between the two candidate bind- 
ings at that point would be that it was a COOKING-POT that was INSIDE-OF the DISH- 
WASHER. However, reinforcement and feedback from the inference paths generated by the 
POLICE's TRANSFER-SELF eventually cause MARIJUANA to win out. The final selection 
of MARIJUANA over the COOKING-POT bindings is represented simply by the fact that 
MARIJUANA has greater evidential activation. The resulting most highly-activated path 
of nodes and non-local bindings represents the plan/goal analysis in Figure 1. A more 
detailed description of ROBIN's network structure can be found in [Lange, 1989]. 
EVIDENTIAL VS SIGNATURE ACTIVATION 
It is important to emphasize the differences between ROBIN's evidential and signature ac- 
tivation. Both are simply activation from a computational point of view, but they 
propagate across separate pathways and fulfil different functions. 
Evidential Activation: 
1) Previous work -- Similar to the activation of previous localist models. 
2) Function -- Activation on a node represents the amount of evidence available for a 
node and the likelihood that its concept is selected in the current context. 
3) Node pathways -- Spreads along weighted evidential pathways between related frames. 
4) Dynamic structure -- Decides among candidate structures; i.e. in Figure 1, MARI- 
JUANA is more highly-activated than COOKING-POT, so is selected as the currently 
most plausible role-binding throughout the inference path. 
Dynamic, Non-Local Role Bindings and Inferencing 551 
Signature Activation: 
1) Previous work -- First introduced in ROBIN. 
2) Function -- Activation on a node is part of a unique pattern of signature activation 
representing a dynamic, virtual binding of the signature's concept. 
3) Node pathways -- Spreads along role-binding paths between corresponding roles of 
related frames. 
4) Dynamic structure -- Represents a potential (candidate) dynamic structure; i.e., that 
either MARIJUANA or COOKING-POT is INSIDE-OF a DISHWASHER. 
NETWORK BUILDING BLOCKS AND NEURAL 
PLAUSIBILITY 
ROBIN builds its networks with elements that each perform a simple computation on 
their inputs: summation, summation with thresholding and decay, multiplication, or 
maximization. The connections between units are either weighted excitatory or 
inhibitory. Max units, i.e. those outputting the maximum of their inputs, are used 
because of their ability to pass on signature activations without alteration. 
ROBIN's most controversial element will likely be the signature-producing nodes that 
generate the uniquely-identifying activations upon which dynamic role-binding is based. 
These identifier nodes need to broadcast their unique signature activation throughout the 
time the concept they represent is active, and be able to broadcast the same signature 
whenever needed. Reference to neuroscience literature [Segundo et al., 1981, 1964] re- 
veals that self-feedbacking groups of "pacemaker" neurons have roughly this ability: 
"The mechanism described determines stable patterns in which, over a 
clearly defined frequency range, the output discharge is locked in phase 
and frequency..." [Segundo et al., 1964] 
Similar to pacemakers are central pattern generators (CPGs) [Ryckebusch et al., 1988], 
which produce different stable patterns of neuronal oscillations. Groups of pacemakers or 
CPGs could conceivably be used to build ROBIN's signature-producing nodes, with 
oscillator phase-locking implementing virtual bindings of signatures. In any case, the 
simple computational elements ROBIN is built upon appear to be as neurally plausible as 
those of current distributed models. 
FUTURE WORK 
There are several directions for future research: (1) Self-organization of network structure 
-- non-local bindings allow ROBIN to create novel network instances over its pre-existing 
structure. Over time, repeated instantiations should cause modification of weights and re- 
cruitment of underutilized nodes to alter the network structure. (2) Signature dynamics -- 
currently, the identifying signatures are single arbitrary activations; instead, signatures 
should be distributed patterns of activation that are learned adaptively over time, with 
similar concepts possessing similar signature patterns. 
552 Lange and Dyer 
CONCLUSION 
This paper describes ROBIN, a domain-independent 1ocalist spreading-activation network 
model that approaches many of the problems of natttral language understanding, including 
those of inferencing and frame selection. To allow this, the activation on the network's 
simple computational nodes is of one of two types: (a) evidential activation, to indicate 
the likelihood that a concept is selected, and Co) signature activation, to uniquely identify 
concepts and allow the representation and propagation of dynamic virtual role-bindings 
not possible in previous localist or distributed models. 
ROBIN's localist networks use the spread of evidential and signature activation along their 
built-in structure of simple computational nodes to form a single most highly-activated 
path representing a plan/goal analysis of the input. It thus performs the inferencing, 
plan/goal analysis, schema instantiafion, word-sense disambiguation, and dynamic re- 
interpretation tasks required for natural language understanding. 
References 
Cottrell, G. & Small, S. (1982): A Connectionist Scheme for Modeling Word-Sense 
Disambiguation. Cognition and Brain Theory, 6, p. 89-120. 
Dyer, M. G. (1983): In-Depth Understanding: A Computer Model of lntegrated Process- 
ing for Narrative Comprehension, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Feldman, $. A. (1986): Neural Representation of Conceptual Knowledge, (Technical 
Report TR 189), Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester. 
Lange, T. (1989): (forthcoming) High-Level Inferencing in a Localist Network, Master's 
Thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. 
McClelland, J. L. & Kawamoto, A. H. (1986): Mechanisms of Sentence Processing: 
Assigning Roles to Constituents of Sentences. In McClelland & Rumelhart (eds.) 
Parallel Distributed Processing: Vol 2. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Ryckebusch, S., Mead, C., & Bower, J. M. (1988): Modeling a Central'Pattern Genera- 
tor in Software and Hardware: Tritonia in Sea Moss. Proceedings oflEEE Con- 
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems -- Natural and Synthetic (NIPS- 
88), Denver, CO. 
Segundo, J.P., Perkel, D. H., Schulman, J. H., Bullock, T. H., & Moore, G. P (1964): 
Pacemaker Neurons: Effects of Regularly Spaced Synaptic Input. Science, Vol- 
ume 145, Number 3627, p. 61-63. 
Segundo, $. P. & Kohn, A. F. (1981): A Model of Excitatory Synaptic Interactions Be- 
tween Pacemakers. Its Reality, its Generality, and the Principles Involved. Bio- 
logical Cybernetics, Volume 40, p. 113-126. 
Touretzky, D. S. & Hinton, G. E. (1985): Symbols among the Neurons: Details of a 
Connectionist Inference Architecture. Proceedings of the International Joint Con- 
ference on Artificial Intelligence, Los Angeles, CA. 
Waltz, D. & Pollack, J. (1985): Massively Parallel Parsing: A Strongly Interactive 
Model of Natural Language Interpretation. Cognitive Science, Volume 9, Num- 
ber 1, p. 51-74. 
