695 
ANALOG IMPLEMENTATION OF SHUNTING 
NEURAL NETWORKS 
Bahram Nabet, Robert B. Darling, and Robert B. Pinter 
Department of Electrical Engineering, FT-10 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 98195 
ABSTRACT 
An extremely compact, all analog and fully parallel implementa- 
tion of a class of shunting recurrent neural networks that is ap- 
plicable to a wide variety of FET-based integration technologies is 
proposed. While the contrast enhancement, data compression, and 
adaptation to mean input intensity capabilities of the network are 
well suited for processing of sensory information or feature extrac- 
tion for a content addressable memory (CAM) system, the network 
also admits a global Liapunov function and can thus achieve stable 
CAM storage itself. In addition the model can readily function as 
a front-end processor to an analog adaptive resonance circuit. 
INTRODUCTION 
Shunting neural networks are networks in which multiplicative, or shunting, terms 
of the form xi '.j fj(xj) or xi -].j I 1 appear in the short term memory equations, 
where xi is activity of a cell or a cell population or an iso-potential portion of a 
cell and Ii are external inputs arriving at each site. The first case shows recurrent 
activity, while the second case is non-recurrent or feed forward. The polarity of 
these terms signify excitatory or inhibitory interactions. 
Shunting network equations can be derived from various sources such as the passive 
membrane equation with synaptic interaction (Grossberg 1973, Pinter 1983), models 
of dendritic interaction (Rall 1977), or experiments on motoneurons (Ellias and 
Grossberg 1975). 
While the exact mechanisms of synaptic interactions are not known in every in- 
dividual case, neurobiological evidence of shunting interactions appear in several 
696 Nabet, Darling and Pinter 
areas such as sensory systems, cerebellum, neocortex, and hippocampus (Grossberg 
1973, Pinter 1987). In addition to neurobiology, these networks have been used to 
successfully explain data from disciplines ranging from population biology (Lotka 
195(}) to psychophysics and behavioral psychology (Grossberg 1983). 
Shunting nets have important advantages over additive models which lack the ex- 
tra nonlinearity introduced by the multiplicative terms. For example, the total 
activity of the network, shown by -]i xi, approaches a constant even as the input 
strength grows without bound. This normalization in addition. to being computa- 
tionally desirable has interesting ramifications in visual psychophysics (Grossberg 
1983). Introduction of multiplicative terms also provides a negative feedback loop 
which automatically controls the gain of each cell, contributes to the stability of the 
network, and allows for large dynamic range of the input to be processed by the 
network. The automatic gain control property in conjunction with properly chosen 
nonlinearities in the feedback loop makes the network sensitive to small input values 
by suppressing noise while not saturating at high input values (Grossberg 1973). 
Finally, shunting nets have been shown to account for short term adaptation to 
input properties, such as adaptation level tuning and the shift of sensitivity with 
background strength (Grossberg 1983), dependence of visual size preference and 
latency of response on contrast and mean luminance, and dependence of temporal 
and spatial frequency tuning on contrast and mean luminance (Pinter 1985). 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The advantages, generality, and applicability of shunting nets as cited in the previ- 
ous section make their implementation very desirable, but digital implementation 
of these networks is very inefficient due to the need for analog to digital conver- 
sion, multiplication and addition instructions, and implementation of iterative al- 
gorithms. A linear feedback class of these networks (xi 
however, can be implemented very efficiently with simple, completely parallel and 
all analog circuits. 
FRAMEWORK 
Figure 1 shows the design framework for analog implementation of a class of shunt- 
ing nets. In this design addition (subtraction) is achieved, via Kirchoff's current 
law by placing transistors in upper (lower) rails, and through the choice of deple- 
tion or enhancement mode devices. Multiplicative, or shunting, interconnections 
are done by one transistor per interconnect, using a field-effect transistor (FET) in 
the voltage-variable conductance region. Temporal properties are characterized by 
cell membrane capacitance C, which can be removed, or in effect replaced by the 
parasitic device capacitances, if higher speed is desired. A buffer stage is necessary 
for correct polarity of interconnections and the large fan-out associated with high 
connectivity of neural networks. 
Analog Implementation of Shunting Neural Networks 697 
) l LQ Vdd 
I. ---m i._m+ 1 ..... 
I -- Xrn --t Xm+l 
_ - -t xj ..- Xj+ 1 
-.  Vss 
Figure 1. Design framework for implementation of one cell in a 
shunting network. Voltage output of other cells is connected to the 
gate of transistors Qi,j. 
Such a circuit is capable of implementing the general network equation: 
dxi 
2 
= ß ß + 
dt 
j½i j 
(1) 
Excitatory and inhibitory input current sources can also be shunted, with extra 
circuitry, to implement non-recurrent shunting networks. 
NMOS, CMOS and GALLIUM ARSENIDE 
Since the basic cell of Fig. I is very similar to a standard logic gate inverter, but with 
the transistors sized by gate width-to-length ratio to operate in the nonsaturated 
current region, this design is applicable to a variety of FET technologies including 
NMOS, CMOS, and gallium arsenide (GaAs). 
A circuit made of all depletion-mode devices such as GaAs MESFET buffered FET 
logic, can implement all the terms of Eq. (1) except shunting excitatory terms and 
requires a level shifter in the buffer stage. A design with all enhancement mode 
devices such as silicon NMOS can do the same but without a level shifter. With 
the addition of p-channel devices, e.g. Si CMOS, all polarities and all terms of Eq. 
(1) can be realized. As mentioned previously a buffer stage is necessary for correct 
polarity of interconnections and fan out/fan in capacity. 
Figure 2 shows a GaAs MESFET implementation with only depletion mode devices 
which employs a level shifter as the buffer stage. 
698 Nabet, Darling and Pinter 
VDD - 
INPUTS: 
EXTERNAL OR FROM 
PREYJOUS LAYER 
EXCITATORY 
CONNECTIONS 
INHIBITORY 
CONNECTIONS 
TUNABLE 
SELF-RELAXATION  OUTPUT TO 
CONNECTION NEXT LAYER 
VSS " 
LEVEL SHIFT AND BUFFER STAGE 
Figure 2. Gallium arsenide MESFET implementation with level 
shifter and depletion mode devices. Lower rail transistors produce 
shunting off-surround terms. Upper transistors can produce addi- 
tive excitatory connections. 
SPECIFIC IMPLEMENTATION 
The simplest shunting network that can be implemented by the general framework 
of Fig.1 is Fig. 2 with only inhibitory connections (lower rail transistors). This 
circuit implements the network model 
dXi 
dt = - ,iX, + X, Uc, X,) - (2), 
The simplicity of the implementation is notable; a linear array with nearest neighbor 
interconnects consists of only 5 transistors, 1-3 diodes, and if required I capacitor 
per cell. 
A discrete element version of this implementation has been constructed and shows 
good agreement with expected properties. Steady state output is proportional to 
the square root of a uniform input thereby compressing the input data and showing 
adaptation to mean input intensity (figure 3). The network exhibits contrast en- 
hancement of spatial edges which increases with higher mean input strength (figure 
4). A point source input elicits an on-center off-surround response, similar to the 
difference-of-Gaussians receptive field of many excitable cells. This 'receptive field' 
becomes more pronounced as the input intensity increases, showing the dependence 
of spatial frequency tuning on mean input level (figure 5). The temporal response 
of the network is also input dependent since the time constant of the exponential 
Analog Implementation of Shunting Neural Networks 699 
decay of the impulse response decreases with input intensity. Finally, the depen- 
dence of the above properties on mean input strength can be tuned by varying the 
conductance of the central FET. 
700.0 
600.0 
300.0 
200,0 
INPUT CURREI' rnA 
2.1 
Figure 3. Response of network to uniform input. Output is pro- 
portional to the square root of the input. 
DEPENDENCE 
1.5 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
1.0 
0. 
0.7 
OF ENHANCEMENT ON MEAN 
INPUT 
0.6 
4 5 6 7 
CELL NUMBER 
Figure 4. Response of network to spatial edge patterns with the 
same contrast but increasing mean input level. 
700 Nabet, Darling and Pinter 
0.9 
0.7 
0.6 
' 0.5 
o 
z 
0.4 
0.3 
Figure 5. 
Imox = 2.0 mA, Vmox = 575.7- mV 
2 3 4 5 6 7 
CELL NUMBER 
INPUT )( OUTPUT 
Response of network to a point source input. Inset 
shows the receptive field of fiy's lamina monopolar cells (LMC of 
Lucilia sericata). Horizontal axis of inset in visual angle, vertical 
axis relative voltage units of hyperpolarization. Inset from Pinter 
et M. (in preparation) 
CONTENT ADDRESSABILITY AND RELATION TO ART 
Using a theorem by Cohen and Grossberg (1983), it can be shown that the network 
equation (2) admits the global Liapunov function 
n . 1 n 
(3) 
where A is a constant, under the constraints Kij = Kji and xi > O. This shows that 
in response to an arbitrary input the network always approaches an equilibrium 
point. The equilibria represent stored patterns and this is Content Addressable 
Memory (CAM) property. 
In addition, Eq. (2) is a special case of the feature representation field of an analog 
adaptive resonance theory ART-2 circuit, (Carpenter and Grossberg 1987), and 
hence this design can operate as a module in a learning multilayer ART architecture. 
Analog Implementation of Shunting Neural Networks 701 
FUTURE PLANS 
Due to the very small number of circuit components required to construct a cell, 
this implementation is quite adaptable to very high integration densities. A solid 
state implementation of the circuit of figure (2) on a gallium arsenide substrate, 
chosen for its superiority for opto-electronics applications, is in progress. The chip 
includes monolithically fabricated photosensors for processing of visual information. 
All of the basic components of the circuit have been fabricated and tested. With 
standard 2 micron GaAs BFL design rules, a chip could contain over 1000 cells per 
cm 2, assuming an average of 20 inputs per cell. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The present work has the following distinguishing features: 
ß Implements a mathematically well described and stable model. 
ß Proposes a framework for implementation of shunting nets which are biologically 
feasible, explain variety of psychophysical and psychological data and have many 
desirable computational properties. 
ß Has self-sufficient computational capabilities; especially suited for processing of sen- 
sory information in general and visual information in particular (Nabet and Darling 
1988). 
ß Produces a 'good representation' of the input data which is also compatible with 
the self-organizing multilayer neural network architecture ART-2. 
ß Is suitable for implementation in variety of technologies. 
ß Is parallel, analog, and has very little overhead circuitry. 
702 Nabet, Darling and Pinter 
REFERENCES 
Carpenter, G.A. and Grossberg, S. (1987) "ART 2: self organization of stable cat- 
egory recognition codes for analog input patterns,". Applied Optics 26, pp. 4919- 
4930. 
Cohen,M.A. and Grossberg, S. (1983) "Absolute stability of global pattern forma- 
tion and parallel memory storage by competitive neural networks", IEEE Transac- 
tions on Systems Man and Cybernetics SMC-13, pp. 815-826. 
Ellias, S.A. and Grossberg, S. (1975) "Pattern formation, contrast control, and 
oscillations in the short term memory of shunting on-center off-surround networks" 
Biological Cybernetics, 20, pp. 69-98. 
Grossberg, S. (1973), "Contour enhancement, Short term memory and constancies 
in reverberating neural networks," Studies in Applied Mathematics, 52, pp. 217- 
257. 
Grossberg, S. (1983), "The quantized geometry of visual space: the coherent com- 
putation of depth, form, and lightness." The behavioral and brain sciences, 6, pp. 
625-692. 
Lotka, A.J. (1956). Elements of mathematical biology. New York: Dover. 
Nabet, B. and Darling, R.B. (1988). "Implementation of optical sensory neural net- 
works with simple discrete and monolithic circuits," (Abstract) Neural Networks, 
Vol.l, Suppl. 1, 1988, pp. 396. 
PinteL R.B., (1983). "The electrophysiological bases for linear and nonlinear prod- 
uct term lateral inhibition and the consequences for wide-field textured stimuli" 
J. Theor. Biol. 105 pp. 233-243. 
PinteL R.B. (1985) "Adaptation of spatial modulation transfer functions via non- 
linear lateral inhibition" Biol. Cybernetics 51, pp. 285-291. 
PinteL R.B. (1987) "Visual system neural networks: Feedback and feedforward lat- 
eral inhibition" Systems and Control Encyclopedia (ed.M.G. Singh) Oxford: Perg- 
amon Press. pp. 5060-5065. 
PinteL R.B., Osorio, D., and Srinivasan, M.V., (in preperation) "Shift of edge 
preference to scototaxis depends on mean luminance and is predicted by a matched 
filter hypothesis in fly lamina cells" 
Rall, W. (1977). "Core conductor theory and cable properties of neurons" in Hand- 
book of Physiology: The Nervous System vol. I, part I, Ed. E.R. Kandel pp. 39-97. 
Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society. 
