ART2/BP architecture for adaptive estimation of 
dynamic processes 
Einar Srheim* 
Department of Computer Science 
UNIK, Kjeller 
University of Oslo 
N-2007 Norway 
Abstract 
The goal has been to construct a supervised artificial neural network that 
learns incrementally an unknown mapping. As a result a network con- 
sisting of a combination of ART2 and backpropagation is proposed and 
is called an "ART2/BP" network. The ART2 network is used to build 
and focus a supervised backpropagation network. The ART2/BP network 
has the advantage of being able to dynamically expand itself in response 
to input patterns containing new information. Simulation results show 
that the ART2/BP network outperforms a classical maximum likelihood 
method for the estimation of a discrete dynamic and nonlinear transfer 
function. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Most current neural network architectures such as backpropagation require a cyclic 
presentation of the entire training set to converge. They are thus not very well suited 
for adaptive estimation tasks where the training vectors arrive one by one, and where 
the network may never see the same training vector twice. The ART2/BP network 
system is an attempt to construct a network that works well on these problems. 
Main features of our ART2/BP are: 
ß implements incremental supervised learning 
ß dynamically self-expanding 
*e-mail address: einar@tellus.unik.no or einars@ifi.uio.no 
169 
170 Sorheim 
ß learning of a novel training pattern does not wash away memory of previous 
training patterns 
ß short convergence time for learning a new pattern 
2 BACKGROUND 
Adaptive estimation of nonlinear functions requires some basic features of the esti- 
mation algorithm. 
1. Incremental learning 
The input/output pairs arrive to the estimation machine one by one. By ac- 
cumulating the input/output pairs into a training set and rerun the training 
procedure at every arrival of a new input/output pair, one could use a conven- 
tional method. Obvious disadvantages would however be 
ß huge learning time required as the size of the training set increases. 
ß an upper limit, N, on the number of elements in the training set will 
have to be set. The training set will then be a gliding horizon of the N 
last input/output pairs, and information prior to the N last input/output 
pairs will be lost. 
2. Plasticity 
Learning of a new input/output pair should not wash away the memory of 
previously learned nonconflicting input/output pairs. With most existing feed- 
forward supervised nets this is hard to accomplish, though some efforts have 
been made (Otwell 90). Some networks, like the ART-family and RCN (Ryan 
1988) are plastic but they are self-organizing, not supervised. 
To summarize: 
Need a supervised network that learns incrementally the mapping of an unknown 
system and that can be used to predict future outputs. The system in question 
maps analog vectors to analog vectors. 
3 COMBINED ARCHITECTURE 
In the proposed network architecture an ART2 network controls a BP network, see 
Figure 1. 
The BP-network consists of many relatively small subnetworks where the subnets 
are specialized on one particular domain of the input space. ART2 controls how the 
input space is divided among the subnets and the total amount of subnets needed. 
The ART2 network analyzes the input part of the input/output pairs as they arrive 
to the system. For a given input pattern is, ART2 finds the category Cs which has 
the closest resemblance to 's. If this resemblance is good enough,  is of category 
Cs and the LTM-weights of Cs are updated. The BP-subnetwork BPs, connected 
to Cs, is as a consequence activated S and relearning of BPs is done. The learning 
set consists of a "representative" set of the neighbouring subnets patterns and a 
small number of the previous patterns belonging to category Cs. To summarize the 
ART2/BP Architecture for Adaptive Estimation of Dynamic Processes 171 
algorithm goes as follows: 
1. Send input vector to ART2 network 
2. ART2 classification. 
3. If in learning mode adjust ART2 LTM weights of the winning node. 
4. Send input to the back propagation network connected to the winning ART2 
node. 
5. If in learning mode ß 
ß find a representative training set. 
ß do epoch learning on training set. 
Otherwise 
ß compute output of the selected back propagation network. 
6. Go to 1. for new input vector. 
The ART2/BP neural network can be used for adaptive estimation of nonlinear 
dynamic processes. The mapping to be estimated then is 
7(t + 6t) : f(ff(t),7(t)) (1) 
s(t)  a m 
The input/output pairs will be o = [ff(t),fi(t),7(t + 6t)], denote the input part of 
/: '= [(t),7(t)] and the output part of io: 3= 7(t + 6t). 
4 ART2 MODIFIED 
ART2 was developed by Carpenter&; Grossberg see (Carpenter 1987) and (Carpen- 
ter 1988). ART2 categorizes arbitrary sequences of analog input patterns, and the 
categories can be of arbitrary coarseness. For a detailed description of ART2, see 
(Carpenter 1987). 
4.1 MODIFICATION 
In the standard ART2-algorithm input vectors (patterns) are normalized. For this 
application it is not desired to classify parallel vectors of different magnitude as 
belonging to the same category. 
where this element is simply 
the new input vector becomes 
By adding an extra element to the input vector 
i+ = IIll  (2) 
i '5 = [, II'll 3 (a) 
~ _% 
From a scaled vector of ':  = a .i the original vector ' could easily be found as ß 
i, - ,.111  (4) 
-' [ ] 
 ---- 1,2, .... ,n 
172 Sorheim 
and by using the augmented ' as the input to ART2 instead of ' one can at any 
point in FI( representation layer ) and F2( categorization layer ) generate the corre- 
sponding non-normalized vector. The F2 node competition is modified so that the 
node having bottom-up LTM weights with the smallest distance (distance being the 
euclidean norm) to the F1 layer pattern code wins the competition. The distance 
dj of F2 node J is given by: 
dj 
: being the 12 - norm 
: F1 pattern code. 
: bottom- up LTM weights of F2 node J 
Reset is done by calculating the distance d between the F1 layer pattern code it7 and 
 ß 
(6) 
and comparing it to a largest acceptable bound p. If d > p the winning node is 
inhibited and a new node will be created. If d _< p LTM-patterns of the winning 
node J are modified (learning). 
5 BACK PROPAGATION NETWORK 
The backpropagation network used in this work is of the standard feedforward type, 
see (Rumelhart 1986) . The number of hidden layers and nodes should be kept low 
in the subnetworks, for the problems in our simulations we used 1 hidden layer with 
2 nodes. As for training algorithms several different kinds have been tried: 
ß Standard back propagation (SBP) 
ß A modified back propagation (MBP) method similar to the one used in the 
BPS simulator from George Mason University. 
ß Quickprop (Q). 
ß A quasi-Newton method (BFGS). 
All of these except SBP show similar performance in my test cases. 
The BP-networks performs as an interpolator in this algorithm and any good inter- 
polation algorithm can be used instead of BP. Approximation theory gives several 
interesting techniques for approximation/interpolation of multidimensional func- 
tions such as Radial Basis Functions and tIyper Basis Functions, for further detail 
see (Poggio 90). These methods requires a representative training set where the 
input part determines the location of centers in the input space. The ART2 algo- 
rithm can be used for determining these centers in an adaptive way and thus making 
possible an incremental version of the approximation theory techniques. This idea 
has not been tested yet, but is an interesting concept for further research. 
ART2/BP Architecture for Adaptive Estimation of Dynamic Processes 173 
6 LEARNING 
Learning in ART2/BP is a two stage process. First the input patterns is sent to 
the ART2 network for categorizing and learning . ART2 will then activate the 
BP subnetwork that is a local expert on patterns of the same category as the 
input pattern, and learning of this subnetwork will occur. A training set that is 
representative for the domain of the input space has to be found. Let a small 
number of the last categorized input/output pairs be allocated to its corresponding 
sub net to provide a part of the training set. Denote such a set as L_IO½, ( C being 
the category). Define the location of F2 node J to be its bottom-up weights 'j. Let 
the current input ' define an origin, then find the F2 nodes closest to origin in each 
n-ant of the input space. Call this set of nodes Ns and the set of last input/output 
pairs stored in these nodes N_IO. The training set is then chosen to be: 
T = N_IO U L_IO 
Before training, the elements in T are scaled to increase accuracy and to accelerate 
learning. BP-learning is then performed, the stopping criteria being a fixed error 
term or a maximum number of iterations. 
7 ESTIMATION 
In estimation mode learning in the network is turned off. Given an input thenetwork 
will produce an output that hopefully will be close to the output of the real system. 
The ART2-network selects a winning node in the same way as described before but 
now the reset assembly is not activated. Then the input is fed to the corresponding 
BP subnetwork and its output is used as an estimate of the original functions output. 
Because each subnetwork is scaled to cover the domain of the input space made up 
by the complex hull Co(T) of its training set T, the entire ART2/BP network will 
cover the complex hull Co(T) C n+m where: 
T= 
{set of all previous Ps used to train the network} 
Good estimation/prediction can thus be expected if * e Co(T). This means that if 
the input vector 'lies in a domain of the input space that has not been previously 
explored by the elements in the training set, the network will generalize poorly. 
8 EXAMPLE 
The ART2/BP network has been used to estimate a dynamic model of a tank filled 
with liquid. The liquid level is sampled every 6t time interval and the ART2/BP 
network is used to estimate the discrete dynamic nonlinear transfer function of the 
liquid level as a function of inlet liquid flow and previous liquid level. That is, we 
want to find a good estimate ](., .) of: 
y(t + 
u(t) 
y(t) 
= f(u(t), y(t)) 
-- inlet liquid flow at time t 
= liquid level at time t 
(7) 
174 Sorheim 
0.2' 
0.15' 
0.1 
0.05 
-0.0õ- 
,00 250 300 
black line: ARMA model estimation error (y(t + 6t) - .OARMA(t 
grey line ß ART2/BP estimation error (y(t + 6t) - OAnr=/Br(t + 60) 
Figure 1: Comparison of the estimation error of the ARMA model and the 
ART2/BP network 
To increase the nonlinearities of the transfer function, the area of the tank varies 
with a step function of the hquid level. The BP subnetworks have 2 input nodes, 
I hidden layer with 2 neurons and a single neuron output layer. In the simulations 
p = 0.04 and the last three categorized input/output pairs are stored at every 
subnetwork. As the input space is 2-dimensional giving 4 neighbouring nodes the 
maxirrium size of the training set 7 input/output pairs. After a learning period of 
1000 samples with random inlet flow , three test cases are run with the network in 
estimation mode. The network had then formed about 140 categories. The same 
set of simulation data is also run through an offline maximum likelihood method to 
estimate a linear ARMA model of the plant, see (Ljung 1983). / 
Figure 1 shows the simulation results of the three test cases where ß 
samples 1-100 : random input flow. 
samples 101-200 : constant input flow at a low level. 
samples 201-300 ß constant input flow at a high level. 
In Figure 1, the estimation errors of the two methods are compared. For the 
first 100 samples with stochastic input flow, the estimation error variance of the 
ART2/BP Architecture for Adaptive Estimation of Dynamic Processes 175 
ART2/BP network is roughly a factor 10 less than that of the ARMA-model. The 
performance of ART2/BP is also significantly better for the constant input flow 
cases, here the ARMA model has an error of .-. 0.02 while the ART2/BP-error is 
~ 0.002. The overall improvement in estimation error is a reduction of roughly 0.1 
ß Also keep in mind that ART2/BP is compared to an offline maximum likelihood 
method while ART2/BP clearly is an online method. The online version of the 
maximum likelihood would most probably have given a worse performance than the 
offline version. 
9 CONCLUSION/COMMENTS 
The proposed ART2/BP neural network architecture offers some unique features 
compared to backpropagation. It provides incremental learning and can be applied 
to truly adaptive estimation tasks. In our example it also outperforms a classical 
maximum likelihood method for the estimation of a discrete dynamic nonlinear 
transfer function. Future work will be the investigation of ART2/BP's properties for 
multistep-ahead prediction of dynamic nonlinear transfer functions, and embedding 
ART2/BP in a neural adaptive controller. 
Acknowledgments 
Special thanks to Steve Lehar at Boston University for providing me with his ART2 
simulation program. It proved to be crucial for getting a quick start on ART2 and 
understanding the concept. 
References 
Carpenter, G.A. /z Grossberg, S. (1987). ART2: Self-organization of stable cate- 
gory recognition codes for analog input patterns. Applied Optics pp 4919-4930. 
Carpenter, G.A./z Grossberg, S. (1988). The ART of adaptive pattern recognition 
by a self-organizing neural network. Compuler 21 pp 77-88. 
Fahlman, S.E. (1988). Faster-Learning Variations on Back-Propagation: An Empir- 
ical Study. Proceedings of the 1988 Connectionist Models Summer School. Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Ljung, L. & S0derstr0m (1983). Theory and practice of recursive identification. 
The MIT press, Cambridge, MA. 
Otwell, K. (1990). Incremental backpropagation learning from novelty-based or- 
thogonalization. Proceedings IJNN90 . 
Poggio, T., Girosi, F. (1990). Networks for Approximation and Learning. Proceed- 
ings of the IEEE, Vol. 78, No. 9. 
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., & Williams, R.J. (1986). Parallel Distributed 
Processing: Explorations in the microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1. The MIT 
Press,Cambridge, MA. 
Ryan, T. W. (1988). The resonance correlation network. Proceedings IJNN88. 
