RecNorm: Simultaneous Normalisation and 
Classification applied to Speech Recognition 
John S. Bridle 
Royal Signals and Radar Est. 
Great Malvern 
UK WR14 3PS 
Abstract 
Stephen J. Cox 
British Telecom Research Labs. 
Ipswich 
UK IP5 7RE 
A particular form of neural network is described, which has terminals 
for acoustic patterns, class labels and speaker parameters. A method of 
training this network to "tune in" the speaker parameters to a particular 
speaker is outlined, based on a trick for converting a supervised network 
to an unsupervised mode. We describe experiments using this approach 
in isolated word recognition based on whole-word hidden Markov models. 
The results indicate an improvement over speaker-independent perfor- 
mance and, for unlabelled data, a performance close to that achieved on 
labelled data. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
We are concerned to emulate some aspects of perception. In particular, the way that 
a stimulus which is ambiguous, perhaps because of unknown lighting conditions, can 
become unambiguous in the context of other such stimuli: the fact that they are 
subject to the same unknown conditions gives our perceptual apparatus enough 
constraints to solve the problem. Individual words are often ambiguous even to 
human listeners. For instance a Cockney might say the word "ace" to sound the 
same as a Standard English speaker's "ice". Similarly with "room" and "rum", or 
"work" and "walk" in other pairs of British English accents. If we heard one of these 
ambiguous pronunciations, knowing nothing else about the speaker we could not tell 
which word had been said. For current automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems 
such effects are much more frequent, because we do not know how to concentrate 
on the important aspects of the signal locally, nor how to exploit the fact that some 
unknown properties apply to whole words, nor how to bring to bear on the task of 
234 
RecNorm 235 
acoustic disambiguation all the information that is normally latent in the context 
of the utterance. 
Most attempts to construct ASR systems which can be used by many persons have 
used so-called speaker-independent models. When decoding a short sequence of 
words there is no way of imposing our knowledge that all the speech is uttered by 
one person. 
To enable adaptation using small amounts of speech from a new speaker we propose 
to factor the speech knowledge into speaker-independent models, continous speaker- 
specific parameters and a transformation which modifies the models according to 
the speaker parameters. (In this paper we shall only use transformations which can 
just as easily be applied to the input patterns.) We are specially interested in the 
possibility of estimating such parameters from quite small amounts of unlabelled 
speech, such as a few short words or one longer word. Although the types of models 
and transformations we have used are very simple, we hope the general approach 
will be applicable to quite sophisticated models and transformations which will be 
necessary for future high-performance speech recognition systems. 
2 AN ADAPTIVE NETWORK APPROACH 
2.1 GENERALIDEA 
Suppose we had a feed-forward network with three (vector-valued) ternfinals, which 
encapsulates our knowledge of the relationship between acoustic patterns, X, class 
labels (e.g. word identities) C, and speaker parameters, Q. 
Training such a network seems difficult, because although we can supply (X,(7) 
pairs, we do not know the appropriate values of Q. (We only know the names of 
the speakers, or perhaps some phoneticJan's descriptive labels.) 
In training the network we start with default values of Q, feed forward from X and 
Q to (7, back-propagate derivatives to internal parameters of the network (weights, 
transition probabilities, etc.) and also to the Qs, enforcing the constraint that the 
Qs for any one speaker stay equal. We can imagine one copy of the network for 
each utterance, with the Q terminals of networks dealing with the same speaker 
strapped together. One convenient implementation (for a small number of training 
speakers) is to adapt one Q vector per speaker in a set of weights from one-from-N 
coded speaker identity inputs to linear units, as we shall see later. 
Once the network is trained we have two modes of use. If we have available one 
or more known utterances by a new speaker, then we can "tune-in" to the speaker 
(as during training) except that only the Q inputs are adjusted. The case of most 
interest in this paper, however, is when we have a few unknown words from an 
unknown speaker. We set up a Q-strapped set of networks, one for each word, 
initialise the Q values to their defaults, propagate forwards to produce a set of 
distributions across word labels, and then we use a technique which tends to sharpen 
these distributions. In the simplest case, the sharpening process could be a matter 
of: for each utterance pick the word label with the largest output, and assuming 
it to be correct back-propagate derivatives to the common Q. In practice, we can 
use a gentler method in which large outputs get most 'encouragement'. For some 
236 Bridle and Cox 
networks it is possible to show that such a "phantom target" procedure can lead 
to hillclimbing on the likelihood of the data given an assumption about the form of 
the generator of the data (see Appendix). 
2.2 SIMPLE NETWORK ILLUSTRATION 
We have explored these ideas using a very simple network based on that in figure 
1. It can be viewed either as a feedforward network with radial (minus Euclidean 
distance squared) units and a generalised-logistic (Softmax) output non-linearity, 
or as a Gaussian classifier in which the covariance matrices are unit diagonal (see 
[Bri90b]). Training is done by gradient-based optimisation, using back-propagation 
of partial derivatives. During training the criterion is based on relative entropy 
(likelihood of the targets given the network outputs) [Bri90c]. (Such discriminative 
training can lead to different results from the usual model-based methods [Bri90b], 
which in this case would set the reference points at the data means for each class.) 
This simple classifier network is preceded by a full linear transformation (6 param- 
eters), so the equivalent model-based classifier has Gaussian distributions with the 
same arbitrary covariance matrix for each class. We use the biasses of the linear 
units as speaker parameters, so the weights from speaker identity inputs go straight 
into the hidden units, 3 as figure 2. 
During adaptation to a new speaker from unlabelled tokens, the speaker parameters 
of the transformation are allowed to adapt, but the ("phantom") targets are derived 
from the outputs themselves (the targets are just double the outputs) so that the 
largest outputs are encouraged. 
In figure 3 we see the adaptation of the positions of the reference points of the 
radial units in figure 2 when the input points are essentially the 6 reference points 
displaced to one side (to represent one example of each word spoken by a new 
speaker). Adaptation based on tentative classifications pulls the reference points 
towards a position where the inputs can be given confident, consistent labels. 
3 SPEECH RECOGNITION EXPERIMENTS 
We have applied these ideas to the problem of recognising a few short, confusable 
words from a known set, all spoken by the same unknown speaker. If our method 
works we should be able to recognise each word better (on average) if we also look 
at a few other unknown words from the same speaker. 
The dataset [Sa189], which had been recorded previously for other purposes, com- 
prised the British English isolated pronounciations of the names of the letters of 
the alphabet, each spoken 3 times by each speaker. The 104 speakers were divided 
into two groups of 52 (Train and Test), balanced for age and sex. Initial acoustic 
analysis produced 28-component spectrum vectors, 100 per second. In place of the 
2-D input patterns discussed above, each speech pattern was a variable-duration 
sequence (typically 50) of 28-vectors. 
In place of each simple Gaussian density class-models we used a set of Gaussian 
densities and a matrix of probabilities of transitions between them. Each class- 
model is thus a hidden Markov model (HMM) of a word. We used 26 HMMs, each 
RecNorm 237 
T T T T T ! T T T T 
I SOFTMAX (Normalised Exponential) I sox (Normalised Exponential) 
Units 
 \  / / .Linear . 
 Hdden Umts 
Inputs 
Speaker Inputs 
I.D. 
Linear 
Transformation 
Fig. 1 Feedforward Network 
Implementing Simple Gaussian 
Classifier 
Fig.2 Gaussian classifier network with 
input transformation and speaker inputs 
15% _ 
14% _ 
13%_ 
12% _ 
10% _ 
)Bias only 
-'1 ....... t ..... I ..... t-'-:'.'_ ":)Fixed Shift 
I I I I  :) Variable 
..[ .... ...... I I ..[ [ ....... .." ,Shift 
N; Ada-t 3 10 20 78 'Cheat 
P ß Words given mode 
Fig.3 Adaptation to 6 displaced 
points 
Fig.4 Average error rates for alphabet 
word recognition 
238 Bridle and Cox 
with 15 states, each with a 3-component Gaussian mixture output distribution. For 
further details see [CB90]. 
The equivalent to the evaluation of a Gaussian density in the simple network is 
the Forward (or Alpha) computation of the likelihood of the data given a (hidden 
Markov) model. This calculation can be thought of as being performed by a 
recurrent network of a special form. When we include the Bayes inversion to 
produce probabilities of the classes (this is a normalisation if we assume equal prior 
probabilities) we obtain the equivalent of the simple network of figure 1, which we 
call an Alphanet[Bri90a]. 
In place of the 2-component linear transformation in figure 2 we use a constrained 
linear transformation based on [Hun81] yi = airi-1 + biri + ciri+l + di, where 
ß i, i = 1,... 28, is the log spectrum amplitude in frequency channel i. 
We tried three conditions: 
ß Bias Only: a = 0, b = 1, c = 0 (28 parameters) 
ß Fixed Shift: ai = a, bi = b, cl = c (31 parameters) 
ß Variable Shift: the general case (107 parameters) 
Figure 4 shows average word error rates for the three types of transformation, for 
different numbers of utterances taken together (N = 3, 10, 20, 78). N = 1 is the 
non-adaptive case. 'Cheat' Mode is a check on the power of the transformations: 
for each test speaker, all 78 utterances were used to set the parameters of the 
transformation, then recognition performance was measured using those parameters 
of the same utterances. 
We see: 
ß Use of unsupervised adaptation reduced the error rates. 
ß The reductions are not spectacular (15% errors to 12% errors, a reduction in 
error rate by 20%.) but they are statistically significant and may be practically 
significant too. 
ß The performance in 'Cheat' Mode is only a little better than in unsupervised 
mode, so performance is being limited by the power of the transformation. 
ß The Fixed Shift transformation gives quite good results even on only 3 words 
at a time. 
When tested on a 120 talker telephone-line database of isolated digits collected 
at British Telecom, the best unsupervised speaker adaptation technique gave a 
37% decrease in error-rate (for both supervised and unsupervised adaptation on 5 
utterances) using a simple front-end consisting of 8 MFCCs (mel frequency-scale 
cepstrum coefficients). A more sophisticated front-end (using differential informa- 
tion and energy) improved the unadapted performance by 63% over the 8 MFCC 
front-end. Using this front-end, the best unsupervised adaptation technique (on 5 
utterances) decreased the error-rate by a further 25% 
RecNorm 239 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
The results reported here show that simultaneous word recognition and speaker 
normalisation can be made to work, that it improves performance over the cor- 
responding speaker-independent version, and that given 3 to 10 unknown words 
performance can be almost as good as when the adaptation is done using knowl- 
edge of the word identities. The main extensions we are interested in are to use 
non-linear transformations, and to learn low-dimensional but effective speaker pa- 
rameterisations. 
A Unsupervised Adaptation using Phantom Targets 
We aim to motivate the 'phantom target' trick of feeding back twice each output of 
the network as a target. 
Suppose we have a classifier network, with a 1-from-N output coding, and a Softmax 
output nonlinearlty. We write Qj for an output value, V for an input to the Softmax 
output stage, . for the input to the network, c for a class and 0 for parameters 
which we may want to adjust. A typical output value is 
Q(., O) = eV( ', o) / y. eVk(., o). 
/ k 
The output values are interpretable as estimates of posterior probabilities: Qj -. 
Pr(c = j[., 0). For the next step we assume there are some implicit probability 
density functions ej(.,0)  Pt(. Ic=j,0) Assuming equal prior probabilities of 
the classes for simplicity, Bayes rule gives 
so we suppose that 
where the normalisation is 
N 
1 o), 
= f eV( ', 
In the networks we use?the same normalisation applies to all the classes, so we write 
z(0) = 
A maximum-likelihood approach to unsupervised adaptation maximises the likeli- 
hood of the data given the set of (equally probable) distributions, which is 
1 
It is simpler to maximise the log likelihood: 
L(.,O)  log P(., O) = log P,(.,O)-logN = logy. eV,(',O)-logz(O)-logN. 
240 Bridle and Cox 
We shall need 
0_5 =  eV(, 0) 1 
o5 E, eV(" ø) (o) ov(., o)' 
(The likelihood of the whole training set is the product of the likelihoods of the 
individual patterns, and the log turns the product into a sum, so we can sum the 
derivatives of L over the training set.) 
We can often assulne that the normalisation is independent of , giving 
ø) 
eq(', 0) - 0). 
If we have a supervised backprop network using the relative entropy based criterion 
(rather than squared error) [?], we are minimising J = - Ej T logQj, where T is 
the target for the jth output. We know [Bri90b] that IlvJ = Qj - T, so if we set 
OJ ._ IlL 
Ty -- 2Qj we have Ilv - II5' and minimising J is equivalent to maximising L. 
For the simple Gaussian network of figure 1, this unsupervised adaptation, ap- 
plied to the reference points, can be understood as an on-line, gradient descent, 
relative of the k-means cluster analysis procedure, or of the LBG vector quantiser 
design method, or indeed of Kohonen's feature map (without the neighbourhood 
constraints). 
Copyright () Controller HMSO London 1989 
References 
[Bri90a] 
[Bri90b] 
[Bri90c] 
[CB90] 
[Hun81] 
[SalS9] 
J S Bridle. Alphanets: a recurrent 'neural' network architecture with 
a hidden Markov model interpretation. Speech Communication, Special 
"Neurospeech" issue, February 1990. 
J S Bridle. Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classification net- 
work outputs, with relationships to statistical pattern recognition. In 
F Fougelman-Soulie and J H.rault, editors, Neuro-computing: algorithms, 
architectures and applications, NATO ASI Series on Systems and computer 
science. Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
J S Bridle. Training stochastic model recognition algorithms as networks 
can lead to maximum mutual information estimation of parameters. In 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems œ. Morgan Kaufmann, 
1990. 
S J Cox and J S Bridle. Simultaneous speaker normalisation and utterance 
labelling using Bayesian/neural net techniques. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, 1990. 
M J Hunt. Speaker adaptation for word-based speech recognition. 
J. Acoust. Soc. Amer, 69:S41-S42, 1981. (abstract only). 
J A S Salter. The RT5233 Alphabetic database for the Connex project. 
Technical Report RT52/G231/89, BT Technology Executive, 1989. 
