Exploratory Feature Extraction in Speech Signals 
Nathan Intrator 
Center for Neural Science 
Brown University 
Providence, RI 02912 
Abstract 
A novel unsupervised neural network for dimensionality reduction which 
seeks directions emphasizing multimodality is presented, and its connec- 
tion to exploratory projection pursuit methods is discussed. This leads to 
a new statistical insight to the synaptic modification equations governing 
learning in Bienenstock, Cooper, and Munro (BCM) neurons (1982). 
The importance of a dimensionality reduction principle based solely on 
distinguishing features, is demonstrated using a linguistically motivated 
phoneme recognition experiment, and compared with feature extraction 
using back-propagation network. 
I Introduction 
Due to the curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1961) it is desirable to extract fea- 
tures from a high dimensional data space before attempting a classification. How to 
perform this feature extraction/dimensionality reduction is not that clear. A first 
simplification is to consider only features defined by linear (or semi-linear) projec- 
tions of high dimensional data. This class of features is used in projection pursuit 
methods (see review in Huber, 1985). 
Even after this simplification, it is still difficult to characterize what interesting 
projections are, although it is easy to point at projections that are uninteresting. 
A statement that has recently been made precise by Diaconis and Freedman (1984) 
says that for most high-dimensional clouds, most low-dimensional projections are 
approximately normal. This finding suggests that the important information in the 
data is conveyed in those directions whose single dimensional projected distribution 
is far from Gaussian, especially at the center of the distribution. Friedman (1987) 
241 
242 Intrator 
argues that the most computationally attractive measures for deviation from nor- 
mality (projection indices) are based on polynomial moments. However they very 
heavily emphasize departure from normality in the tails of the distribution (Huber, 
1985). Second order polynomials (measuring the variance - principal components) 
are not sufficient in characterizing the important features of a distribution (see 
example in Duda & Hart (1973) p. 212), therefore higher order polynomials are 
needed. We shall be using the observation that high dimensional clusters trans- 
late to multimodal low dimensional projections, and if we are after such structures 
measuring multimodality defines an interesting projection. In some special cases, 
where the data is known in advance to be hi-modal, it is relatively straightforward 
to define a good projection index (Hinton & Nowlan, 1990). When the structure 
is not known in advance, defining a general multimodal measure of the projected 
data is not straight forward, and will be discussed in this paper. 
There are cases in which it is desirable to make the projection index invariant 
under certain transformations, and maybe even remove second order structure (see 
Huber, 1985) for desirable invariant properties of projection indices), In such cases 
it is possible to make such transformations before hand (Friedman, 1987), and then 
assume that the data possesses these invariant properties already. 
2 Feature Extraction using ANN 
In this section, the intuitive idea presented above is used to form a statistically 
plausible objective function whose minimization will be those projections having a 
single dimensional projected distribution that is far from Gaussian. This is done 
using a loss function whose expected value leads to the desired projection index. 
Mathematical details are given in Intrator (1990). 
Before presenting this loss function, let us review some necessary notations and as- 
sumptions. Consider a neuron with input vector x - (x, ..., Cr), synaptic weights 
vector rn = (m,..., raN), both in R N, and activity (in the linear region) c = -m. 
 2 CO m 
Define the threshold = and the functions = c , 
(c, Ore) = c 2- cOm. The  function has been suggested as a biologically plausible 
synaptic modification function that explains visual cortical plasticity (Bienenstock, 
Cooper and Munro, 1982). Note that at this point c represents the linear projection 
of ß onto m, and we seek an optimal projection in some sense. 
We want to base our projection index on polynomial moments of low order, and 
to use the fact that bimodal distribution is already interesting, and any additional 
mode should make the distribution even more interesting. With this in mind, con- 
sider the following family of loss functions which depend on the synaptic weight 
vector and on the input ; 
 3 
The motivation for this loss function can be seen in the following graph, which 
represents the  function and the associated loss function L(x). For simplicity 
the loss for a fixed threshold Om and synaptic vector m can be written as Lm(c) = 
-c2(c- O), where c = (x. m). 
Exploratory Feature Extraction in Speech Signals 243 
Till'. OAND I.OSS FUNCIIONS 
Figure 1: The function b and the loss functions for a fixed m and 
The graph of the loss function shows that for any fixed m and ©,, the loss is 
small for a given input x, when either (x. m) is close to zero, or when (x. m) is 
larger than 4 4 
O,. Moreover, the loss function remains negative for (x ß m) 
4 
therefore, any kind of distribution at the right hand side of O is possible, and 
the preferred ones are those which are concentrated further away from 4 
We must still show why it is not possible that a minimizer of the average loss will be 
such that all the mass of the distribution will be concentrated in one of the regions. 
Roughly speaking, this can not happen because the threshold O is dynamic and 
depends on the projections in a nonlinear way, namely, O = E(x ß m) 2. This 
implies that O will always move itself to a stable point such that the distribution 
will not be concentrated at only one of its sides. This yields that the part of the 
O has a high loss, making those distributions in which the 
distribution for c  s 
4 
distribution for c  O, has its mode at zero more plausible. 
The risk (expected value of the loss) is given by: 
 = _ {[(.-)] - [(. )]}. 
3 
Since the risk is continuously differentiable, its minimization can be achieved via a 
gradient descent method with respect to m, namely: 
dmi 0 
= - 
The resulting differential equations suggest a modified version of the law governing 
synaptic weight modification in the BCM theory for learning and memory (Bienen- 
stock, Cooper and Munro, 1982). This theory was presented to account for various 
experimental results in visual cortical plasticity. The biological relevance of the 
theory has been extensively studied (Soul et al., 1986; Bear et al., 1987; Cooper et 
., 1987; Bear et al., 1988), and it was shown that the theory is in agreement with 
the classical deprivation experiments (Clothioux et al., 1990). 
40 makes this 
The fact that the distribution has part of its mass on both sides of  
loss a plausible projection index that seeks multimodalities. However, we still need 
244 Indrafor 
to reduce the sensitivity of the projection index to outliers, and for full generality, 
allow any projected distribution to be shifted so that the part of the distribution 
4 
that satisfies c ( g©m will have its mode at zero. The over-sensitivity to outliers 
is addressed by considering a nonlinear neuron in which the neuron's activity is 
defined to be c z o'(x- m), where o' usually represents a smooth sigmoidal function. 
A more general definition that would allow symmetry breaking of the projected 
distributions, will provide solution to the second problem raised above, and is still 
consistent with the statistical formulation, is c - tr(x ß m - c), for an arbitrary 
threshold c which can be found by using gradient descent as well. For the nonlinear 
neuron, Om is defined to be O, - E[o-(e ß m)]. 
Based on this formulation, a network of Q identical nodes may be constructed. All 
the neurons in this network receive the same input and inhibit each other, so as 
to extract several features in parallel. A similar network has been studied in the 
context of mean field theory by Scofield and Cooper (1985). The activity of neuron 
k in the network is defined as c - o'( ß m - c), where ,t is the synaptic weight 
vector of neuron k, and c is its threshold. The inhibited activity and threshold of 
the k'th neuron are given by 5k = c - r I 3# cj, )m - E[5]. 
We omit the derivation of the synaptic modification equations which is similar to 
the one for a single neuron, and present only the resulting modification equations 
for a synaptic vector m in a lateral inhibition network of nonlinear neurons: 
The lateral inhibition network performs a direct search of Q-dimensional projections 
together, and therefore may find a richer structure that a stepwise approach may 
miss, e.g. see example 14.1 Huber (1985). 
3 Comparison with other feature extraction methods 
When dealing with a classification problem, the interesting features are those that 
distinguish between classes. The network presented above has been shown to seek 
multimodality in the projected distributions, which translates to clusters in the 
original space, and therefore to find those directions that make a distinction between 
different sets in the training data. 
In this section we compare classification performance of a network that performs 
dimensionality reduction (before the classification) based upon multimodality, and 
a network that performs dimensionality reduction based upon minimization of mis- 
classification error (using back-propagation with MSE criterion). This is done using 
a phoneme classification experiment whose linguistic motivation is described below. 
In the latter we regard the hidden units representation as a new reduced feature 
representation of the input space. Classification on the new feature space was done 
using back-propagation  
 See Intrator (1990) for comparison vith principal components feature extraction and 
with k-NN as a classifier 
Exploratory Feature Extraction in Speech Signals 245 
Consider the six stop consonants [p,k,t,b,g,d], which have been a subject of recent 
research in evaluating neural networks for phoneme recognition (see review in Lipp- 
mann, 1989). According to phonetic feature theory, these stops posses several com- 
mon features, but only two distinguishing phonetic features, place of articulation 
and voicing (see Blumstein & Lieberman 1984, for a review and related references 
on phonetic feature theory). This theory suggests an experiment in which features 
extracted froin unvoiced stops can be used to distinguish place of articulation in 
voiced stops as well. It is of interest if these features can be found from a single 
speaker, how sensitive they are to voicing and whether they are speaker invariant. 
The speech data consists of 20 consecutive time windows of 32msec with 30msec 
overlap, aligned to the beginning of the burst. In each time window, a set of 22 
energy levels is computed. These energy levels correspond to Zwicker critical band 
filters (Zwicker, 1961). The consonant-vowel (CV) pairs were pronounced in isola- 
tion by native American speakers (two male BSS and LTN, and one female 2ES.) 
Additional details on biological motivation for the preprocessing, and linguistic mo- 
tivation related to child language acquisition can be found in Seebach (1990), and 
Seebach and Intrator (1991). An average (over 25 tokens) of the six stop consonants 
followed by the vowel [a] is presented in Figure 2. All the images are smoothened 
using a moving average. One can see some similarities between the voiced and 
unvoiced stops especially in the upper left corner of the image (high frequencies be- 
ginning of the burst) and the radical difference between them in the low frequencies. 
Figure 2: An average of the six stop consonants followed by the vowel [a]. 
Their order from left to right [pa] [ba] [ka] [ga] [ta] Ida]. Time increases 
from the burst release on the X axis, and frequency increases on the Y axis. 
In the experiments reported here, 5 features were extracted from the 440 dimen- 
sion original space. Although the dimensionality reduction inethods were trained 
only with the unvoiced tokens of a single speaker, the classifier was trained on (5 
dimensional) voiced and unvoiced data from the other speakers as well. 
The classification results, which are summarized in table 1, show that the back- 
propagation network does well in finding structure useful for classification of the 
trained data, but this structure is more sensitive to voicing. Classification results 
using a BCM network suggest that, for this specific task, structure that is less 
sensitive to voicing can be extracted, even though voicing has significant effects 
on the speech signal itself. The results also suggest that these features are more 
speaker invariant. 
246 Intrator 
Place of Articulation Classification (B-P) 
B-P BCM 
BSS /p,k,t/ 100 100 
BSS/b,g,d/ 83.4 94.7 
LTN /p,k,t/ 95.6 97.7 
LTN/b,g,d/ 78.3 93.2 
JES (Both) 88.0 99.4 
Table 1: Percentage of correct classification of place of articulation in voiced 
and unvoiced stops. 
Figure 3: Synaptic weight images of the 5 hidden units of back-propagation 
(top), and by the 5 BCM neurons (bottoln). 
The difference in performance between the two feature extractors may be partially 
explained by looking at the synaptic weight vectors (images) extracted by both 
method: For the back-propagation feature extraction it can be seen that although 
5 units were used, fewer number of features were extracted. One of the main 
distinction between the unvoiced stops in the training set is the high frequency burst 
at the beginning of the consonant (the upper left corner). The back-propagation 
method concentrated mainly on this feature, probably because it is sufficient to base 
the recognition of the training set on this feature, and the fact that training stops 
when misclassification error falls to zero. On the other hand, the BCM inethod does 
not try to reduce the inisclassificaion error and is able to find a richer, linguistically 
meaningful structure, containing burst locations and format tracking of the three 
different stops that allowed a better generalization to other speakers and to voiced 
stops. 
The network and its training paradigm present a different approach to speaker 
independent speech recognition. In this approach the speaker variability problem 
is addressed by training a network that concentrates mainly on the distinguishing 
features of a single speaker, as opposed to training a network that concentrates on 
both the distinguishing and comlnon features, on multi-speaker data. 
Acknowledgement s 
I wish to thank Leon N Cooper for suggesting the problem and for providing many 
helpful hints and insights. Geoff Hinton made invaluable comments. The appli- 
cation of BCM to speech is discussed in more detail in Seebach (1990) and in a 
Exploratory Feature Extraction in Speech Signals 247 
forthcoming article (Seebach and Intrator, 1991). Research was supported by the 
National Science Foundation, the Army Research Office, and the Office of Naval 
Research. 
References 
Bellman, R. E. (1961) Adaptive Control Processes, Princeton, NJ, Princeton Uni- 
versity Press. 
Bienenstock, E. L., L. N Cooper, and P.W. Munro (1982) Theory for the devel- 
opment of neuron selectivity: orientation specificity and binocular interaction in 
visual cortex. J.Neurosci. 2:32-48 
Bear, M. F., L. N Cooper, and F. F. Ebner (1987) A Physiological Basis for a 
Theory of Synapse Modification. Science 237:42-48 
Diaconis, P, and D. Freedman (1984) Asymptotics of Graphical Projection Pursuit. 
The Annals of Statistics, 12 793-815. 
Friedman, J. H. (1987) Exploratory Projection Pursuit. Journal of the American 
Statistical Association 82-397:249-266 
Hinton, G. E. and S. J. Nowlan (1990) The bootstrap Widrow-Hoffrule as a cluster- 
formation algorithm. Neural Computation. 
Huber P. J. (1985) Projection Pursuit. The Annal. of Star. 13:435-475 
Intrator N. (1990) A Neural Network For Feature Extraction. In D. S. Touret- 
zky (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2. San Mateo, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
Lipplnann, R. P. (1989) Review of Neural Networks for Speech Recognition. Neural 
Computation 1, 1-38. 
Reilly, D. L., C.L. Scofield, L. N Cooper and C. Elbaurn (1988) GENSEP: a multiple 
neural network with modifiable network topology. INNS Conference on Neural 
Networlds. 
Saul, A. and E. E. Clothiaux, 1986) Modeling and Simulation II: Simulation of 
a Model for Development of Visual Cortical specificity. J. of Electrophysiological 
Techniques, 13:279-306 
Scofield, C. L. and L. N Cooper (1985) Development and properties of neural net- 
works. Contemp. Phys. 26:125-145 
Seebach, B. S. (1990) Evidence for the Development of Phonetic Property Detec- 
tors in a Neural Net without Innate Knowledge of Linguistic Structure. Ph.D. 
Dissertation Brown University. 
Duda R. O. and P. E. Hart (1973) Pattern classification and scene analysis John 
Wiley, New York 
Zwicker E. (1961) Subdivision of the audible frequency range into critical bands 
(Frequenzgruppen) Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 33:248 
