Applications of Neural Networks in 
Video Signal Processing 
John C. Pearson, Clay D. Spence and Ronald Sverdlove 
David Samoff Research Center 
CN5300 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5300 
Abstract 
Although color TV is an established technology, there are a number of 
longstanding problems for which neural networks may be suited. Impulse 
noise is such a problem, and a modular neural network approach is pre- 
sented in this paper. The training and analysis was done on conventional 
computers, while real-time simulations were performed on a massively par- 
allel computer called the Princeton Engine. The network approach was 
compared to a conventional alternative, a median filter. Real-time simula- 
tions and quantitative analysis demonstrated the technical superiority of 
the neural system. Ongoing work is investigating the complexity and cost 
of implementing this system in hardware. 
1 
THE POTENTIAL FOR NEURAL NETWORKS IN 
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 
Neural networks are most often considered for application in emerging new tech- 
nologies, such as speech recognition, machine vision, and robotics. The fundamental 
ideas behind these technologies are still being developed, and it will be some time 
before products containing neural networks are manufactured. As a result, research 
in these areas will not drive the development of inexpensive neural network hard- 
ware which could serve as a catalyst for the field of neural networks in general. 
In contrast, neural networks are rarely considered for application in mature tech- 
nologies, such as consumer electronics. These technologies are based on established 
principles of information processing and communication, and they are used in mil- 
lions of products per year. The embedding of neural networks within such mass- 
289 
290 Pearson, Spence, and Sverdlove 
market products would certainly fuel the development of low-cost network hardware, 
as economics dictates rigorous cost-reduction in every component. 
2 IMPULSE NOISE IN TV 
The color television signaling standard used in the U.S. was adopted in 1953 (McI1- 
wain and Dean, 1956; Pearson, 1975). The video information is first broadcast as an 
amplitude modulated (AM) radio-frequency (RF) signal, and is then demodulated 
in the receiver into what is called the composite video signal. The composite signal 
is comprised of the high-bandwidth (4.:2 MHz) luminance (black and white) signal 
and two low-bandwidth color signals whose amplitudes are modulated in quadrature 
on a 3.58 MHz subcarrier. This signal is then further decoded into the red, green 
and blue signals that drive the display. One image "frame" is formed by interlacing 
two successive "fields" of 262.5 horizontal lines. 
Electric sparks create broad-band RF emissions which are transformed into oscilla- 
tory waveforms in the composite video signal, called AM impulses. See Figure 1. 
These impulses appear on a television screen as short, horizontal, multi-colored 
streaks which clearly stand out from the picture. Such sparks are commonly cre- 
ated by electric motors. There is little spatial (within a frame) or temporal (between 
frames) correlation between impulses. 
General considerations suggest a two step approach for the removal of impulses from 
the video signal - detect which samples have been corrupted, and replace them with 
values derived from their spatio-temporal neighbors. Although impulses are quite 
visible, they form a small fraction of the data, so only those samples detected as 
corrupted should be altered. An interpolated average of some sort will generally be a 
good estimate of impulse-corrupted samples because images are generally smoothly 
varying in space and time. 
There are a number of difficulties associated with this detection/replacement ap- 
proach to the problem. There are many impulse-like waveforms present in normal 
video, which can cause "false positives" or "false alarms". See Figure 2. The algo- 
rithms that decode the composite signal into RGB spread impulses onto neighboring 
lines, so it is desirable to remove the impulses in the composite signal. However, 
the color encoding within the composite signal complicates matters. The subcarrier 
frequency is near the ringing frequency of the impulses and tends to hide the im- 
pulses. Furthermore, the replacement function cannot simply average the nearest 
Figure 1: Seven Representative AM Impulse Waveforms. They have been digitized 
and displayed at the intervals used in digital receivers (8 bits, .07 usec). The largest 
amplitude impulses are 20-30 samples wide, approximately 3% of the width of one 
line of active video (752 samples). 
Applications of Neural Networks in Video Signal Processing 291 
+128 
-128 
0 752 
Figure 2: Corrupted Video Scan Line. (Top) Scan line of a composite video signal 
containing six impulse waveforms. (Bottom) The impulse waveforms, derived by 
subtracting the uncorrupted signal from the corrupted signal. Note the presence of 
many impulse-like features in the video signal. 
samples, because they represent different color components. The impulses also have 
a wide variety of waveforms (Figure 1), including some variation caused by clipping 
in the receiver. 
3 MODULAR NEURAL NETWORK SYSTEM 
The impulse removal system incorporates three small multi-layer perceptron net- 
works (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986), and all of the processing is confined to 
one field of data. See Figure 3. The replacement function is performed by one 
network, termed the i-net ("i" denotes interpolation). Its input is 5 consecutive 
samples each from the two lines above and the two lines below the current line. 
The network consists of 10 units in the first hidden layer, 5 in the second, and' one 
output node trained to estimate the center sample of the current line. 
The detection function employs 2 networks in series. (A single network detector 
has been tried, but it has never performed as well as this two-stage detector.) The 
inputs to the first network are 9 consecutive samples from the current line centered 
on the sample of interest. It has 3 nodes in the first layer, and one output node 
trained to compute a moving average of the absolute difference between the clean 
and noisy signals of the current inputs. It is thus trained to function as a filter for 
impulse energy, and is termed the e-net. The output of the e-net is then low-pass 
filtered and sub-sampled to remove redundant information. 
The inputs to the second network are 3 lines of 5 consecutive samples each, drawn 
from the post-processed output of the e-net, centered on the sample of interest. 
This network, like the e-net, has 3 nodes in the first layer and one output node. It 
is trained to output 1 if the sample of interest is contaminated with impulse noise, 
and 0 otherwise. It is thus an impulse detector, and is called the d-net. 
The output of the d-net is then fed to a binary switch, which passes through to the 
final system output either the output of the i-net or the original signal, depending 
on whether the input exceeds an adjustable threshold. 
292 Pearson, Spence, and Sverdlove 
small 
impulse 
'pseudo- 
,mpuise' 
'edge' 
big impulse 
Origlnal Dlrty Picture 
ve. potential.f.alse 
s 
potential false negative 
potential true , m 
positive 
I 1 tap 
Interpolated Original 
4x5 taps IL switch 
true positive ß - 
false negative 
mama 
I I w 
"Restored" Picture 
false positives 
-small impulse let through 
- . ß blurred eyes 
-big Impulse removed 
Figure 3: The Neural Network AM Impulse Removal System. The cartoon face is 
used to illustrate salient image processing characteristics of the system. The e-net 
correctly signals the presence of the large impulse (chin), misses the small impulse 
(forehead), and incorrectly identifies edges (nose) and points (eyes) as impulses. 
The d-net correctly disregards the vertically correlated impulse features (nose) and 
detects the large impulse (chin), but incorrectly misses the small impulse (forehead) 
and the non-correlated impulse-like features (eyes). The i-net produces a fuzzy 
(doubled) version of the original, which is used to replace segments identified as 
corrupted by the d-net. 
Experience showed that the d-net tended to produce narrow spikes in response to 
impulse-like features of the image. To remove this source of false positives, the 
output of the d-net is averaged over a 19 sample region centered on the sample of 
interest. This reduces the peak amplitude of signals due to impulse-like features 
much more than the broad signals produced by true impulses. An impulse is con- 
sidered to be present if this smoothed signal exceeds a threshold, the level of which 
is chosen so as to strike a balance between low false positive rates (high threshold), 
and high true positive rates (low threshold). 
Experience also showed that the fringes of the impulses were not being detected. 
To compensate for this, sub-threshold d-net output samples are set high if they are 
within 9 samples of a super-threshold d-net sample. Figure 4 shows the output of 
the resulting trained system for one scan line. 
The detection networks were trained on one frame of video containing impulses of 
5 different amplitudes with the largest twenty times the smallest. Visually, these 
ranged from non-objectionable to brightly colored. Standard incremental back- 
propagation and conjugate gradient (NAG, 1990) were the training proceedures 
used. The complexity of the e-net and d-net were reduced in phases. These nets 
Applications of Neural Networks in Video Signal Processing 293 
-255 NOISE 
E-NET 
0 752 
Figure 4: Input and Network Signals. 
began as 3 layer nets. After a phase of training, redundant nodes were identified 
and removed, and training re-started. This process was repeated until there were 
no redundant nodes. 
4 
REAL-TIME SIMULATION ON THE PRINCETON 
ENGINE 
The trained system was simulated in real-time on the Princeton Engine (Chin et. 
al., 1988), and a video demonstration was presented at the conference. The Prince- 
ton Engine (PE) is a 29.3 GIPS image processing system consisting of up to 2048 
processing elements in a SIMD configuration. Each processor is responsible for the 
output of one column of pixels, and contains a 16-bit arithmetic unit, multiplier, a 
64-word triple-port register stack, and 16,000 words of local processor memory. In 
addition, an interprocessor communication bus permits exchanges of data between 
neighboring processors during one instruction cycle. 
While the i-net performs better than conventional interpolation methods, the dif- 
ference is not significant for this problem because of the small amount of signal 
which is replaced. (If the whole image is replaced, the neural net interpolator gave 
about 1.5 dB better performance than a conventional method.) Thus it has not 
been implemented on the PE. The i-net may be of value in other video tasks, such 
as converting from an interlaced to a non-interlaced display. 
16-bit fixed point arithmetic was used in these simulations, with 8 bits of fraction, 
and 10 bit sigmoid function look-up tables. Comparison with the double-precision 
arithmetic used on the conventional computers showed no significant reduction in 
294 Pearson, Spence, and Sverdlove 
ROC PLOT: NEURAL NETWORK DETECTOR 
.S b..,- ,,/ .,- 
E / .," . 
L' ." ,;' ,o _ 
'"" 'ø ----- ' 
1' , 
g ,; ,oo --- ' 
..4.  /, - 
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1. 
 FALSE: DETECTION 
.4 
0 
0 
ROC PLOT: NETWORK & MEDIAN DETECTORS 
.02 .04 .06 .08 .I 
 FALSœ DETCTION 
Figure 5: ROC Analysis of Neural Network and Median Detectors. 
performance. Current work is exploring the feasibility of implementing training on 
the PE. 
5 PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The mean squared error (MSE) is well known to be a poor measure of subjective 
image quality (Roufs and Bouma, 1980). A better measure of detection performance 
is given by the receiver operating characteristic, or ROC (Green and Swets, 1966, 
1974). The ROC is a parametric plot of the fraction of corrupted samples correctly 
detected versus the fraction of clean samples that were falsely detected. In this case, 
the decision threshold for the smoothed output of the d-net was the parameter 
varied. Figure 5 (left) shows the neural network detector ROC for five different 
impulse amplitudes (tested on a video frame that it was not trained on). This 
quantifies the sharp breakdown in performance observed in real-time simulations at 
low impulse amplitude. This breakdown is not observed in analysis of the MSE. 
Median filters are often suggested for impulse removal tasks, and have been applied 
to the removal of impulses from FM TV transmission systems (Perlman, et al, 
1987). In order to assess the relative merits of the neural network detector, a 
median detector was designed and analyzed. This detector computes the median of 
the current sample and its 4 nearest neighbors with the same color sub-carrier phase. 
A detection is registered if the difference between the median and the current sample 
is above threshold (the same additional measures were taken to insure that impulse 
fringes were detected as were described above for the neural network detector). 
Figure 5 (right) shows both the neural network and median detector ROC's for 
two different video frames, each of which contained a mixture of all 5 impulse 
amplitudes. One frame was used in training the network (TRAIN), and the other 
was not (TEST). This verifies that the network was not overtrained, and quantifies 
the superior performance of the network detector observed in real-time simulations. 
Applications of Neural Networks in Video Signal Processing 295 
6 CONCLUSIONS 
We have presented a system using neural network algorithms that outperforms a 
conventional method, median filtering, in removing AM impulses from television 
signals. Of course an additional essential criterion is the cost and complexity of 
hardware implementations. Median filter chips have been successfully fabricated 
(Christopher et al., 1988). We are currently investigating the feasibility of casting 
small neural networks into special purpose chips. We are also applying neural nets 
to other television signal processing problems. 
Acknowledgement s 
This work was supported by Thomson Consumer Electronics, under Erich Geiger 
and Dietrich Westerkamp. This work was part of a larger team effort, and we 
acknowledge their help, in particular: Nurit Binenbaum, Jim Gibson, Patrick Hsieh, 
and John Ju. 
References 
Chin, D., J. Passe, F. Bernard, H. Taylor and S. Knight, (1988). The Princeton 
Engine: A Real-Time Video System Simulator. IEEE Transactions on Consumer 
Electronics 34:2 pp. 285-297. 
Christopher, L.A., W.T. Mayweather III, and S. Perlman, (1988). A VLSI Median 
Filter for Impulse Noise Elimination in Composite or Component TV Signals. IEEE 
Transactions on Consumer Electronics 34:1 p. 262. 
Green, D.M., and J.A. Swets, (1966 and 1974). Signal Detection Theory and Psy- 
chophysics. New York, Wiley (1966). Reprinted with corrections, Huntington, 
N.Y., Krieger (1974). 
McIlwain, K. and C.E. Dean (eds.); Hazeltine Corporation Staff, (1956). Principles 
of Color Television. New York. John Wiley and Sons. 
NAG, (1990). The NAG Fortran Library Manual, Mark 1. Downers Grove, IL 
(The Numerical Algorithms Group Inc.). 
Pearson, D.E., (1975). Transmission and Display of Pictorial Information. New 
York. John Wiley and Sons. 
Perlman, S.S, S. Eisenhandler, P.W. Lyons, and M.J. Shumila, (1987). Adaptive 
Median Filtering for Impulse Noise Elimination in Real-Time TV Signals. IEEE 
Transactions on Communications COM-35:6 p. 646. 
Roufs, J.A. and H. Bouma, (1980). Towards Linking Perception Research and 
Image Quality. Proceedings of the oVID 21:3, pp. 247-270. 
Rumelhart, D.E. and J.L. McClelland (eds.), (1986). Parallel Distributed Pro- 
cessing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Cambridge, Mass., MIT 
Press. 
Part VII 
Visual Processing 
