A VLSI Neural Network for Color Constancy 
Andrew Moore 
Computation and Neural Systems Program, 116-81 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Geoffrey Fox* 
Dept. of Physics 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
John Allman 
Dept. of Biology, 216-76 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Rodney Goodman 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, 116-81 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
A system for color correction has been designed, built, and tested suc- 
cessfully; the essential components are three custom chips built using sub- 
threshold analog CMOS VLSI. The system, based on Land's Retinex the- 
ory of color constancy, produces colors similar in many respects to those 
produced by the visual system. Resistive grids implemented in analog 
VLSI perform the smoothing operation central to the algorithm at video 
rates. With the electronic system, the strengths and weaknesses of the 
algorithm are explored. 
1 A MODEL FOR COLOR CONSTANCY 
Humans have the remarkable ability to perceive object colors as roughly constant 
even if the color of the illumination is varied widely. Edwin Land, founder of the 
Polaroid Corporation, models the computation that results in this ability as three 
identical center-surround operations performed independently in three color planes, 
such as red, green, and blue (Land, 1986). The basis for this model is as follows. 
Consider first an array of grey papers with different reflectances. (Land designated 
these arrays Mondrians, since they resemble the works of the Dutch painter Piet 
*Present address: Dept. of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244 
370 
A VLSI Neural Network for Color Constancy 371 
Mondrian.) Land illuminated a Mondrian with a gradient of illumination, ten times 
more bright at the top than at the bottom, so that the flux reaching the eye from a 
dark grey patch at top was identical to the flux from a light grey patch at bottom. 
Subjects reported that the top paper was dark grey and the bottom paper was 
light grey. Land accounted for this with a center minus surround model. At each 
point in an image, the incoming light is compared to a spatial average of light in 
the neighborhood of the point in question. Near the top of the Mondrian, the 
abundance of white is sensed and subtracted from the central sensor to normalize 
the central reading with respect to neighboring values, weighted with distance; 
near the bottom, the abundance of dark is sensed and used to correct the central 
reading. Land proposed that the weighting function of the surround is a monotonic 
decreasing function of distance, such as 1/r 2. 
In earlier work, similar experiments were carried out with color Mondrians (Land, 
1977; McCann el. al., 1976). However, instead of varying the intensity of illumi- 
nation, Land and his colleagues varied the color of the illumination. The color of 
patches in a Mondrian remained nearly constant despite large changes in the illu- 
minant color. This is the phenomenon of color constancy: the ability of observers 
to judge, under a wide variety of lighting conditions, the approximate reflectance 
or intrinsic color of objects. Land and his colleagues proposed a variety of different 
models for this phenomenon, collectively referred to as Relinec models. (The term 
Retinex was coined by Land since he was not sure whether the computation was 
going on in the retina, the cortex, or both.) In his most recent paper on the subject 
(Land, 1986), Land simply extended the black-and-white model to the three color 
dimensions. In each of three independent color planes, the color at a given point is 
compared to that of the points surrounding it, weighted as 1Iv 2. 
2 EFFICIENT CALCULATION OF THE SURROUND 
In practical terms, the Retinex algorithm corresponds to subtracting from an image 
a blurred version of itself. The distance weighting (type of blurring) Land proposes 
varies as 1/r 2, so the operation is a center minus surround operation, where the 
surround is the center convolved with a 1/r 2 kernel. 
[ 1] 
lo,,i(x, y) = l(x, y) - log li(x, y) © - 
rye0 (1) 
where li is the signal or lightness in color plane i, and l is the log of the signal. The 
logs are important since the signal is composed of illuminant times reflectance and 
the log of a product is a sum. By subtracting the blurred version of the image after 
taking logs, the illuminant is subtracted away in the ideal case (but see below). 
This type of Retinex algorithm, then, has a psychophysical basis and sound compu- 
tational underpinnings (Hurlbert, 1986). But the complexity is too great. Since the 
required surround is so large, such a convolution across an NxN pixel image entails 
on the order of N 4 operations. On a chip, this corresponds to explicit connections 
from each pixel to most if not all other pixels. 
A similar operation can be carried out much more efficiently by switching from 
372 Moore, Allman, Fox, and Goodman 
a convolution to a resistive grid calculation. The operations are similar since the 
weighting of neighboring points (Green's function) in a resistive grid decreases in 
the limit as the exponential of the distance from a given location on a resistive grid 
(Mead, 1989). Again, the kernel is a monotonic decreasing function. With this type 
of kernel, the operation in each Retinex (color channel) is 
y) = y) - y) © e- 
(2) 
where A is the length constant or extent of weighting in the grid. Since the calcula- 
tion is purely local, the complexity is reduced dramatically from O(N 4) to O(N2). 
On a chip, a local computation corresponds to connections only between nearest- 
neighbor pixels. 
3 
EVALUATION OF THE ALGORITHM WITH 
COMPUTER SIMULATIONS 
3.1 STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE ALGORITHM 
Images of a subject holding a color poster were captured under fluorescent and 
incandescent light with an RGB video camera and a 24 bit frame grabber. First, 
the camera was adjusted so that the color looked good under fluorescent light. Next, 
without readjusting the camera, the fiuorescents were turned off and the subject was 
illuminated with incandescent light. The results were unacceptable. The skin color 
was very red, and, since the incandescent lamp was not very bright, the background 
was lost in darkness. The two images were processed with the Land algorithm, using 
resistive grids to form the surround for subtraction. Details of the simulations and 
color images can be found in (Moore et. al, 1991). For the good, fluorescent image, 
the processing improved the image contrast somewhat. For the poor, incandescent 
image, the improvement was striking. Skin color was nearly normal, shadows were 
softened, and the the background was pulled out of darkness. 
Computer simulation also pointed out two weaknesses of the algorithm: color Mach 
bands and the greying out of large monochromatic regions. Color Mach bands 
arise from this algorithm in the following way. Suppose that a strongly colored 
region, e.g. red, abuts a grey region. In the grey region, the surround subtracted 
at a given point has a strong red component. Therefore, after subtraction of the 
surround, a grey point is rendered as grey minus red, or equivalently, grey plus 
the complementary color of red, which is blue-green. Since the surround weighting 
decreases with distance, the points in the image closest to the red area are strongly 
tinged with blue-green, while points further away are less discolored. Induction of 
this sort in black-and-white images is known as the Mach band effect. An analogous 
induction effect in color is intrinsic to this algorithm. 
Greying out of large colored areas is also an intrinsic weakness of the algorithm. 
The surrounds used in the simulations are quite large, with a length constant of 
nearly one third of the image. Often a large portion of an image is of a single color, 
e.g. a blue sky commonly fills the upper half of many natural scenes. In the sky 
region, the surround samples mostly blue, and with subtraction, blue is subtracted 
from blue, leaving a grey sky. This effect illustrates the essence of the algorithm 
A VLSI Neural Network for Color Constancy 373 
- it operates under a grey worm assumption. The image for which this algorithm 
is ideal is richly colored, with reds and their green complements, yellows and their 
blue complements, and whites with their black complements. In such images, the 
large surround is sampling the color of a grey "mirror", since the sum of a color 
and its complement is grey. If this condition holds, the color subtracted when the 
surround is subtracted from a point in the image is the color of the illuminant; 
the surround acts as a dull grey mirror which reflects the illuminant. [Many color 
constancy schemes rely on this assumption; for a review see (Lennie and D'Zmura, 
X988).] 
3.2 AN EXTENSION TO THE LAND ALGORITHM 
These two weaknesses arise from too much surround subtraction in solidly colored 
areas. One way the minimize the effects is to modulate the surround with a measure 
of image structure, which we call edginess, before subtraction. So, while for the 
original algorithm, the operation is output = center- surround , to ameliorate 
induction effects and lessen reliance on the grey world assumption, the surround 
weight should be modified pointwise. In particular, if edginess is given a value 
close to zero in homogeneous regions like the blue sky, and is given a value close 
to one in detailed areas, a better formulation is output = center - surround. 
edginess. In this relation, the surround is effectively zeroed in smooth areas before 
it is subtracted, so that induction is diminished - more of the original color is 
retained. The extended algorithm, then, is a working compromise between color 
constancy via strict application of the grey world assumption and no color constancy 
at all. To compute a measure of spatial structure, the average magnitude of the 
first spatial derivatives is found at each point in each color plane is smoothed on 
a resistive grid; the output at a given point is multiplied with the surround value 
from the corresponding point of first resistive grid. In our simulations, the modified 
algorithm reduces (but does not eliminate) color Mach bands, and returns color to 
large monochromatic regions such as the the sky in the example image discussed 
above, at the cost of one additional resistive grid per color channel. This extension 
is not the whole answer, however. If a large region is highly textured (for example, 
if there is a flock of birds in the sky), edginess is high, the surround is subtracted 
at near full strength, and the sky is rendered grey in the textured region. This is 
a subject of continuing research. We implemented the original algorithm, but not 
this extension of it, using analog VLSI. 
4 
VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RETINEX 
ALGORITHM 
To realize a real-time electronic system of video camera color correction based on 
Land's algorithm, the three color outputs of a video camera are fed onto three 
separate resistive grids built from subthreshold analog CMOS VLSI. Each 48 by 47 
node resistive grid was built using 2 micron design rules and contains about 60,000 
transistors. The circuit details within each pixel are similar to those of the analog 
retina (Mead, 1989); technical details of the system may be found in (Moore et. al., 
1991). 
374 Moore, Allman, Fox, and Goodman 
Computer simulations are quite costly in terms of time and disk storage. With a 
real-time system, it is possible to intensively investigate the strengths and weak- 
nesses of this color correction algorithm quickly and economically. 
4.1 REAL-TIME VERIFICATION OF ALGORITHM STRENGTHS 
4.1.1 Dynamic range enhancement 
A common problem with video imaging is that the range of an image exceeds the 
dynamic range of the camera sensors. For example, consider an image comprised 
of an indoor scene and an outdoor scene viewed through a window. The indoor 
illumination (e.g., direct sunlight) can be one thousand times or more brighter than 
the indoor illumination (e.g., artificial lights or indirect sunlight). A video camera 
can only capture one portion of the scene with fidelity. By opening up the camera 
iris so that a lot of light falls on the camera sensors, the indoor scene looks good, 
but the outdoor scene is awash in white. Conversely, by closing the camera iris so 
that less light falls on the camera sensors, the outdoor scene looks good, but the 
indoor scene is rendered as deep black. 
In fact, the image information is often not lost in this troublesome situation. Most 
sensors are not linear, but instead have a response function that resembles a hyper- 
bolic tangent. Rather than saturating at the extremes of the response range, most 
sensors compress information near those response extremes. With a center-surround 
processing stage following a camera, the information "squashed" near the camera 
range limits can be recovered. In extremely bright portions of an image, white is 
subtracted from white, "pulling" the signal toward the mid-range, so that details in 
that portion of the scene become defined. Similarly, in dark portions of the scene, 
dark is subtracted from dark and the details of the indoor portion of the example 
image are visible. Thus the Land algorithm as applied to video imaging can enhance 
the dynamic range of video cameras. [This strength of the algorithm was predicted 
from the similar capability of the (black-and-white) silicon retina (Mead, 1989) - it 
has a dynamic range that exceeds by far the range of conventional cameras since it 
incorporates light sensors and center-surround processing on one chip.] 
4.1.2 Color constancy 
For a richly colored scene, the Land algorithm can remove strongly colored illu- 
mination, with some qualifications. We constructed a color Mondrian with many 
differently colored patches of paper, and illuminated it with ordinary fluorescent 
light plus various colored lights. Under a wide range of conditions, the color of 
the Mondrian as viewed on a video monitor changes with the illumination while 
it looks fairly stable to an observer. After passing the images through the elec- 
tronic color compensation system, the image is also fairly stable for a wide variety 
of illumination conditions. There is a significant difference, however, between what 
an observer sees and what the corrected camera image reports. The video images 
passed through the electronic implementation of the Land algorithm take on the 
illuminant somewhat in portions of the image that are brighter than average, and 
take on the complementary color of the illuminant in portions that are darker than 
average. For example, for a blue illumination, the raw video image looks bluet all 
over. The processed image changes in a different way. White patches are faintly 
A VLSI Neural Network for Color Constancy 375 
blue (much less as compared to the raw image), and black patches (which remain 
black in the raw image) are tinged with yellow. There is psychophysical evidence 
that the same effects are noted by human observers (see Jameson and Hurvich, 
1989, for a review), but they are much less pronounced than those produced by 
the Land algorithm in our experience. Still, the overall effect of constancy in the 
processed images is convincing as compared to the raw images. 
4.2 
REAL-TIME VERIFICATION OF ALGORITHM 
WEAKNESSES 
4.2.1 Color Mach bands and greying of large regions 
To our surprise, the color Mach band effect, explained above, is less pronounced 
than we expected; for many scenes the induction effects are not noticeable. It 
is possible to the see the Mach bands clearly by placing colored cards on a grey 
background - the complementary color of the card surrounds the card as a halo 
that diminishes with distance from the card. 
Since the Retinex algorithm relies on the grey world assumption, the algorithm fails 
where this assumption fails to hold. With the real-time system, we have demon- 
strated this in many ways. For example, if the video camera is pointed at the color 
Mondrian and the hand of a Caucasian investigator (with a reddish skin tone) is 
slowly moved in front of the camera lens, the Mondrian in the background slowly 
grows more green. Green is the complementary color of red. Another example of 
practical importance is revealed by zooming in on a particular patch of the Mon- 
drian. As more and more of the image is filled with this patch, the patch grows 
greyer and greyer, because the correction system subtracts the patch color from 
itself. 
4.2.2 Scene dependence of color constancy 
As described above, we were impressed with this algorithm after simulating it on 
a digital computer. The skin tone of a subject, deeply reddened by incandescent 
light, was dramatically improved by the algorithm. In the computer study, the 
subject's face was, by accident rather than design, just in the middle of a large 
white patch and a large black patch. The electronic system yields perfect constancy 
of skin tone with this configuration also, but not for an arbitrary configuration. 
In short, the color constancy afforded by this algorithm is scene dependent; to 
consistently produce perfect color constancy of an object with the real-time system, 
it is necessary to place the object carefully within a scene. We are still investigating 
this weakness of the algorithm. Whether it is camera dependent (i.e., the result of 
camera nonlinearities) remains to be seen. 
5 Conclusion 
After studying the psychophysics and the computational issues in color constancy, 
encouraging preliminary results for a particular version of Land's Retinex algorithm 
were obtained in computer simulation. In order to study the algorithm intensively, 
an electronic system was developed; the system uses three resistive grids built from 
376 Moore, Allman, Fox, and Goodman 
subthreshold analog CMOS VLSI to form a blurred version of the image for sub- 
traction from the original. It was found that the system produces images that are 
more constant, in a sense, than raw video images when the illuminant color varies. 
However, the constancy is more apparent than real; if absolute constancy of a par- 
ticular object is desired, that object must be carefully placed in its surroundings. 
The real-time system allowed us to address this and other such practical issues of 
the algorithm for the first time. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to many of our colleagues at Caltech and elsewhere for discussions 
and support in this endeavor. A.M. was supported by fellowships from the Parsons 
Foundation and the Pew Charitable Trust and by research assistantships from Office 
of Naval Research, the Joint Tactical Fusion Program and the Center for Research in 
Parallel Computation. We are grateful to DARPA for MOSIS fabrication services, 
and to Hewlett Packard for computing support in the Mead Lab. The California 
Institute of Technology has filed for a U.S. patent for this and other related work. 
References 
A. Hurlbert. (1986) Formal connections between lightness algorithms. J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. A3: 1684-1693. 
D. Jameson & L.M. Hurvich (1989). Essay concerning color constancy. Ann. Rev. 
Psychol. 40:1-22. 
E.H. Land. (1977) The Retinex theory of color vision. Scientific American 237:108- 
128. 
E.H. Land. (1986) An alternative technique for the computation of the designator 
in the retinex theory of color vision. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:3078-3080. 
P. Lennie & M. D'Zmura. (1988) Mechanisms of color vision. CRC Crit. Rev. 
Neurobiol. 3(4):333-400. 
J.J. McCann, S.P. McKee, & T.H. Taylor. (1976) Quantitative studies in Retinex 
theory. Vision Res. 16:445-458. 
C.A. Mead. (1989) Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Reading, MA: Addison- 
Wesley. 
A. Moore, J. Allman, & R. Goodman. (1991) A Real-time Neural System for Color 
Constancy. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks 2(2) In press. 
