Optimal Filtering in the Salamander Retina 
Fred Rieke a', W. Geoffrey Owen b and William Bialek a'b'c 
Departments of Physics  and Molecular and Cell Biology & 
University of California 
Berkeley, California 94720 
and 
NEC Research Institute ½ 
4 Independence Way 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 
Abstract 
The dark-adapted visual system can count photons with a reliability lim- 
ited by thermal noise in the rod photoreceptors -- the processing circuitry 
between the rod cells and the brain is essentially noiseless and in fact may 
be close to optimal. Here we design an optimal signal processor which 
estimates the time-varying light intensity at the retina based on the rod 
signals. We show that the first stage of optimal signal processing involves 
passing the rod cell output through a linear filter with characteristics de- 
termined entirely by the rod signal and noise spectra. This filter is very 
general; in fact it is the first, stage in any visual signal processing task 
at, low photon flux. We identifv the output of this first-stage filter with 
the intracellular voltage response of the bipolar cell, the first anatomical 
stage in retinal signal processing. From recent data on tiger salamander 
photoreceptors we extract the relevant spectra and make parameter-free, 
quantitative predictions of the bipolar cell response to a dim, diffuse flash. 
Agreement with experiment is essentially perfect. As far as we know this 
is the first successtiff predictive theory for neural dynamics. 
1 Introduction 
A number of biological sensory cells perform at a level which can be ca, lied optimal 
-- their performance approaches limits set, by the laws of physics [1]. In some cases 
377 
378 Rieke, Owen, and Bialek 
the behavioral perforlnance of an orgauism, not just the performance of the sensory 
cells, also approaches fundamental limits. Such performance indicates that neural 
computation can reach a level of precision where the reliability of the computed 
output is linfited by noise in the sensory input rather than by inefficiencies in the 
processing algorithm or noise in the processing hardware [2]. These observations 
suggest that we study algorithms for optimal signal processing. If we can make the 
notiou of optimal processing precise we will have the elements of a predictive (and 
hence unequivocally testable) theory for what the nervous system should compute. 
This is in contrast to traditional modeling approaches which involve adjustment of 
free parameters to fit. experinenta. l data. 
To further develop these ideas we consider the vertebrate retina. Since the classic 
experiments of Hecht, Shlaer and Pirenne we have known that the dark-adapted 
visual system can count small numbers of photons [3]. Recent experiments confirm 
Barlow's suggestion [4,.5] that. the reliability of behavioral decision making reaches 
linfits imposed by dark noise in the photoreceptors due to therlnal isomerization of 
the photopigment [6]. If dark-adapted visual performance is limited by thermal noise 
in the sensory cells then the subsequent layers of signal processing circuitry must be 
extremely reliable. Rather than trying to determine precise limits to reliability, we 
follow the approach introduced in [7] and use the notion of "optilnal computation" 
to design the optimal processor of visual stimuli. These theoretical argulnents 
result in parameter-free predictions for the dynanfics of signal transfer from the 
rod photoreceptor to the bipolar cell, the first stage in visual signal processing. We 
compare these predictions directly with measurements on the intact retina of the 
tiger salamander Amb:qsloma tigrinum [8,9]. 
2 Design of the optimal processor 
All of an organism's knowledge of the visual world derives from the currents I,(t) 
flowing in the photoreceptor cells (labeled n). Visual signal processing consists of 
estimating various aspects of the visual scene from observation of these currents. 
Furthermore, to be of use to the organism these estimates must be carried out in real 
time. The general problem then is to formulate an optimal strategy for estimating 
solne functional G[R(r,t)] of the time and position dependent photon arrival rate 
R(r, t) from real time observation of the currents In(t). 
We can make considerable aualytic progress towards solving this general problem 
using probabilistic methods [7,2]. Start by writing an expression for/he probability 
of the fuuctional G[R(r,t)] conditional on the currents In(t), P{G[R(r,t)][In(t)}. 
Expanding for low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) we find that the first term in the 
expansion of P{GII} depends only on a filtered version of the rod currents, 
P{G[R.(l',t)]lln(t)} -- 'G[F * ]n] q- higher order correctious, 
(1) 
vhere ß denotes convolution; the filter F depends only on the signal and noise 
characteristics of the photoreceptors, as described below. Thus the estimation task 
divides naturally into two stages -- a universal "pre-processing"stage and a task- 
dependent stage. The universal stage is independent both of the stimulus R(r, t) and 
of the particular functional G[R] we wish to estimate. Intuitively this separation 
lnakes sense; in conventional signal processing systems detector outputs are first 
Optimal Filtering in the Salamander Retina 379 
photon rate R(t) 
time rod photoreceptor 
estimated rate R,s t (t) 
I reconstruction 
ß 
current 
Figure ]: Schematic view of photon arrival rate estimation problem. 
processed by a filter whose shape is motivated by general SNR considerations. Thus 
the view of retinal signal processing which emerges from this calculation is a pre- 
processing or "cleaning up" stage followed by more specialized processing stages. 
We emphasize that this separation is a mathematical fact, not, a model we have 
imposed. 
To fill in some of the details of the calculation we turn to the simplest example of 
the estimation tasks discussed above- estimation of the photon arrival rate itself 
(Fig. 1): Photons from a light source are incident on a small patch of retina at 
a time-varying rate R(t), resulting in a current I(t) in a particular rod cell. The 
theoretical problem is to determine the opt, imal strategy for estimating R(I) based 
on the currents I(t) in a small collection of rod cells. With an appropriate defini- 
tion of "optimal" we can pose the estimation problem mathematically and look for 
analytic or numerical solutions. One approach is the conditional probability calcu- 
lation discussed above [7]. Alternatively we can solve this problem using fimctional 
methods. Here we outline the finct, ional calculation. 
Start by writing the estimated rate as a filtered version of the rod currents: 
Rest(if) 
= /drF(r)I(t- r) 
+ far/dr'F,(r,r')I(t- 
+ ... (2) 
In the low SNR limit the rods respond linearly (they count photons), and we expect, 
that the linear term dominates the series (2). We then solve analytically for the 
filter Fi(r)which minimizes \-" = (fdtlR(t) -Rt(t)l '2-) --i.e. the filter which 
satisfies tih-"/6F(r ) = 0. The averages {...) are taken over the ensemble of stimuli 
380 Rieke, Owen, and Bialek 
R(t). The result of this optimization is* 
(.3) 
In the photon counting regime the rod currents are described as a sum of impulse 
responses Io(t- tu) occuring at the photon arrival times t, plus a noise term 5I(t). 
Expanding for low SNR we find 
Fl(v) = e SR(w) S + '"  (4) 
where Ss(w) is the spectral density of fluctuations iu the photon arrival rate, [0(w) 
is the Fourier transform of Io(t), and 5"(w) is the spectral density of current noise 
5I(t) in the rod. 
The filter (4) naturally separates into two distinct stages: A "first" stage 
Pbip()  f;()/Sl() (5) 
which depends only on [}e signal and noise properties of the rod cell, and a "sec- 
ond" stage S(w) which contains our a priori knowledge of the stimulus. The first 
stage filter is the matched filter given the rod signal and noise characteristics; each 
frequency component in the output of this filter is weighted according to its input 
SNR. 
Recall from the probabilistic argument above that optimal estimation of some arbi- 
trary aspect of the scene, such as motion, also results in a separation into two pro- 
cessing stages. Specifically, estimation of ang functional of light intensity involves 
only a filtered version of the rod currents. This filter is precisely the universal filter 
Fbip(r) defined in (5). This result makes intnifive sense since the first stage of 
filtering is silnply "cleaning up" the rod siguals prior to subsequent computation. 
Intuitively we expect that this filtering occurs a an early stage of visual processing. 
The first opportunity [o filter the rod signals occurs in the transfer of signals be- 
tween the rod and bipolar cells; we identi [le transfer function between these cells 
with the first stage of our optimal filter. More precisely we identify the intracellular 
voltage response of the bipolar cell with the output of the filter Fbip(r). In response 
to a diln flash of light at t = 0 the average bipolar cell voltage response should then 
be 
[ip(t)  f dr Fbip(r)IO(t -- v). 
Nowhere in this prediction process do we i,scrt any information about the bipolar 
respovse  the shape of our prediction is govr,d enlirclg bg signal and noise 
properties of the rod cell and the theoretical pri, ciplc of optim. alitg. 
3 
Extracting the filter paralneters and predicting the 
bipolar response 
To complete our prediction of the dim flash bipolar response we extract, the rod 
single photon current I0(t) and rod current noise spectrum 5"I(w) kom experilnen- 
'We define the Fourier Transform a.s f(w) = f dte+i'"tf(l). 
Optimal Filtering in the Salamander Retina 381 
predicted bipolar 
 .iiii: [ measured bipolar ,,..,-œ. 
I R ,--h / 
 I I I I I I I 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
time (sec) 
Figure 2: Comparison of predicted dim flash bipolar voltage response (based entirely 
on rod signal and noise characteristics) and measured bipolar voltage response. For 
reference we show rod voltage responses from two different cells which show the typical 
variations from cell to cell and thus indicate the variations we should expect in different 
bipolar cells. The measured responses are averages of many presentations of a diffuse 
flash occurring at t = 0 and resulting in the absorption of an average of about 5 photons 
in the rod cell. The errors bars are one standard deviation. 
t. al data. To compare our prediction directly with experiment we must obtain the 
rod characteristics under ident, ical recordlug conditions as the bipolar measurement. 
This excludes suction pipette meuren]ents which measure the currents directly, 
but; effect, the rod response dynamics [10,11]. The bipolar voltage response is mea- 
sured intrace!lularly in the eyecup preparat. ion [8]: our approach is to use intracel- 
]ular voltage recordings to characterize the rod network and thus convert. volt. ages 
to currents, as in [12]. This approach to the problem may seem overly complicated 
-- why did we formulate the theory in terms of currents and not. voltages.'? It is 
important we formulat, e our theory in terms of the inditeideal rod signal and noise 
characteristics. The electrical coupling between rod cells in the retina causes the 
voltage noise in nearby rods to be correlated; each rod, however, independently 
injects curvent. noise into the network. 
The impedances connecting adjacent rod cells, the impedance of the rod cell itself 
and the spatial layout and connections between rods determine the relationship 
bet,ween current,s and voltages in the network. The rods lie nearly on a square 
382 Rieke, Owen, and Bialek 
lattice with lattice constant 20 #m. Using this result we extract the impedances from 
two independent experiments [12]. Once we have the impedances we "decorrelate" 
the voltage noise to calculate the uncorrelated current noise. We also convert the 
measured single photon voltage response to the corresponding current Io(t). It 
is important to realize ilia/, the impedauce characteristics of the rod network are 
experimentally determined, and are not, in any sense free parameters! 
After completing these calculations the elements of our bipolar prediction are ob- 
tained under identical conditions to the experimental bipolar response, and we can 
make a direct comparison between the two; there are n free parameters in this 
prediclion. As shown in the Fig. 2, the predicted bipolar response (6) is in excellent 
agreement with the measured response; all deviations are well within the error bars. 
4 Concluding remarks 
We began by posing a. theoretical question: How can we best. recover the photon 
arrival rate fi:om observations of the rod signals? The answer, in the forin of a linear 
filter which we apply to the rod current, divides into two stages -- a stage which is 
matched to the rod signal and noise characteristics, and a stage which depends on 
the particular characteristics of the photon source we are observing. The first-stage 
filter in fact is the universal pre-processor for all visual processing tasks at low SNR. 
We identified this filter with the rod-bipolar transfer function, and based ou this 
hypothesis predicted the bipolar response to a dim, diffuse flash. Our prediction 
agrees extremely well with experimental bipolar responses. We emphasize once 
more that this is not a "model" of the bipolar cell; in fact there is nothing in our 
theory about the physical properties of bipolar cells. Rather our approach restilts 
in parameter-free predictions of the computation al properties of these cells fi'om the 
general theoretical principle of optimal computation. As far as we know this is the 
first success fill quantitative prediction from a theory of neural computation. 
Thus far our results are limited to the dark-adapted regime; however the theoreti- 
cal analysis presented liere depends only on low SNR. This observation suggests a 
follow-up experiment to test the role of adaptation in the rod-bipolar transfer fimc- 
tion. If the retina is first adapted to a constant background illumination and then 
shown dim flashes on top of the background we can use the analysis presented here 
to predict the adapted bipolar response from the adapted rod impulse response and 
noise. Such an experiments would answer a uumber of interesting questions about 
retinat processtug: (1) Does the processing remain optimal at. higher light levels? 
(2) Does the bipolar cell still fimction as the universal pre-processor? (3) Do the 
rod and bipolar cells adapt together in such a way that the optimal first-stage filter 
remains mchanged, or does the rod-bipolar transfer function also adapt? 
Can these ideas be extended to other systems, particularly spiking cells? A number 
of other signal processing systems exhibit nearly optimal performance [2]. One 
exa. mple we are currently studying is the extraction of movement information 
the array of photoreceptor voltages in the insect compound eye [13]. In related 
work, Atick and Redlich [14] have argued that the receptive field characteristics of 
retina.1 ganglion cells can be qnantitatively predicted from a principle of optimal 
encoding (see also [15]). A more general question we are currently pursuing is 
the efficiency of the codtug of sensory information in neural spike trains. Our 
Optimal Filtering in the Salamander Retina 383 
preliminary results indicate that the information rate in a spike train can be as high 
as 80% of the maximum information rate possible given the noise characteristics of 
spike generation [16]. From these examples we believe that "optimal performance" 
provides a general theoretical framework which can be used to predict the significant 
computational dynamics of cells in many neural systems. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank R. Miller and W. Hare for sharing their data and ideals, D. Warland and 
R. de Ruyter van Steveninck for helping develop many of the methods we have used 
in this analysis, and J. Atick, J. Hopfield and D. Tank for many helpful discussions. 
W. B. thanks the Aspen Center for Physics for the environment which catalyzed 
these discussions. Work at Berkeley was supported by the National Institntes of 
Health through Grant No. EY 03785 to WGO, and by the National Science Foun- 
dation through a Presidential Young Investigator Award to WB, supplemented by 
funds from Cray Research, Sun Microsystems, and the NEC Research Institute, and 
through a Graduate Fellowship to FR. 
References 
1. W. Bialek. An. Rev. Biopbys. Biophys. Cbem., 16:455, 1987. 
2. W. Bialek. In E. Jen, editor, 1989 Lectures in Complex System. s, SFI Stud- 
ies in the Sciences of Complexity, volume 2, pages 513-595. Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Mass., 1990. 
3. S. Hecht, S. Shlaer, and M. Pirenne. J. Gem Physiol., 25:819, 1942. 
4. H. B. Barlow. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 46:634, 1956. 
5. H. B. Barlow. Nature, 334:296, 1988. 
6. A.-C. Aho, K. Donner, C. Hydn, L. O. Larsen, and T. Reuter. Nature, 324:348, 
1988. 
7. W. Bialek and W. Owen. Biophys. J., in press. 
8. W. A. Hare and W. G. Owen. J. Physiol., 421:223, 1990. 
9. M. Capovilla, W. A. Hare, and W. G. Owen. J. Pbysiol., 391:125, 1987. 
10. Denis Baylot, T. D. Lamb, and K.-W. Yau. J. Pbysiol., 288:613-634, 1979. 
11. D. Baylor, G. Matthews, and K. Yau. J. Physiol., 309:591, 1980. 
12. V. Torre and W. G. Owen. Biophys. J., 4!:305-324, 1983. 
13. W. Bialek, F. Rieke, R. R. de Ruyter van Steveninck, and D. Warland. In 
D. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processi,g Systems 2, 
pages 36-43. Morgan Kauhnann, San Mateo, Ca., 1990. 
14. J. J. Atick and N. RedItch. Neural Computation, 2:308, 1990. 
15. W. Bialek, D. Ruderman, and A. Zee. In D. Touretzky, editor, Adva,ces in 
Neural Iformation Processing Systems 3. Morgan Kaufnmnn, San Mateo, Ca., 
1991. 
16. F. Rieke, W. Yamada, K. Moortgat, E. R. Lewis, and W. Bialek. Proceedings 
of the 9th I, ternation. al Symposium on Hearth, g, 1991. 
