A Model of Distributed Sensorimotor Control in 
the Cockroach Escape Turn 
R.D. Beer x,2, G.J. Kacmarcik x, R.E. Ritzmann 2 and H.J. Chlel 2 
Departments of Computer Engineering and Science, and 2Biology 
Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, OH 44106 
Abstract 
In response to a puff of wind, the American cockroach turns away and runs. 
The circuit underlying the initial turn of this escape response consists of 
three populations of individually identifiable nerve cells and appears to em- 
ploy distributed representations in its operation. We have reconstructed 
several neuronal and behavioral properties of this system using simplified 
neural network models and the backpropagation learning algorithm con- 
strained by known structural characteristics of the circuitry. In order to 
test and refine the model, we have also compared the model's responses to 
various lesions with the insect's responses to similar lesions. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
It is becoming generally accepted that many behavioral and cognitive capabilities 
of the human brain must be understood as resulting from the cooperative activity 
of populations of nerve cells rather than the individual activity of any particu- 
lar cell. For example, distributed representation of orientation by populations of 
directionally-tuned neurons appears to be a common principle of many mammalian 
motor control systems (Georgopoulos et al., 1988; Lee et al., 1988). While the gen- 
eral principles of distributed processing are evident in these mammalian systems, 
however, the details of their operation are not. Without a deeper knowledge of the 
underlying neuronal circuitry and its inputs and outputs, it is difficult to answer 
such questions as how the population code is formed, how it is read out, and what 
precise role it plays in the operation of the nervous system as a whole. In this paper, 
we describe our work with an invertebrate system, the cockroach escape response, 
which offers the possibility of addressing these questions. 
5O7 
508 Beer, Kacmarcik, Ritzmann, and Chiel 
2 THE COCKROACH ESCAPE RESPONSE 
Any sudden puff of wind directed toward the American cockroach (Periplaneta 
americana), such as from an attacking predator, evokes a rapid directional turn 
away from the wind source followed by a run (Ritzmann, 1984). The initial turn is 
generally completed in approximately 60 msec after the onset of the wind. During 
this time, the insect must integrate information from hundreds of sensors to direct 
a very specific set of leg movements involving dozens of muscles distributed among 
three distinct pairs of multisegmented legs. In addition, the response is known to 
exhibit various forms of plasticity, including adaptation to sensory lesions. This 
system has also recently been shown to be capable of multiphasic responses (e.g. an 
attack from the front may elicit a sequence of escape movements rather than a single 
turn) and context-dependent responses (e.g. if the cockroach is in antennal contact 
with an obstacle, it may modify its escape movements accordingly) (Ritzmann et 
al., in preparation). 
The basic architecture of the neuronal circuitry responsible for the initial turn of 
the escape response is known (Daley and Camhi, 1988; Ritzmann and Pollack, 
1988; Ritzmann and Pollack, 1990). Characteristics of the initiating wind puff 
are encoded by a population of several hundred broadly-tuned wind-sensitive hairs 
located on the bottom of the insect's cerci (two antennae-like structures found at the 
rear of the animal). The sensory neurons which innervate these hairs project to a 
small population of four pairs of ventral giant interneurons (the vGIs). These giant 
interneurons excite a larger population of approximately 100 interneurons located 
in the thoracic ganglia associated with each pair of legs. These type A thoracic 
interneurons (the TIAs) integrate information from a variety of other sources as 
well, including leg proprioceptors. Finally, the TIAs project to local interneurons 
and motor neurons responsible for the control of each leg. 
Perhaps what is most interesting about this system is that, despite the complexity 
of the response it controls, and despite the fact that its operation appears to be 
distributed across several populations of interneurons, the individual members of 
these populations are uniquely identifiable. For this reason, we believe that the 
cockroach escape response is an excellent model system for exploring the neuronal 
basis of distributed sensorimotor control at the level of identified nerve cells. As an 
integral part of that effort, we are constructing a computer model of the cockroach 
escape response. 
3 NEURAL NETWORK MODEL 
While a great deal is known about the overall response properties of many of the 
individual neurons in the escape circuit, as well as their architecture of connectiv- 
ity, little detailed biophysical data is currently available. For this reason, our initial 
models have employed simplified neural network models and learning techniques. 
This approach has proven to be effective for analyzing a variety of neuronal cir- 
cuits (e.g. Lockery et al., 1989; Anastasio and Robinson, 1989). Specifically, using 
backpropagation, we train model neurons to reproduce the observed properties of 
identified nerve cells in the escape circuit. 
In order to ensure that the resulting models are biologically relevant, we constrain 
A Model of Distributed Sensorimotor Control in The Cockroach Escape Turn 509 
Left vGI1 
Left vGI2 
Left vGI3 
Left vGI4 
Figure 1' Windfields of Left Model Ventral Giant Interneurons 
backpropagation to produce solutions which are consistent with the known struc- 
tural characteristics of the circuit. The most important constraints we have utilized 
to date are the existence or nonexistence of specific connections between identified 
cells and the signs of existing connections. Other constraints that we are exploring 
include the firing curves and physiological operating ranges of identified neurons in 
the circuit. It is important to emphasize that we employed backpropagation solely 
as a means for finding the appropriate connection weights given the known structure 
of the circuit, and no claim is being made about its biological validity. 
As an example of this approach, we have reconstructed the observed windfields of 
the eight ventral giant interneurons which serve as the first stage of interneuronal 
processing in the escape circuit. These windfields, which represent the intensity of a 
cell's response to wind puffs from different directions, have been well characterized 
in the insect (Westin, Langberg, and Camhi, 1977). The windfields of individual 
cercal sensory neurons have also been mapped (Westin, 1979; Daley and Camhi, 
1988). The response of each hair is broadly tuned about a single preferred direction, 
which we have modeled as a cardioid. The cercal hairs are arranged in nine major 
columns on each cercus. All of the hairs in a single column share similar responses. 
Together, the responses of the hairs in all eighteen columns provide overlapping 
coverage of most directions around the insect's body. The connectivity between 
each major cercal hair column and each ventral giant interneuron is known, as are 
the signs of these connections (Daley and Camhi, 1988). Using these data, each 
model vGI was trained to reproduce the corresponding windfield by constrained 
backpropagation. x The resulting responses of the left four model vGIs are shown 
in Figure 1. These model windfields closely approximate those observed in the 
cockroach. Further details concerning vGI windfield reconstruction will be given in 
a forthcoming paper. 
4 ESCAPE TURN RECONSTRUCTIONS 
Ultimately, we are interested in simulating the entire escape response. This re- 
quires some way to connect our neural models to behavior, an approach that we 
have termed computational neuroethology (Beer, 1990). Toward that end, we have 
1Strictly speaking, we are only using the delta rule here. The full power of backpropa- 
gation is not needed for this task since we are training only a single layer of weights. 
510 Beer, Kacmarcik, Ritzmann, and Chiel 
Figure 2: Model Escape Turns for Wind from Different Directions 
also constructed a three dimensional kinematic model of the insect's body which ac- 
curately represents the essential degrees of freedom of the legs during escape turns. 
For our purposes here, the essential joints are the coxal-femur (CF) and femur-tibia 
(FT) joints of each leg. The leg segment lengths and orientations, as well as the 
joint angles and axes of rotation, were derived from actual measurements (Nye and 
Ritzmann, unpublished data). The active leg movements during escape turns of a 
tethered insect, in which the animal is suspended by a rod above a greased plate, 
have been shown to be identical to those of a free ranging animal (Camhi and Levy, 
1988). Because an insect thus tethered is neither supporting its own weight nor gen- 
erating appreciable forces with its legs, a kinematic body model can be defended as 
an adequate first approximation. 
The leg movements of the simulated body were controlled by a neural network 
model of the entire escape circuit. Where sufficient data was available, the structure 
of this network was constrained appropriately. The first layer of this circuit was 
described in the previous section and is prevented from further training here. There 
are six groups of six representative TIAs, one group for each leg. Within a group, 
representative members of each identified class of TIA are modeled. Where known, 
the connectivity from the vGIs to each class of TIAs was enforced and all connections 
from vGIs to TIAs were constrained to be excitatory (Ritzmann and Pollack, 1988). 
Model TIAs also receive inputs from leg proprioceptors which encode the angle of 
each joint (Murrain and Ritzmann, 1988). The TIA layer for each side of the body 
was fully connected to 12 local interneurons, which were in turn fully connected to 
motor neurons which encode the change in angle of each joint in the body model. 
High speed video films of the leg movements underlying actual escape turns in the 
tethered preparation for a variety of different wind angles and initial joint angles 
have been made (Nye and Ritzmann, 1990). The angles of each joint before wind 
onset and immediately after completion of the initial turn were used as training 
data for the model escape circuit. Only movements of the middle and hind legs were 
considered because individual joint angles of the front legs were far more variable. 
After training with constrained backpropagation, the model successfully reproduced 
the essential features of this data (Figure 2). Wind from the rear always caused 
A Model of Distributed Sensorimotor Control in The Cockroach Escape Turn 511 
Figure 3: Model Escape Turns Following Left Cercal Ablation 
the rear legs of the model to thrust back, which would propel the body forward 
in a freely moving insect, while wind from the front caused the rear legs to move 
forward, pulling the body back. The middle legs always turned the body away from 
the direction of the wind. 
MODEL MANIPULATIONS 
The results described above demonstrate that several neuronal and behavioral prop- 
erties of this system can be reproduced using only simplified but biologically con- 
strained neural network models. However, to serve as a useful tool for understanding 
the neuronal basis of the cockroach escape response, it is not enough for the model 
to simply reproduce what is already known about the normal operation of the sys- 
tem. In order to test and refine the model, we must also examine its responses 
to various lesions and compare them to the responses of the insect to analogous 
lesions. Here we report the results of two experiments of this sort. 
Immediately following removal of the left cercus, cockroaches make a much higher 
proportion of incorrect turns (i.e. turns toward rather than away from the wind 
source) in response to wind from the left, while turns in response to wind from the 
right are largely unaffected. (Vardi and Camhi, 1982a). These results suggest that, 
despite the redundant representation of wind direction by each cercus, the insect 
integrates information from both cerci in order to compute the appropriate direction 
of movement. As shown in Figure 3, the response of the model to a left cercal 
ablation is consistent with these results. In response to wind from the unlesioned 
side, the model generates leg movements which would turn the body away from the 
wind. However, in response to wind from the lesioned side, the model generates leg 
movements which would turn the body toward the wind. 
It is interesting to note that, following an approximately thirty day recovery pe- 
riod, the directionality of a cercally ablated cockroach 's escape response is largely 
restored (Vardi and Camhi, 1982a). While the mechanisms underlying this adap- 
tation are not yet fully understood, they appear to involve a reorganization of the 
vGI connections from the intact cercus (Vardi and Camhi, 1982b). After a cercal 
512 Beer, Kacmarcik, Ritzmann, and Chiel 
ablation, the windfields of the vGIs on the ablated side are significantly reduced. 
Following the thirty day recovery period, however, these windfields are largely re- 
stored. We have also examined these effects in the model. After cercal ablation, 
the model vGI windfields show some similarities to those of similarly lesioned in- 
sects. In addition, using vGI retraining to simulate the adaptation process, we have 
found that the model can effect a similar recovery of vGI windfields by adjusting 
the connections from the intact cercus. However, due to space limitations, these 
results will be described in detail elsewhere. 
A second experimental manipulation that has been performed on this system is the 
selective lesion of individual ventral giant interneurons (Comer, 1985). The only 
result that we will describe here is the lesion of vGI1. In the animal, this results 
in a behavioral deficit similar to that observed with cercal ablation. Correct turns 
result for wind from the unlesioned side, but a much higher proportion of incorrect 
turns are observed in response to wind from the lesioned side. The response of the 
model to this lesion is also similar to its response to a cercal ablation (Figure 3) 
and is thus consistent with these experimental results. 
6 CONCLUSIONS 
With the appropriate caveats, invertebrate systems offer the possibility of addressing 
important neurobiological questions at a much finer level than is generally possible 
in mammalian systems. In particular, the cockroach escape response is a complex 
sensorimotor control system whose operation is distributed across several popula- 
tions of interneurons, but is nevertheless amenable to a detailed cellular analysis. 
Due to the overall complexity of such circuits and the wealth of data which can be 
extracted from them, modeling must play a crucial role in this endeavor. However, 
in order to be useful, models must make special efforts to remain consistent with 
known biological data and constantly be subjected to experimental test. Experi- 
mental work in turn must be responsive to model demands and predictions. This 
paper has described our initial results with this cooperative approach to the cock- 
roach escape response. Our future work will focus on extending the current model 
in a similar manner. 
Acknowledgement s 
This work was supported by ONR grant N00014-90-J-1545 to RDB, a CAISR grad- 
uate fellowship from the Cleveland Advanced Manufacturing Program to GJK, NIH 
grant NS 17411 to RER, and NSF grant BNS-8810757 to HJC. 
References 
Anastasio, T.J. and Robinson, D.A. (1989). Distributed parallel processing in the 
vestibulo-oculomotor system. Neural Computation !:230-241. 
Beer, R.D. (1990). Intelligence as Adaptive Behavior: An Experiment in Computa- 
tional Neuroethology. Academic Press. 
Camhi, J.M. and Levy, A. (1988). Organization of a complex motor act: Fixed 
and variable components of the cockroach escape behavior. J. Comp. Physiology 
A Model of Distributed Sensorimotor Control in The Cockroach Escape Turn 513 
163:317-328. 
Comer, C.M. (1985). Analyzing cockroach escape behavior with lesions of individual 
giant interneurons. Brain Research 335:342-346. 
Daley, D.L. and Camhi, J.M. (1988). Connectivity pattern of the cercal-to-giant 
interneuron system of the American cockroach. J. Neurophysiology 60:1350-1368. 
Georgopoulos, A.P., Kettner, R.E. and Schwartz, A.B. (1988). Primate motor 
cortex and free arm movements to visual targets in three-dimensional space. II. 
Coding of the direction of movement by a neuronal population. J. Neuroscience 
8:2928-2937. 
Lee, C., Rohrer, W.H. and Sparks, D.L. (1988). Population coding of saccadic eye 
movements by neurons in the superior colliculus. Nature 332:357-360. 
Lockery, S.R., Wittenberg, G., Kristan, W.B. Jr. and Cottrell, G.W. (1989). Func- 
tion of identified interneurons in the leech elucidated using neural networks trained 
by back-propagation. Nature 340:468-471. 
Murrain, M. and Ritzmann, R.E. (1988). Analysis of proprioceptive inputs to DPG 
interneurons in the cockroach. J. Neurobiology 19:552-570. 
Nye, S.W. and Ritzmann, R.E. (1990). Videotape motion analysis of leg joint angles 
during escape turns of the cockroach. Society for Neurosciences Abstracts 16:759. 
Ritzmann, R.E. (1984). The cockroach escape response. In R.C. Eaton (Ed.) 
Neural Mechanisms of Startle Behavior (pp. 93-131). New York: Plenum. 
Ritzmann, R.E. and Pollack, A.J. (1988). Wind activated thoracic interneurons 
of the cockroach: II. Patterns of connection from ventral giant interneurons. J. 
Neurobiology 19:589-611. 
Ritzmann, R.E. and Pollack, A.J. (1990). Parallel motor pathways from thoracic 
interneurons of the ventral giant interneuron system of the cockroach, Periplaneta 
americana. J. Neurobiology 21:1219-1235. 
Ritzmann, R.E., Pollack, A.J., Hudson, S. and Hyvonen, A. (in preparation). Tho- 
racic interneurons in the escape system of the cockroach, Periplaneta americana, 
are multi-modal interneurons. 
Vardi, N. and Camhi, J.M. (1982). Functional recovery from lesions in the escape 
system of the cockroach. I. Behavioral recovery. J. Comp. Physiology 146:291-298. 
Vardi, N. and Camhi, J.M. (1982). Functional recovery from lesions in the escape 
system of the cockroach. II. Physiological recovery of the giant interneurons. J. 
Comp. Physiology 146:299-309. 
Westin, J. (1979). Responses to wind recorded from the cercal nerve of the cock- 
roach Periplaneta americana. I. Response properties of single sensory neurons. J. 
Comp. Physiology 133:97-102. 
Westin, J., Langberg, J.J. and Camhi, J.M. (1977). Response properties of gi- 
ant interneurons of the cockroach Periplaneta americana to wind puffs of different 
directions and velocities. J. Comp. Physiology 121:307-324. 
