A Short-Term Memory Architecture for the 
Learning of Morphophonemic Rules 
Michael Gasser and Chan-Do Lee 
Computer Science Department 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47405 
Abstract 
Despite its successes, Rumelhart and McClelland's (1986) well-known ap- 
proach to the learning of morphophonemic rules suffers from two deficien- 
cies: (1) It performs the artificial task of associating forms with forms 
rather than perception or production. (2) It is not constrained in ways 
that humans learners are. This paper describes a model which addresses 
both objections. Using a simple recurrent architecture which takes both 
forms and "meanings" as inputs, the model learns to generate verbs in 
one or another "tense", given arbitrary meanings, and to recognize the 
tenses of verbs. Furthermore, it fails to learn reversal processes unknown 
in human language. 
BACKGROUND 
In the debate over the power of connectionist models to handle linguistic phenom- 
ena, considerable attention has been focused on the learning of simple morphological 
rules. It is a straightforward matter in a symbolic system to specify how the mean- 
ings of a stem and a bound morpheme combine to yield the meaning of a whole 
word and how the form of the bound morpheme depends on the shape of the stem. 
In a distributed connectionist system, however, where there may be no explicit 
morphemes, words, or rules, things are not so simple. 
The most important work in this area has been that of Rumelhart and McClelland 
(1986), together with later extensions by Marchman and Plunkerr (1989). The net- 
works involved were trained to associate English verb stems with the corresponding 
past-tense forms, successfully generating both regular and irregular forms and gen- 
eralizing to novel inputs. This work established that rule-like linguistic behavior 
605 
606 Gasser and Lee 
could be achieved in a system with no explicit rules. However, it did have important 
limitations, among them the following: 
The representation of linguistic form was inadequate. This is clear, for exam- 
ple, from the fact that distinct lexical items may be associated with identical 
representations (Pinker & Prince, 1988). 
The model was trained on an artificial task, quite unlike the perception and 
production that real hearers and speakers engage in. Of course, because it has 
no semantics, the model also says nothing about the issue of compositionality. 
One consequence of both of these shortcomings is that there are few constraints on 
the kinds of processes that can be learned. 
In this paper we describe a model which addresses these objections to the earlier 
work on morphophonemic rule acquisition. The model learns to generate forms 
in one or another "tense" given arbitrary patterns representing "meanings", and 
to yield the appropriate tense, given forms. The network sees linguistic forms 
one segment at a time, saving the context in a short-term memory. This style of 
representation, together with the more realistic tasks that the network is faced with, 
results in constraints on what can be learned. In particular, the system experiences 
difficulty learning reversal processes which do not occur in human language and 
which were easily accommodated by the earlier models. 
2 SHORT-TERM MEMORY AND PREDICTION 
Language takes place in time, and at some point, systems that learn and process 
language have to come to grips with this fact by accepting input in sequential form. 
Sequential models require some form of short-term memory (STM) because the 
decisions that are made depend on context. There are basically two options, window 
approaches, which make available stretches of input events all at once, and dynamic 
memory approaches (Port, 1990), which offer the possibility of a recoded version 
of past events. Networks with recurrent connections have the capacity for dynamic 
memory. We make use of a variant of a simple recurrent network (Elman, 1990), 
which is a pattern associator with recurrent connections on its hidden layer. Because 
the hidden layer receives input from itself as well as from the units representing the 
current event, it can function as a kind of STM for sequences of events. 
Elman has shown how networks of this type can learn a great deal about the struc- 
ture of the inputs when trained on the simple, unsupervised task of predicting the 
next input event. We are interested in what can be expected from such a network 
that is given a single phonological segment (hereafter referred to as a phone) at a 
time and trained to predict the next phone. If a system could learn to do this suc- 
cessfully, it would have a left-to-right version of what phonologists call phonotactics; 
that is, it would have knowledge of what phones tend to follow other phones in given 
contexts. Since word recognition and production apparently build on phonotactic 
knowledge of the language (Church, 1987), training on the prediction task might 
provide a way of integrating the two processes within a single network. 
A Short-Term Memory Architecture for the Learning of Morphophonemic Rules 607 
3 ARCHITECTURE 
The type of network we work with is shown in Figure 1. Both its inputs and 
(cun'nt phon ) (stem { tns ) 
FORM MEANING 
Figure 1: Network Architecture 
outputs include FORM, that is, an individual phone, and what we'll call MEANING, 
that is, a pattern representing the stem of the word to be recognized or produced 
and a single unit representing a grammatical feature such as PAST or PRESENT. 
In fact, the meaning patterns have no real semantics, but like real meanings, they 
are arbitrarily assigned to the various morphemes and thus convey nothing about 
the phonological realization of the stem and grammatical feature. The network is 
trained both to auto-associate the current phone and predict the next phone. 
The word recognition task corresponds to being given phone inputs (together with a 
default pattern on the meaning side) and generating meaning outputs. The meaning 
outputs are copied to the input meaning layer on each time step. While networks 
trained in this way can learn to recognize the words they are trained on, we have 
not been able to get them to generalize well. Networks which are expected only to 
output the grammatical feature, however, do generalize, as we shall see. 
The word production task corresponds to being given a constant meaning input 
and generating form output. Following an initial default phone pattern, the phone 
input is what was predicted on the last time step. Again, however, though such a 
network does fine on the training set, it does not generalize well to novel inputs. 
We have had more success with a version using "teacher forcing". Here the correct 
current phone is provided on the input at each time step. 
4 SIMULATIONS 
4.1 STIMULI 
We conducted a set of experiments to test the effectiveness of this architecture for 
the learning of morphophonemic rules. Input words were composed of sequences of 
phones in an artificial language. Each of the 15 possible phones was represented 
by a pattern over a set of 8 phonetic features. For each simulation, a set of 20 
words was generated randomly from the set of possible words. Twelve of these were 
608 Gasser and Lee 
designated "training" words, 8 "test" words. 
For each of these basic words, there was an associated infiected form. For each 
simulation, one of a set of 9 rules was used to generate the inflected form: (1) suffix 
(+ assimilation) (gñp-*gñps, gñb-*gñbz), (2) prefix (+ assimilation) 
kñpskip), (3) gemination (igañgga), (4) initial deletion (gipñp), (5) medial 
deletion (6) final deletion (7) tone change 
(S) Pig Latin and (9) reversal 
In the two assimilation cases, the suffix or prefix agreed with the preceding or 
following phone on the voice feature. In the suffixing example, p is followed by 
s because it is voiceless, b by z because it is voiced. In the prefixing example, g 
is preceded by z because it is voiced, k by s because it is voiceless. Because the 
network is trained on prediction, these two rules are not symmetric. It would not 
be surprising if such a network could learn to generate a final phone which agrees 
in voicing with the phone preceding it. But in the prefixing case, the network must 
choose the correct prefix before it has seen the phone with which it is to agree in 
voicing. We thought this would still be possible, however, because the network also 
receives meaning input representing the stem of the word to be produced. 
We hoped that the network would succeed on rule types which are common in 
natural languages and fail on those which are rare or non-existent. Types 1-4 are 
relatively common, types 5-7 infrequent or rare, type 8 apparently known only in 
language games, and type 9 apparently non-occurring. 
For convenience, we will refer to the uninfiected form of a word as the "present" 
and the infiected form as the "past tense" of the word in question. Each input word 
consisted of a present or past tense form preceded and followed by a word boundary 
pattern composed of zeroes. Meaning patterns consisted of an arbitrary pattern 
across a set of 6 "stem" units, representing the meaning of the "stem" of one of the 
20 input words, plus a single bit representing the "tense" of the input word, that 
is, present or past. 
4.2 TRAINING 
During training each of the training words was presented in both present and past 
forms, while the test words appeared in the present form only. Each of the 32 
separate words was trained in both the recognition and production directions. 
For recognition training, the words were presented, one phone at a time, on the 
form input units. The appropriate pattern was also provided on the stem meaning 
units. Targets specified the current phone, next phone, and complete meaning. 
Thus the network was actually being trained to generate only the tense portion of 
the meaning for each word. The activation on the tense output unit was copied to 
the tense input unit following each time step. 
For production training, the stem and grammatical feature were presented on the 
lexical input layer and held constant throughout the word. The phones making up 
the word were presented one at a time beginning with the initial word boundary, 
and the network was expected to predict the next phone in each case. 
There were 10 separate simulations for each of the 9 inflectional rules. Pilot runs 
A Short-Term Memory Architecture for the Learning of Morphophonemic Rules 609 
Table 1: Results of Recognition and Production Tests 
RECOGNITION PRODUCTION 
% tenses correct % segments correct 1% affixes correct 
Suffix 79 82 83 
Prefix 76 62 76 
Tone change 99 98 - 
Gemination 90 74 42 
Deletion 67 31 - 
Pig Latin 61 27 - 
Reversal 13 23 - 
were used to find estimates of the best hidden layer size. This varied between 16 
and 26. Training continued until the mean sum-of-squares error was less than 0.05. 
This normally required between 50 and 100 epochs. Then the connection weights 
were frozen, and the network was tested in both the recognition and production 
directions on the past tense forms of the test words. 
4.3 RESULTS 
In all cases, the network learned the training set quite successfully (at least 95% of 
the phones for production and 96% of the tenses for recognition). Results for the 
recognition and production of past-tense forms of test words are shown in Table 1. 
For recognition, chance is 37.5%. For production, the network's output on a given 
time step was considered to be that phone which was closest to the pattern on the 
phone output units. 
5 DISCUSSION 
5.1 AFFIXATION AND ASSIMILATION 
The model shows clear evidence of having learned morphophonemic rules which it 
uses in both the production and perception directions. And the degree of mastery 
of the rules, at least for production, mirrors the extent to which the types of rules 
occur in natural languages. Significantly, the net is able to generate appropriate 
forms even in the prefix case when a "right-to-left" (anticipatory) rule is involved. 
That is, the fact that the network is trained only on prediction does not limit it 
to left-to-right (perseverative) rules because it has access to a "meaning" which 
permits the required "lookahead" to the relevant feature on the phone following the 
prefix. What makes this interesting is the fact that the meaning patterns bear no 
relation to the phonology of the stems. The connections between the stem meaning 
input units and the hidden layer are being trained to encode the voicing feature 
even when, in the case of the test words, this was never required during training. 
In any case, it is clear that right-to-left assimilation in a network such as this is 
more difficult to acquire than left-to-right assimilation, all else being equal. We are 
610 Gasser and Lee 
unaware of any evidence that would support this, though the fact that prefixes are 
less common than suffixes in the world's languages (Hawkins & Cutler, 1988) means 
that there are at least fewer opportunities for the right-to-left process. 
5.2 REVERSAL 
What is it that makes the reversal rule, apparently difficult for human language 
learners, so difficult for the network? Consider what the network does when it is 
faced with the past-tense form of a verb trained only in the present. If the novel item 
took the form of a set rather than a sequence, it would be identical to the familiar 
present-tense form. What the network sees, however, is a sequence of phones, and 
its task is to predict the next. There is thus no sharing at all between the present 
and past forms and no basis for generalizing from the present to the past. Presented 
with the novel past form, it is more likely to base its response on similarity with a 
word containing a similar sequence of phones (e.g., gip and git) than it is with the 
correct mirror-image sequence. 
It is important to note, however, that difficulty with the reversal process does not 
necessarily presuppose the type of representations that result from training a simple 
recurrent net on prediction. Rather this depends more on the fact that the network 
is trained to map meaning to form and form to meaning, rather than form to form, 
as in the case of the Rumelhart and McClelland (1986) model. Any network of the 
former type which represents linguistic form in such a way that the contexts of the 
phones are preserved is likely to exhibit this behavior. 1 
6 LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS 
Despite its successes, this model is far from an adequate account of the recognition 
and production of words in natural language. First, although networks of the type 
studied here are capable of yielding complete meanings given words and complete 
words given meanings, they have difficulty when expected to respond to novel forms 
or combinations of known meanings. In the simulations, we asked the network 
to recognize only the grammatical morpheme in a novel word, and in production 
we kept it on track by giving it the correct input phone on each time step. It 
will be important to discover ways to make the system robust enough to respond 
appropriately to novel forms and combinations of meanings. 
Equally important is the ability of the model to handle more complex phonological 
processes. Recently Lakoff (1988) and Touretzky and Wheeler (1990) have devel- 
oped connectionist models to deal with complicated interacting phonological rules. 
While these models demonstrate that connectionism offers distinct advantages to 
conventional serial approaches to phonology, they do not learn phonology (at least 
not in a connectionist way), and they do not yet accommodate perception. 
We believe that the performance of the model will be significantly improved by 
the capacity to make reference directly to units larger than the phone. We are 
currently investigating an architecture consisting of a hierarchy of networks of the 
type described here, each trained on the prediction task at a different time scale. 
We are indebted to Dave Touretzky for helping to clarify this issue. 
A Short-Term Memory Architecture for the Learning of Morphophonemic Rules 611 
7 CONCLUSIONS 
It is by now clear that a connectionist system can be trained to exhibit rule-like be- 
havior. What is not so clear is whether networks can discover how to map elements 
of form onto elements of meaning and to use this knowledge to interpret and gen- 
erate novel forms. It has been argued (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988) that this behavior 
requires the kind of constituency which is not available to networks making use of 
distributed representations. 
The present study is one attempt to demonstrate that networks are not limited 
in this way. We have shown that, given "meanings" and temporally distributed 
representations of words, a network can learn to isolate stems and the realizations 
of grammatical features, associate them with their meanings, and, in a somewhat 
limited sense, use this knowledge to produce and recognize novel forms. In addition, 
the nature of the training task constrains the system in such a way that rules which 
are rare or non-occurring in natural language are not learned. 
References 
Church, K. W. (1987). Phonological parsing and lexical retrieval. Cognition, œ5, 
53-69. 
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, lJ, 179-211. 
Fodor, J., & Pylyshyn, Z. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A 
critical analysis. Cognition, 28, 3-71. 
Hawkins, J. A., & Cutler, A. (1988). Psychological factors in morphological asym- 
merry. In J. A. Hawkins (Ed.), Ezplaining language universals (pp. 280-317). 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Lakoff, G. (1988). Cognitive phonology. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of 
the Linguistics Society of America. 
Marchman, V., & Plunkerr, K. (1989). Token frequency and phonological pre- 
dictability in a pattern association network: Implications for child language acqui- 
sition. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 11, 
179-187. 
Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1988). On language and connectionism: Analysis of a 
parallel distributed processing model of language acquisition. Cognition, 28, 73- 
193. 
Port, R. (1990). Representation and recognition of temporal patterns. Connection 
Science, 2, 151-176. 
Rumelhart, D., & McClelland, J. (1986). On learning the past tense of English 
verbs. In J. L. McClelland & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Process- 
ing, Vol. 2 (pp. 216-271). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Touretzky, D. and Wheeler, D. (1990). A computational basis for phonology. In 
D. S. Touretzky (Ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2, San 
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
