Evaluation of Adaptive Mixtures 
of Competing Experts 
Steven J. Nowlan and Geoffrey E. Hinton 
Computer Science Dept. 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ONT M5S 1A4 
Abstract 
We compare the performance of the modular architecture, composed of 
competing expert networks, suggested by Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan and 
Hinton (1991) to the performance of a single back-propagation network 
on a complex, but low-dimensional, vowel recognition task. Simulations 
reveal that this system is capable of uncovering interesting decompositions 
in a complex task. The type of decomposition is strongly influenced by 
the nature of the input to the gating network that decides which expert 
to use for each case. The modular architecture also exhibits consistently 
better generalization on many variations of the task. 
I Introduction 
If back-propagation is used to train a single, multilayer network to perform different 
subtasks on different occasions, there will generally be strong interference effects 
which lead to slow learning and poor generalization. If we know in advance that a set 
of training cases may be naturally divided into subsets that correspond to distinct 
subtasks, interference can be reduced by using a system (see Fig. 1) composed of 
several different "expert" networks plus a gating network that decides which of the 
experts should be used for each training case. 
Systems of this type have been suggested by a number of authors (Hampshire and 
Waibel, 1989; Jacobs, Jordan and Barto, 1990; Jacobs et al., 1991) (see also the 
paper by Jacobs and Jordan in this volume (1991)). Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan and 
Hinton (1991) show that this system can be trained by performing gradient descent 
774 
Evaluation of Adaptive Mixtures of Competing Experts 775 
:02 
Expert 2 
Expert 1 
Expert 3 
I' 
Input 
I 
x 1 x2 x3 
Gating 
Network 
Input 
Figure 1: A system of expert and gating networks. Each expert is a feedforward 
network and all experts receive the same input and have the same number of out- 
puts. The gating network is also feedforward and may receive a different input than 
the expert networks. It has normalized outputs pj = exp(xj)/-iexp(xi), where 
xj is the total weighted input received by output unit j of the gating network. pj 
can be viewed as the probability of selecting expert j for a particular case. 
in the following error function: 
E c = - log  p ½ -I1'-''11=/2'= (1) 
i 
where E c is the error on training case c, p? is the output of the gating network for 
expert i, a is the desired output vector and /c is the output vector of expert i, and 
a is constant. 
The error defined by Equation I is simply the negative log probability of generating 
the desired output vector under a mixture of gaussians model of the probability 
distribution of possible output vectors given the current input. The output vector 
of each expert specifies the mean of a multidimensional gaussian distribution. These 
means are a function of the inputs to the experts. The outputs of the gating network 
specify the mixing proportions of the experts, so these too are determined by the 
current input. 
During learning, the gradient descent in E has two effects. It raises the mixing 
proportion of experts that do better than average in predicting the desired output 
vector for a particular case, and it also makes each expert better at predicting the 
desired output for those cases for which it has a high mixing proportion. The result 
of these two effects is that, after learning, the gating network nearly always assigns 
a mixing proportion near I to one expert on each case. So towards the end of 
the learning, each expert can focus on modelling the cases it is good at without 
interference from the cases for which it has a negligible mixing proportion. 
776 Nowlan and Hinton 
In this paper, we compare mixtures of experts to single back-propagation networks 
on a vowel recognition task. We demonstrate that the mixtures are better at 
fitting the training data and better at generalizing than comparable single back- 
propagation networks. 
2 Data and Experimental Procedures 
The data used in these experiments consisted of the frequencies of the first and 
second formants for 10 vowels from 75 speakers (32 Males, 28 Females, and 15 
Children) (Peterson and Barney, 1952). 1 The vowels, which were uttered in an 
hVd context, were {heed, hid, head, had, bud, hod, hawed, hood, who'd, heard}. The 
word list was repeated twice by each speaker, with the words in a different random 
order for each presentation. The resulting spectrograms were hand segmented and 
the frequencies of the formants extracted from the middle portion of the vowel. 
The simulations were performed using a conjugate gradient technique, with one 
weight change after each pass through the training set. For the back-propagation 
experiments, each simulation was initialised randomly with weight values in the 
range [-0.5, 0.5]. For the mixture systems, the last layer of weights in the gating 
network was always initialised to 0 so that all experts initially had equal a priori 
selection probabilities, pi,, while all other weights in the gating and expert networks 
were initialized randomly with values in the range [-0.5, 0.5] to break symmetry. 
The value of r used was 0.25 for all of the mixture simulations. In all cases, the 
input formant values were linearly scaled by dividing them by 1000, so the first 
formant was in the range (0, 1.5) and the second was in the range (0, 4). 
Two sets of experiments were performed: one in which the performance of different 
systems on the training data was compared and a second in which the ability of 
different systems to generalize was compared. 
Five different types of input were used in each set of experiments: 
1. Frequencies of first and second formants only (Form.). 
2. Form. plus a localist encoding of the speaker identity (Form. + Speaker ID). 
3. Form. plus a localist encoding of whether the speaker was a male, female, or 
child (Form. + MFC). 
4. Form. plus the minimum and maximum frequency for the first and second 
formant (as real values) over all samples from the speaker (Form. + Range). 
5. Form. + MFC + Range. 
For the simulations in which a single back-propagation network was used the net- 
work received the entire set of input values. However, for the mixture systems the 
expert networks saw only the formant fi'equencies, while the gating network saw 
everything but the formant frequencies (except of course when the input consisted 
only of the formant frequencies). 
Obtained, with thanks, from Ray Watrous, who originally obtained the data from Ann 
Syrdal at AT&T Bell Labs. 
Evaluation of Adaptive Mixtures of Competing Experts 777 
Type of Input  Experts # Hid per Expert #.Hid Gating 
Form. 20 3 - 5 10 
Form. + Speaker ID 10 25 0 
Form. + MFC 10 25 0 
Form. + MFC + Range 10 25 5 
Form. + Range 10 25 5 
Table 1: Summary of mixture architecture used with each type of input. 
Type of Input Mixture Error % BP Error % Sig.(p) 
Formants only 13.9 q- 0.9 21.8 q- 0.6 >> 0.9999 
Form. + Speaker ID 4.6 q- 0.7 6.2 q- 0.6 > 0.97 
Form. + MFC 13.0 q- 0.4 15.4 q- 0.3 >> 0.9999 
Form. + MFC + Range 5.6 q- 0.6 13.1 q- 1.0 >> 0.9999 
Form. + Range 11.6 q- 0.9 13.5 q- 0.4 > 0.998 
Table 2: Performance comparison of associative mixture systems and single back- 
propagation networks on vowel classification task. Results reported are based on an 
average over 25 simulations for each back-propagation network or mixture system. 
The BP networks used in the single network simulations contained one layer of 
hidden units? In the mixture systems, the expert networks also contained one 
layer of hidden units although the number of hidden units in each expert varied. 
The gating network in some cases contained hidden units, while in other cases it 
did not (see Table 1). Further details of the simulations may be found in (Nowlan, 
1991). 
3 Results of Performance Studies 
In the set of performance experiments, each system was trained with the entire set 
of 1494 tokens until the magnitude of the gradient vector was < 10 -8. The error 
rate (as percent of total cases) was evaluated on the training data (generalization 
studies are described in the next section). The very high degree of class overlap in 
this task makes it extremely difficult to find good solutions with a gradient descent 
procedure and this is reflected by the far from optimal average performance of all 
systems on the training data (see Table 2). For purposes of comparison, the best 
performance ever obtained on this vowel data using speaker dependant classification 
methods is about 2.5% (Gerstman, 1968; Watrous, 1990). 
Table 2 reveals that in every case the mixture system performs significantly better a 
than a single network given the same input. The most striking, and interesting, 
2The number of hidden units was selected by performing a number of initial simulations 
with different numbers of hidden units for each network and choosing the smallest number 
which gave near optimal performance. These numbers were 50, 150, 60, 150, and 80 
respectively for the five types of input listed above. 
aBased on a t-test with 48 degrees of freedom. 
778 Nowlan and Hinton 
Spec. # % Male % Female % Child % Total 
0 0.0 0.0 6.7 1.3 
4 3.1 3.6 0.0 2.7 
5 84.4 17.8 0.0 42.7 
7 9.4 7.1 6.7 8.0 
8 3.1 42.9 0.0 17.3 
9 0.0 28.6 86.7 28.0 
Table 3: Speaker decomposition in terms of Male, Female and Child categories for 
a mixture with speaker identity as input to the gating network. 
result in Table 2 is contained in the fourth row of the table. While the associative 
mixture architecture is able to combine the two separate cues of MFC categories and 
speaker formant range quite effectively, the single back-propagation network fails 
to do so. The combination of these two different cues in the associative mixture 
system was obtained by a hierarchical training procedure in which three different 
experts were first created using the MFC cue alone, and copies of these networks 
were further specialized when the formant range cue was added to the input received 
by the gating network (see (Nowlan, 1990; Nowlan, 1991) for details). Since the 
single back-propagation network is much less modular than the associative mixture 
system, it is difficult to implement such a hierarchical training procedure in the 
single network case. (A variety of techniques were explored and details may again 
be found in (Nowlan, 1991).) 
Another interesting aspect of the mixture systems, not revealed in Table 2, is the 
manner in which the training cases were divided among the different expert net- 
works. Once the network was trained, the training cases were clustered by assigning 
each case to the expert that was selected most strongly by the gating network. 
The mixture which used only the formant frequencies as input to both the gating 
and expert networks tended to cluster training cases according to the position of 
the tongue hump when the vowel is uttered. In all simulations, the four front vowels 
were always clustered together and handled by a single expert. The low back and 
high back vowels also tended to be grouped together, but each of these groups was 
divided among several experts and not always in exactly the same way. 
The mixture which received speaker identity as well as formant frequencies as input 
tended to group speakers roughly according to the categories male, female, and 
child. A typical grouping of speakers by the mixture is shown in Table 3. 
4 Results of Generalization Studies 
In the set of generalization experiments, for all but the input which contained 
the speaker identity, each system was trained on data from 65 speakers until the 
magnitude of the gradient vector was < 10 -4. The performance was then tested 
on the data from the 10 speakers not in the training set. Twenty different test sets 
were created by leaving out different speakers for each, and results are an average 
over one simulation with each of the test sets. Each test set consisted of 4 male, 3 
Evaluation of Adaptive Mixtures of Competing Experts 779 
Type of Input Mixture Error % BP Error % Sig.(p) 
Formants only 15.1 q- 0.9 23.3 q- 1.2 )) 0.9999 
Form. + Speaker ID 6.4 q- 1.3 - )) 0.9999 
Form. + MFC 13.5 q- 0.6 18.4 q- 1.1 )) 0.9999 
Form. + MFC + Range 6.2 q- 0.9 16.1 q- 1.0 )) 0.9999 
Form. + Range 12.8 q- 0.9 16.2 q- 0.8 > 0.9999 
Table 4: Generalization comparison of associative mixture systems and single back- 
propagation networks on vowel classification task. Results reported are based on an 
average over 20 simulations for each back-propagation network or mixture system. 
female and 3 child speakers. 
The generalization tests for the mixture in which speaker identity was part of the 
input used a different testing strategy. In this case, the training set consisted of 70 
speakers and the testing set contained the remaining 5 speakers (2 male, 2 female, 1 
child). Again, results are averaged over 20 different testing sets. After the mixture 
was trained, an expert was selected for each test speaker using one utterance of each 
of the first 3 vowels, and the performance of the selected expert was tested on the 
remaining 17 utterances of that speaker. No generalization results are reported for 
the single back-propagation network which received the speaker identity as well as 
the first and second formant values, since there is no straightforward way to perform 
rapid speaker adaptation with this architecture. (See Watrous (Watrous, 1990) for 
some approaches to speaker adaptation in single networks.) The percentage of 
misclassifications on the test set for the mixture systems and corresponding single 
back-propagation networks are summarized in Table 4, and in all cases the mixture 
system generalizes significantly better 4 than a single network. 
The relatively poor generalization performance of the single back-propagation net- 
works is not due to overfitting on the training data because the single back- 
propagation networks perform worse on the training data than the mixture systems 
on the test data. Also, the associative nixture systems initially contained even 
more parameters than the corresponding back-propagation networks. (The associa- 
tive mixture which received formant range data for gating input initially contained 
almost 3600 parameters, while the corresponding single back-propagation network 
contained only slightly more than 1200 parameters.) Part of the explanation for the 
good generalization performance of the mixtures is the pruning of excess parameters 
as the system is trained. The number of effective parameters in the final mixture is 
very often less than half the number in the original system, because a large number 
of experts have negligible mixing proportions in the final mixture. 
5 Discussion 
The mixture systems outperform single back-propagation networks which receive 
the same input, and show much better generalization properties when forced to 
deal with relatively small training sets. In addition, the mixtures can easily be 
4Based on a t-test with 38 degrees of freedom. 
780 Nowlan and Hinton 
refined hierarchically by learning a few experts and then making several copies of 
each and adding additional contextual input to the gating network. 
The best performance for either single networks or mixture systems is obtained 
by including the speaker identity as part of the input. When given such input, 
the mixture systems are capable of discovering speaker categories which give levels 
of classification performance close to those obtained by speaker dependent classi- 
fication schemes. Good performance can also be obtained on novel speakers by 
determining which existing speaker category the new speaker is most similar to (us- 
ing a small number of labelled utterances). If, instead, the speaker is represented in 
terms of features such as male, female, child, and formant range, the mixtures also 
exhibit good generalization to novel speakers described in terms of these features. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by grants fi'om the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council, the Ontario Information Technology Research Center, and Apple 
Computer Inc. Hinton is the Noranda fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced 
Research. 
References 
Gerstman, L. J. (1968). Classification ot' self-normalized vowels. IEEE Trans. on 
Audio and Electroacoustics, AU-16(1):78-80. 
Hampshire, J. and Waibel, A. (1989). The Meta-Pi network: Building distributed 
knowledge representations for robust pattern recognition. Technical Report 
CMU-CS-89-166, Carnegie-Mellon, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Jacobs, R. A. and Jordan, M. I. (1991). A competitive modular connectionist ar- 
chitecture. In Touretzky, D. S., editor, Neural Information Processing Systems 
3. Morgan Kauffman, San Mateo, CA. 
Jacobs, R. A., Jordan, M. I., and Barto, A. G. (1990). Task decomposition through 
competition in a modular connectionist architecture: The what and where 
vision tasks. Cognitive Science. In Press. 
Jacobs, R. A., Jordan, M. I., Nowlan, S. J., and Hinton, G. E. (1991). Adaptive 
mixtures of local experts. Neural Computation, 3(1). 
Nowlan, S. J. (1990). Competing experts: An experimental investigation of assso- 
ciative mixture models. Technical Report CRG-TR-90-5, Department of Com- 
puter Science, University of Toronto. 
Nowlan, S. J. (1991). Soft Competitive Adaptation: Neural Network Learning Algo- 
rithms based on Fitting Statistical Mixtures. PhD thesis, School of Computer 
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Peterson, G. E. and Barney, H. L. (1952). Control methods used in a study of 
vowels. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 24:175-184. 
Watrous, R. L. (1990). Speaker normalization and adaptation using second or- 
der connectionist networks. Technical Report CRG-TR-90-6, University of 
Toronto. 
