A Comparative Study of the Practical 
Characteristics of Neural Network and 
Conventional Pattern Classifiers 
Kenney Ng 
BBN Systems and Technologies 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
Abstract 
Richard P. Lippmann 
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT 
Lexington, MA 02173-9108 
Seven different pattern classifiers were implemented on a serial computer 
and compared using artificial and speech recognition tasks. Two neural 
network (radial basis function and high order polynomial GMDH network) 
and five conventional classifiers (Gaussian mixture, linear tree, K nearest 
neighbor, KD-tree, and condensed K nearest neighbor) were evaluated. 
Classifiers were chosen to be representative of different approaches to pat- 
tern classification and to complement and extend those evaluated in a 
previous study (Lee and Lippmann, 1989). This and the previous study 
both demonstrate that classification error rates can be equivalent across 
different classifiers when they are powerful enough to form minimum er- 
ror decision regions, when they are properly tuned, and when sufficient 
training data is available. Practical characteristics such as training time, 
classification time, and memory requirements, however, can differ by or- 
ders of magnitude. These results suggest that the selection of a classifier 
for a particular task should be guided not so much by small differences in 
error rate, but by practical considerations concerning memory usage, com- 
putational resources, ease of implementation, and restrictions on training 
and classification times. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Few studies have compared practical characteristics of adaptive pattern classifiers 
using real data. There has frequently been an over-emphasis on back-propagation 
classifiers and artificial problems and a focus on classification error rate as the main 
performance measure. No study has compared the practical trade-offs in training 
time, classification time, memory requirements, and complexity provided by the 
970 
Practical Characteristics of Neural Network and Conventional Pattern Classifiers 971 
many alternative classifiers that have been developed (e.g. see Lippmann 1989). 
The purpose of this study was to better understand and explore practical character- 
istics of classifiers not included in a previous study (Lee and Lippmann, 1989; Lee 
1989). Seven different neural network and conventional pattern classifiers were eval- 
uated. These included radial basis function (RBF), high order polynomial GMDH 
network, Gaussian mixture, linear decision tree, K nearest neighbor (KNN), KD 
tree, and condensed K nearest neighbor (GKNN) classifiers. All classifiers were 
implemented on a serial computer (Sun 3-110 Workstation with FPA) and tested 
using a digit recognition task (7 digits, 22 cepstral inputs, 16 talkers, 70 training 
and 112 testing patterns per talker), a vowel recognition task (10 vowels, 2 formant 
frequency inputs, 67 talkers, 338 training and 333 testing patterns), and two ar- 
tificial tasks with two input dimensions that require either a single convex or two 
disjoint decision regions. Tasks are as in (Lee and Lippmann, 1989) and details of 
experiments are described in (Ng, 1990). 
2 TUNING EXPERIMENTS 
Internal parameters or weights of classifiers were determined using training data. 
Global free parameters that provided low error rates were found experimentally 
using cross-validation and the training data or by using test data. Global parameters 
included an overall basis function width scale factor for the RBF classifier, order 
of nodal polynomials for the GMDH network, and number of nearest neighbors for 
the KNN, KD tree, and CKNN classifiers. 
Experiments were also performed to match the complexity of each classifier to that 
of the training data. Many classifiers exhibit a characteristic divergence between 
training and testing error rates as a function of their complexity. Poor performance 
results when a classifier is too simple to model the complexity of training data 
and also when it is too complex and "over-fits" the training data. Cross-validation 
and statistical techniques were used to determine the correct size of the linear tree 
and GMDH classifiers where training and test set error rates diverged substantially. 
An information theoretic measure (Predicted Square Error) was used to limit the 
complexity of the GMDH classifier. This classifier was allowed to grow by adding 
layers and widening layers to find the number of layers and the layer width which 
minimized predicted square error. Nodes in the linear tree were pruned using 10- 
fold cross-validation and a simple statistical test to determine the minimum size tree 
that provides good performance. Training and test set error rates did not diverge 
for the R, BF and Gaussian mixture classifiers. Test set performance was thus used 
to determine the number of Gaussian centers for these classifiers. 
A new multi-scale radial basis function classifier was developed. It has multiple 
radial basis functions centered on each basis function center with widths that vary 
over 1 1/2 orders of magnitude. Multi-scale RBF classifiers provided error rates 
that were similar to those of more conventional RBF classifiers but eliminated the 
need to search for a good value of the global basis function width scale factor. 
The CKNN classifier used in this study was also new. It was developed to reduce 
memory requirements and dependency on training data order. In the more conven- 
tional CKNN classifier, training patterns are presented sequentially and classified 
using a KNN rule. Patterns are stored as exemplars only if they are classified in- 
972 Ng and Lippmann 
correctly. In the new CKNN classifier, this conventional CKNN training procedure 
is repeated N times with different orderings of the training patterns. All exemplar 
patterns stored using any ordering are combined into a new reduced set of training 
patterns which is further pruned by using it as training data for a final pass of 
conventional CKNN training. This approach typically required less memory than 
a KNN or a conventional CKNN classifier. Other experiments described in (Chang 
and Lippmann, 1990) demonstrate how genetic search algorithms can further reduce 
KNN classifier memory requirements. 
A) GAUSSIAN MIXTURE 
B) POLYNOMIAL GMDH NETWORK 
4000 
3000 
20O0 
1000 
500 
40O0 
3000 
2000 
1000 
500 
o 14oo 
500 1000 
F1 (Hz) 
Figure 1: Decision Regions Created by (A) RBF and (B) GMDH Classifiers for the 
Vowel Problem. 
3 DECISION REGIONS 
Classifiers differ not only in their structure and training but also in how decision 
regions are formed. Decision regions formed by the RBF classifier for the vowel 
problem are shown in Figure 1A. Boundaries are smooth spline-like curves that 
can form arbitrarily complex regions. This improves generalization for many real 
problems where data for different classes form one or more roughly ellipsoidal clus- 
ters. Decision regions for the high-order polynomial (GMDH) network classifier are 
shown in Figure lB. Decision region boundaries are smooth and well behaved only 
in regions of the input space that are densely sampled by the training data. Decision 
boundaries are erratic in regions where there is little training data due to the high 
polynomial order of the discriminant functions formed by the GMDH classifier. As 
a result, the GMDH classifier generalizes poorly in regions with little training data. 
Decision boundaries for the linear tree classifier are hyperplanes. This classifier may 
also generalize poorly if data is in ellipsoidal clusters. 
4 ERROR RATES 
Figure 2 shows the classification (test set) error rates for all classifiers on the bulls- 
eye, disjoint, vowel, and digit problems. The solid line in each plot represents the 
Practical Characteristics of Neural Network and Conventional Pattern Classifiers 973 
lO lO 
8 
6 
n.- 
h.- 2 
g 0 
-- 25 
i, 
o 20 
o 15 
lO 
5 
BULLSEYE 
DIGIT 50% 
I I I I I I I 
8 
6 
4 
2 
o 
30 
25 
20 
DISJOINT 
i I I I I i i 
VOWEL 
15- 
10- 
5 
I I I I I I I 
0 
Figure 2: Test Data Error Rates for All Classifiers and All Problems. 
mean test set error rate across all the classifiers for that problem. The shaded re- 
gions represent one binomial standard deviation, rr, above and below. The binomial 
standard deviation was calculated as rr = X/ú(1 - ú)/N, where ú is the estimated 
average problem test set error rate and N is the number of test patterns for each 
problem. The shaded region gives a rough measure of the range of expected sta- 
tistical fluctuation if the error rates for different classifiers are identical. A more 
detailed statistical analysis of the test set error rates for classifiers was performed 
using McNemar's significance test. At a significance level of a = 0.01, the error 
rates of the different classifiers on the bullseye, disjoint, and vowel problems do not 
differ significantly from each other. 
Performance on the more difficult digit problem, however, did differ significantly 
across classifiers. This problem has very little training data (10 training patterns 
per class) and high dimensional inputs (an input dimension of 22). Some classifiers, 
including the IBF and Gaussian mixture classifiers, were able to achieve very low 
error rates on this problem and generalize well even in this high dimensional space 
with little training data. Other classifiers, including the multi-scale RBF, KD- 
tree, and GKNN classifiers, provided intermediate error rates. The GMDH network 
classifier and the linear tree classifier provided high error rates. 
The linear tree classifier performed poorly on the digit problem because there is 
974 Ng and Lippmann 
not enough training data to sample the input space densely enough for the training 
algorithm to form decision boundaries that can generalize well. The poor perfor- 
mance of the GMDH network classifier is due, in part, to the inability of the GMDH 
network classifier to extrapolate well to regions with little training data. 
1000 
0 100 
F-- 10 
Z 
Z 
F-- 1 
5 PERFORMANCE TRADE-OFFS 
Although differences in the error rates of most classifiers are small, differences in 
practical performance characteristics are often large. For example, on the vowel 
problem, although both the Gaussian mixture and KD tree classifiers perform well, 
the Gaussian mixture classifier requires 20 times less classification memory than the 
KD tree classifier, but takes 10 times longer to train. 
A) VOWEL PROBLEM 
I I I 1000 
GMOH 
L-TREE RBF 
GMIX ﬂ 
ﬂ CKNN 
ﬂ 
RBF-MS 
KO-TREE 
ﬂ 
KNN 
O 100 
v 
I-- 10 
I-- 1 
B) DIGIT PROBLEM 
iﬂ 
ﬂ 
L-TREE 
GMIX 
CKNN 
ﬂ 
RBF 
ﬂ 
RBF-MS 
ﬂ 
KC)-TREE 
ﬂ 
KNN 
I I .1 I I 
00 1000 10000 00 1000 10000 
CLASSIFICATION MEMORY (BYTES) CLASSIFICATION MEMORY (BYTES) 
Figure 3: Training Time Versus Classification Memory Usage For All Classifiers On 
The (A) Vowel And (B) Digit Problems. 
Figure 3 shows the relationship between training time (in CPU seconds measured on 
a Sun 3/110 with FPA) and classification memory usage (in bytes) for the different 
classifiers on the vowel and digit problems. On these problems, the KNN and KD- 
tree classifiers train quickly, but require large amounts of memory. The Gaussian 
mixture (GMIX) and linear tree (L-TREE) classifiers use little memory, but require 
more training time. The RBF and CKNN classifiers have intermediate memory and 
training time requirements. Due to the extra basis functions, the multiscale RBF 
(RBF-MS) classifier requires more training time and memory than the conventional 
RBF classifier. The GMDH classifier has intermediate memory requirements, but 
takes the longest to train. On average, the GMDH classifier takes 10 times longer 
to train than the RBF classifier, and 100 times longer than the KD tree classifier. 
In general, classifiers that use little memory require long training times, while those 
that train rapidly are not memory efficient. 
Figure 4 shows the relationship between classification time (in CPU milliseconds 
Practical Characteristics of Neural Network and Conventional Pattern Classifiers 975 
A) VOWEL PROBLEM 
B) DIGIT PROBLEM 
50 100 
0 4o 
 30 
z 
'< 20 
 lO 
I I 
GMDH 
CKNN KNN 
GMIX 
RBF-MS 
KD-TREE 
RBF 
L-TREE 
o 1 I 
100 1000 10000 
CLASSIFICATION MEMORY USAGE (BYTES) 
o 80 
_ 60 
z 
o 
 40 
LL 
GMDH 
GMIX 
ﬂ 
CKNN 
L-TREE 
ﬂ1 
ﬂ 
RBF-MS 
KNN 
ﬂ KD-TREE 
RBF 
lOO lOOO lOOOO 
CLASSIFICATION MEMORY USAGE (BYTES) 
Figure 4: Classification Time Versus Classification Memory Usage For All Classifiers 
On The (A) Vowel And (B) Digit Problems. 
for one pattern) and classification memory usage (in bytes) for the different clas- 
sifters on the vowel and digit problems. At one extreme, the linear tree classifier 
requires very little memory and classifies almost instantaneously. At the other, the 
GMDH classifier takes the longest to classify and requires a large amount of mem- 
ory. Gaussian mixture and RBF classifiers are intermediate. On the vowel problem, 
the CKNN and the KD tree classifiers are faster than the conventional KNN clas- 
sifter. On the digit problem, the CKNN classifier is faster than both the KD tree 
and KNN classifiers because of the greatly reduced number of stored patterns (15 
out of 70). The speed up in search provided by the KD tree is greatly reduced for 
the digit problem due to the increase in input dimensionality. In general, the trend 
is for classification time to be proportional to the amount of classification memory. 
It is important to note, however, that trade-offs in performance characteristics de- 
pend on the particular problem and can vary for different implementations of the 
classifiers. 
6 SUMMARY 
Seven different neural network and conventional pattern classifiers were compared 
using artificial and speech recognition tasks. High order polynomial GMDH clas- 
sifters typically provided intermediate error rates and often required long training 
times and large amounts of memory. In addition, the decision regions formed did 
not generalize well to regions of the input space with little training data. Radial ba- 
sis function classifiers generalized well in high dimensional spaces, and provided low 
error rates with training times that were much less than those of back-propagation 
classifiers (Lee and Lippmann, 1989). Gaussian mixture classifiers provided good 
performance when the numbers and types of mixtures were selected carefully to 
model class densities well. Linear tree classifiers were the most computationally el- 
976 Ng and Lippmann 
ficient but performed poorly with high dimensionality inputs and when the number 
of training patterns was small. KD-tree classifiers reduced classification time by a 
factor of four over conventional KNN classifiers for low 2-input dimension problems. 
They provided little or no reduction in classification time for high 22-input dimen- 
sion problems. Improved condensed KNN classifiers reduced memory requirements 
over conventional KNN classifiers by a factor of two to fifteen for all problems, 
without increasing the error rate significantly. 
7 CONCLUSION 
This and a previous study (Lee and Lippmann, 1989) explored the performance of 18 
neural network, AI, and statistical pattern classifiers. Both studies demonstrated 
the need to carefully select and tune global parameters and the need to match 
classifier complexity to that of the training data using cross-validation and/or in- 
formation theoretic approaches. Two new variants of existing classifiers (multi-scale 
RBF and improved versions of the CKNN classifier) were developed as part of this 
study. Classification error rates on speech problems in both studies were equiva- 
lent with most classifiers when classifiers were powerful enough to form minimum 
error decision regions, when sufficient training data was available, and when clas- 
sifters were carefully tuned. Practical classifier characteristics including training 
time, classification time, and memory usage, however, differed by orders of magni- 
tude. These results suggest that the selection of a classifier for a particular task 
should be guided not so much by small differences in error rate, but by practical 
considerations concerning memory usage, ease of implementation, computational 
resources, and restrictions on training and classification times. Researchers should 
take time to understand the wide range of classifiers that are available and the 
practical tradeoffs that these classifiers provide. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was sponsored by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the Department 
of the Air Force. 
References 
Eric I. Chang and Richard P. Lippmann. Using Genetic Algorithms to Improve Pattern 
Classification Performance. In Lippmann, R. Moody, J., Touretzky, D., (Eds.) Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 3, 1990. 
Yuchun Lee. Classifiers: Adaptive modules in pattern recognition systems. Master's 
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, May 1989. 
Yuchun Lee and R. P. Lippmann. Practical Characteristics of Neural Network and Con- 
ventional Pattern Classifiers on Artificial and Speech Problems. In D. Touretzky (Ed.) 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ú, 168-177, 1989. 
R. P. Lippmann. Pattern Classification Using Neural Networks. IEEE Communications 
Magazine, 27(27):47-54, 1989. 
Kenney Ng. A Comparative Study of the Practical Characteristics of Neural Network and 
Conventional Pattern Classifiers. Master's Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, May 1990. 
