VLSI Implementation of TInMANN 
Matt Melton Tan Phan Doug Reeves 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept. 
North Carolina State University 
Raleigh, NC 27(195-7911 
Dave Van den Bout 
Abstract 
A massively parallel, all-digital, stochastic architecture -- TInMAN hi -- is 
described which performs competitive and Kohonen types of learning. A 
VLSI design is shown for a TlnMAhihl neuron which fits within a small, 
inexpensive MOSIS TinyChip frame, yet which can be used to build larger 
networks of several hundred neurons. The neuron operates at a speed of 
15 MHz which allows the network to process 290,000 training examples 
per second. Use of level sensitive scan logic provides the chip with 100% 
fault coverage, permitting very reliable neural systems to be built. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Uniprocessor simulation of neural networks has been the norm, but benefiting from 
the parallelism in neural networks is impossible without specialized hardware. Most 
hardware-based neural network simulators use a single high-speed ALU or multiple 
DSP chips connected through communication buses. The first approach does not 
allow exploration of the effects of parallelism, while the complex processors used in 
the second approach hinder investigations into the minimal hardware needs of an 
implementation. Such knowledge can be gained only if an implementation possess 
the same characteristics as a neural network -- i.e. that it be built from many 
simple, cooperating processing elements. However, constructing and connecting 
large numbers of processing elements (or neurons) is difficult. Highly-connected, 
densely-packed analog neurons can be practically realized on a single VLSI chip, 
but interconnecting several such chips into a larger system would require many I/O 
pins. In addition, external parasitic capacitances and noise can affect the reliable 
transfer of data between the chips. These problems are avoided in neural systems 
1046 
VLSI Implementation of TInMANN 1047 
based on noise-resistant digital signals that can be multiplexed over a small number 
of wires. 
The next section of this paper describes the basic theory, algorithm, and architecture 
of the TInMANN digital neural network. The third section illustrates the VLSI 
design of a TInMANN neuron that operates at 15 MHz, is completely testable, and 
can be cascaded to form large Kohonen or competitive networks. 
2 TInMANN ALGORITHM AND ARCHITECTURE 
In the competitive learning algorithm (Rumelhart, 198õ), training vectors of length 
W, v= (v,v2,..., vw), are presented to a winner-take-all network of N neurons. 
Each neuron i possesses a weight vector of length W, 
and a winning neuron k is selected as the one whose weight vector is closest to the 
current training vector. Neuron k is then moved closer to the training vector by 
modifying its weights as follows 
0<e<l, I<_j<_W. 
If the network is trained with a set of vectors that are naturally clustered into 
N groups, then each neural weight vector will eventually reside in the center of a 
different group. Thereafter, an input vector applied to the network is encoded by 
the neuron that has been sensitized to the cluster containing the input. 
Kohonen's self-organizing feature maps (Kohonen, 1982) are trained using a gener- 
alization of competitive learning where each neuron i is provided with an additional 
X-element vector, x/= (t, zi2,..., zix), that defines its topological position with 
relation to the other neurons in the network. As before, neuron k of the N neurons 
wins if it is the closest to the current training vector, but the weight adjustment 
now affects all neurons as determined by a decreasing function f of their topological 
distance from neuron k and a threshold distance dr: 
Ivij ½: Ivij + . f([]x, - xili, dr). (vj - Ivij) 0 < e < 1, 1 <_ j <_ W, 1 <_ i <_ N. 
This function allows the winning neuron to drag its neighbors toward a given section 
of the input space so that topologically close neurons will eventually react similarly 
to closely spaced input vectors. 
The integer Markovgan learning algorithm of Figure I simplifies the Kohonen learn- 
ing procedure by noting that the neuron weights slowly integrate the effects of 
stimuli. This integration can be done by stochastically updating the weights with 
a probability proportional to the neural input. The stochastic update of the neural 
weights is done by generating two uncorrelated random numbers, R and R2, on the 
interval [0, dr] that each neuron compares to its distance from the current training 
vector and its topological distance from the winning neuron, respectively. A neuron 
will try to increment or decrement the elements of its weight vector closer to the 
training vector if the absolute value of the intervening distance is greater than R, 
thus creating a total movement proportional to the distance when averaged over 
many cycles. This movement is inversely modulated by the topological distance 
to the winning neuron k via a comparison with R2. The total effect produced by 
these two stochastic processes is equivalent to that produced in Kohonen's original 
algorithm, but only simple additive operations are now needed. Figure 2 shows 
1048 Melton, Phan, Reeves, and Van den Bout 
for( i 1; i _< N; i 4= i +1 ) 
for( j 4= ; j < w; j 4=+  ) 
wi 4= random() 
for( v (training set} ) 
parallelfor( all neurons i ) 
for( j 4= ; j < w; j 4= j+ 1 ) 
d 4= d + I - wl 
kl 
for( i  1; i  N; i  i + 1 ) 
i d < d ) 
ki 
parCelfor(  neurons i ) 
d 0 
fo(j;jx; j+ ) 
fo(j  ;j w; j  j+  ) 
R  random() 
Ra  random() 
parallelfor(  neurons i ) 
/* stochastic weight update */ 
i I -l >  .d d   ) 
wi  wi+ sign( - wij) 
Figure 1: The integer Markovian learning algorithm. 
our simplified algorithm operates correctly on a problem that has often been solved 
using Kohonen networks. 
The integer Markovian learning algorithm is practical to implement since only sim- 
ple neurons are needed to do the additive operations and a single global bus can 
handle all the broadcast transmissions. The high-level architecture for such an im- 
plementation is shown in Figure 3. TInMAhlhl consists of a global controller that 
coordinates the actions of a linear array of neurons. The neurons contain circuitry 
for comparing and updating their weights. and for enabling and disabling them- 
selves during the conditional portions of the algorithm. The network topology is 
configured by arranging the neurons in an X-dimensional space rather than by 
storing a graph structure in the hardware. This allows the calculation of the topo- 
logical distance between neurons using the same circuitry as is used in the weight 
calculations. TInMANN performs the following operations for each training vector: 
1. The global controller broadcasts the W elements of v while each neuron accu- 
mulates in A the absolute value of the difference between the elements of its 
weight vector (stored in the small, local RAM) and those of the training vector. 
2. The global controller does a binary search for the neuron closest to the training 
VLSI Implementation of TInMANN 1049 
Figure 2: The evolution of 100 TInMANN neurons when learning a two- 
dimensional vector quantization. 
vector by broadcasting distance values bisecting the range containing the win- 
ning neuron. The neurons do a comparison and signal on the wired-OR status 
line if their distance is less than the broadcast value (i.e. the carry bit c is set). 
Neurons with distances greater than the broadcast value are disabled by reset- 
ting their e flags. However, if no neuron is left enabled, the controller restores 
the enable bits and adjusts its search region (this action is needed on -, M/2 
of the search steps, where M is the machine word length used by TInMANN). 
The last neuron left enabled is the winner of the competition (ties are resolved 
by the conditional logic in each neuron). 
The topological vector of the winning neuron is broadcast to the other neurons 
through gate G. The other neurons accumulate into A and store into T1 the 
absolute value of the difference between their topological vectors and that of 
the winning neuron. 
Random number R2 is broadcast by the global controller and those neurons 
having topological distances in T1 greater than R2 are disabled. The remaining 
neurons each compute the distance between a component of their weight vector 
and that of the training vector broadcast by the global controller. All neurons 
whose calculated distances are greater than random number R1 broadcast by 
the controller will increment or decrement their weight elements depending 
on the carry bits left in the c flags during the distance calculations. Then 
all neurons are re-enabled and this step is repeated for the remaining W- 1 
elements of the training vector. 
A single training vector can be processed in 11W + X + 2.5M + 15 clock cycles 
(Van den Bout, 1989). A word-width of 10 bits and a clock cycle of 15 MHz would 
allow TInMANN to learn at a rate of 200,000 three-dimensional vectors per second 
or 290,000 one-dimensional vectors per second. 
3 THE VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF TInMANN 
Figure 4 is a block diagram for the VLSI TInMANN neuron built from the compo- 
nents listed in Table 1. The design was driven by the following requirements: 
Size: The TInMANN neuron had to fit within a MOSIS TinyChip frame, so we 
used small, dense, ripple-carry adders. A 10-bit word size was selected as a 
1050 Melton, Phan, Reeves, and  den Bout 
Global Controller .................... f:i:i:ili 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 
Figure 3: The TInMANN architecture. 
Table 1: Components of the VLSI TInMANN neuron. 
Component Function 
AB Diff 10-bit, two's-complement, ripple-borrow subtractor that calculates 
differences between data in the neuron and data broadcast on the 
global bus (B_Bus). 
P 10-bit pipeline register that temporarily stores the difference out- 
put by A B Diff. 
CFLAG Records the sign bit of the difference stored in P. 
PASum 10-bit, two's-complement, ripple-carry adder/subtractor that adds 
or subtracts P from the accumulator depending on the sign bit in 
CFLAG. This implements the absolute value function. 
A Accumulates the absolute values from PASum to form the Manhat- 
tan distance between a neuron and a training vector. 
8-word memory Stores the weight and topology vectors, the conscience register (De- 
Sieno, 1988), and one working register. 
MUX Steers the output of A or the memory to the input of ABOiff. 
EFLAG Stores the enable bit used for conditionally controlling the neuron 
function during the binary search and weight update phases. 
VLSI Implementation of TInMANN 1051 
paden  
g_en 
a_path 
scan_In e_sela e_selb ½._en zero scan_out s_in 
I 
ramwr 
PhLIH 
Phl._2H 
ramsel g B_Bus 
err s_out 
Figure 4: Block Diagram of the VLSI TInMANN neuron. 
compromise between saving area and retaining numeric precision. The multi- 
plexer was added so that A could be used as another temporary register. The 
neuron logic was built with the OASIS silicon compiler (Kedem, 1990), but the 
memory was hand-crafted to reduce its area. In the final TInMANN neuron, 
4000 transistors are divided between the arithmetic logic (770p x 1300p) and 
the memory (710p x 11õ0/). 
Expandability: The use of broadcast communications reduces the total 
TInMANN chip I/O to only 35 pins. This low connectivity makes it practi- 
cal to build large Kohonen networks. At the chip level, the use of a silicon 
compiler lets us expand the design if more silicon area becomes available. For 
example, the word-size could be readily expanded and the layout automatically 
regenerated by changing a single-statement in the hardware description. Also, 
higher-dimensional vector spaces could be supported by adding more memory. 
Speed: In the worst case, the memory access time is 12 ns, each adder delay is 
45 ns, and the write time for A is 10 ns. This would have limited TInMANN 
to a top speed of 9 MHz. P was added to break the critical path through the 
adders and bring the clock frequency to 15 MHz. At the board level, the ripple 
of status information through the OR gates is sped up by connecting the status 
lines through an OR-tree. 
Testability: To speed the diagnosis of system failures caused by defective chips, 
the TInMANN neuron was made 100% testable by building œF/AG, CF/AG, P, 
and A from level-sensitive scannable latches. Test patterns are shifted into the 
chip through the scan_in pin and the results are shifted out through scan_out. 
All faults are covered by only 27 test patterns. A 100% testable neural system 
is built by concatenating the scan_in and scan_out pins of all the chips. 
1052 Melton, Phan, Reeves, and Van den Bout 
Figure 5: Layout of the TInMANN neuron. 
Each component of the TInMANN neuron was extensively simulated to check for 
correct operation. To test the chip I/O, we performed a detailed circuit simulation 
of two TInMANN neurons organized as a competitive network. The simulation 
demonstrated the movement of the two neurons towards the centroids of two data 
clusters used to provide training vectors. 
Four of the TInMANN neurons in Figure 5 were fabricated by MOSIS. Using the 
built-in scan path, each was found to function at 20 MHz (the maximum speed of 
our tester). These chips are now being connected into a linear neural array and 
attached to a global controller. 
References 
D. E. Van den Bout and T. K. Miller IH. "TInMANN: The Integer MarkovJan 
Artificial Neural Network". In IJCNN, pages II:205-II:211, 1989. 
D. DeSieno. "Adding a Conscience to Competitive Learning". In IEEE Interna- 
tional Conference on Neural Networks, pages I:117-I:124, 1988. 
G. Kedem, F. Brglez, and K. Kozmlnskl. "OASIS: A Silicon Compiler for 
Rapid Implementation of Semi-custom Designs". In International Workshop on 
Rapid S9sterns Protot9ping, June 1990. 
T. Kohonen. "Self-Organized Formation of Topologically Correct Feature Maps". 
Biological Cybernetics, 43:56-69, 1982. 
D. Rumelhart and J. McClelland. Parallel Distributed Processing: Ezplorations 
in the Microstructure of Cognition, chapter 5. MIT Press, 1986. 
