Locomotion in a Lower Vertebrate: 
Studies of the Cellular Basis of Rhythmogenesis 
and Oscillator Coupling 
James T. Buchanan 
Department of Biology 
Marquette University 
Milwaukee, WI 53233 
Abstract 
To test whether the known connectivies of neurons in the lamprey spinal 
cord are sufficient to account for locomotor rhytbmogenesis, a "connection- 
ist" neural network simulation was done using identical cells connected ac- 
cording to experimentally established patterns. It was demonstrated that 
the network oscillates in a stable manner with the same phase relation- 
ships among the neurons as observed in the lamprey. The model was then 
used to explore coupling between identical oscillators. It was concluded 
that the neurons can have a dual role as rhythm generators and as coordi- 
nators between oscillators to produce the phase relations observed among 
segmental oscillators during swimming. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
One approach to analyzing neurobiological systems is to use simpler preparations 
that are amenable to techniques which can investigate the cellular, synaptic, and 
network levels of organization involved in the generation of behavior. This ap- 
proach has yielded significant progress in the analysis of rhythm pattern generators 
in several invertebrate preparations (e.g., the stomatogastric ganglion of lobster, 
Selverston et al., 1983). We have been carrying out similar types of studies of lo- 
comotot rhythm generation in a vertebrate preparation, the lamprey spinal cord, 
which offers many of the same technical advantages of invertebrate nervous systems. 
To aid our understanding of how identified lamprey interneurons might participate 
101 
102 Buchanan 
in rhythmogenesis and in the coupling of oscillators, we have used neural network 
models. 
2 FICTIVE SWIMMING 
The neuronal correlate of swimming can be induced in the isolated lamprey spinal 
cord by exposure to glutamate, which is considered to be the principal endogenous 
excitatory neurotransmitter. As in the intact swimming lamprey, this "fictive" 
swimming is characterized by periodic bursts of motoneuron action potentials in 
A 
LIN 
100/m [ 
cc 
midithe 
lateral edge 
EIN 
B G 
! 20 ms 
LIN-inhibitory CC IN 
M !trychnine 
6o . 1st 
2nd 
60 
last 
40 
20 
o.o o. t.o .5 2.0 2. .o .5 4.0 4.5 5.0 
Input Current (hA) 
Figure 1: Lamprey spinal interneurons. A, drawings of three types of interneurons 
after intracellular dye injections. B, inhibitory and excitatory postsynaptic poten- 
tials and the effects of selective antagonists. C, firing frequency of the first, second, 
and last spike intervals during a 400ms current injection. 
Locomotion Network 103 
the ventral roots, and these bursts alternate between sides of the spinal cord and 
propagate in a head-to-tail direction during forward swimming (Cohen and Wallen, 
1980; Wallen and Williams, 1984). Thus, the cellular mechanisms for generating 
the basic swimming pattern reside within the spinal cord as has been demonstrated 
for many other vertebrates (Grillnet, 1981). 
-0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
VR I I 
MN 
LIN 
so 
EIN   
Peak 
Depolarization 
I, I I I I I 
-0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
Peak 
Repolarization 
I I I ! I I I 
0.4 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
SWIM CYCLE 
Figure 2: Connectivity and activity patterns. Top: synaptic connectivity among 
the interneurons and motoneurons (MN). Bottom: histograms sumnarizing the 
activity of ceils recorded intracellularly during fictive swimming. Timing of activity 
of neurons with the onset of the ipsilateral ventral root burst. 
104 Buchanan 
The swimming rhythm generator is thought to consist of a chain of coupled os- 
cillators distributed throughout the length of the spinal cord. The isolated spinal 
cord can be cut into pieces as small as two or three segments in length from any 
head-to-tail level and still exhibit alternating ventral root bursting upon application 
of glutamate. The intrinsic swimming frequency in each of these pieces of spinal 
cord is different by as much as two-fold, and no consistent relationship between 
intrinsic frequency and the head-to-tail level from which the piece originated has 
been observed (Cohen, 1986). Thus, coupling among the oscillators must provide 
some "buffering capacity" to cope with these intrinsic frequency differences. An- 
other feature of the coupling is the constancy of phase lag, such that over a wide 
range of swimming cycle periods, the delay of ventral root burst onsets between 
segments is a constant fraction of the cycle period (Wallen and Williams, 1984). 
Since the cycle period in swimming lamprey can vary over a ten-fold range, axonal 
conduction time probably is not a factor in the delay between segments. 
3 SPINAL INTERNEURONS 
In recent years, many classes of spinal neurons have been characterized using a 
variety of neurobiological techniques, particularly intracellular recording of mem- 
brane potential (Rovainen, 1974; Buchanan, 1982; Buchanan et al., 1989). Several 
of these classes of neurons are active during tictire swimming. These include the 
lateral interneurons (LIN), cells with axons projecting contralaterally and caudally 
(CC), and the excitatory interneurons (EIN). The LINs are large neurons with an 
ipsilaterally and caudally projecting inhibitory axon (Fig. 1A,B). The CC interneu- 
rons are medium-sized inhibitory cells (Fig. 1A). The EINs are small interneurons 
with ipsilaterally and either candally or rostrally projecting axons (Fig. 1A,B,C). 
The axons of all these cell types project at least five segments and interact with 
neurons in multiple segments. The neurons have similar resting and firing prop- 
erties. They are indistinguishable in their resting potentials, their thresholds, and 
their action potential amplitudes, durations, and after-spike potentials. Their main 
differences are size-related parameters such as input resistance and membrane time 
constant. They fire action potentials throughout the duration of long, alepolarizing 
current pulses, showing some adaptation (a declining frequency with successive ac- 
tion potentials). The plots of spike frequency vs. input current for these various 
cell types are generally monotonic, with a tendency to saturate at higher levels of 
input current (Fig. 1C)(Buchanan, 1991). 
The synaptic connectivites of these cells have been established with simultaneous 
intracellular recording ofpre- and post-synaptic neurons, and the results are summa- 
rized in Fig. 2 along with their activity patterns during fictive swimming. All of the 
cells exhibit oscillating membrane potentials with alepolarizing peaks which tend to 
occur during the ventral root burst and with repolarizing troughs which occur about 
one-half cycle later (Buchanan and Cohen 1982). These oscillations appear to be 
due in large part to two phases of synaptic input: an excitatory alepolarizing phase 
and an inhibitory repolarizing phase (Kahn, 1982; Russell and Wallen, 1983). The 
excitatory phase of motoneurons comes from EINs and the inhibitory phase from 
CCs. However, these interneurons not only interact with motoneurons but with 
other interneurons as well. So the possibility exists that these interneurons provide 
the synaptic drive for all neurons of the network, not just motoneurons. Addition- 
Locomotion Network 105 
ally, it is possible that rhythmicity itself originates from the pattern of synaptic 
connectivity because the circuit has a basic alternating network of reciprocal inhi- 
bition between CC interneurons on opposite sides of the spinal cord. Reciprocal 
inhibition as an oscillatory network needs some form of burst-termination, and this 
could be provided by the feedforward inhibition of ipsilateral CC interneurons by 
the LINs. This inhibition could also acconnt for the early peak observed in many 
CC interneurons during ticrive swimming (Fig. 2). 
4 NEURAL NETWORK MODEL 
The ability of the network of Fig. 2 to generate the basic oscillatory pattern offictive 
swimming was tested using a "connectionist" neural network simulation (Buchanan, 
1992). All of the cells of the neural network had identical S-shaped input-output 
curves and differed only in their excitatory levels and their synaptic connectivity, 
which was set according to the scheme of Fig. 2. If the excitation of CCs was made 
larger than LINs, the network would oscillate (Fig. 3). These oscillations began 
fairly promptly and could continued for at least thousands of cycles. The phase 
relations among the units were similar to those in the lamprey: cells on opposite 
sides of the spinal cord were anti-phasic while most cells on the same side of the 
cord were co-active. Significantly, both in the model and in the lamprey, the CCs 
were phase advanced, presumably due to their inhibition by LINs. 
1. LIN  ' 
1. CC 
1. EIN 
Figure 3: Activity of the neural network model for the lamprey locomotor circuit. 
106 Buchanan 
4.1 COUPLING 
The neural network model of the lamprey swimming oscillator was further used 
to explore how the coupling among 1ocomotor oscillators might be achieved. Two 
identical oscillator networks were coupled using the various pairs of cells in one 
network connected to pairs of cells in the second network. All nine pairs of possible 
connections were tested since all of the interneurons interact with neurons in multi- 
ple segments. The coupling was evaluated by several criteria based on observations 
of lamprey swimming: 1) the stability of the phase difference between oscillators 
and the rate of achieving the steady-state, 2) the ability of the coupling to tolerate 
intrinsic frequency differences between oscillators, and 3) the constancy of the phase 
lag over a wide range of oscillator frequencies. 
A B MNa & MNb 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
-0.5 
-1.0 
-1.5 
0 50 100 150 
Time 
200 
c 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.4 
0.0 
D 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
-0.5 
-1.0 
-1.5 
5O 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 100 150 200 
Cycle Period Time 
added 
250 300 350 
Figure 4: Coupling between two identical oscillators. A, the connectivity. B, 
steady-state coupling within a single cycle. C, constancy of phase lag over a range 
of oscillator periods. D, adding LIN--,CC from oscillator a-,b, reverses the phase, 
simulating backward swimming. 
Locomotion Network 107 
Each of the nine pairs of co,pled interneurons between oscillators were capable of 
producing stable phase locking, although some coupling connections operated over 
a much wider range of synaptic weights than others. The steady-state phase dif- 
ference between the oscillators and the rate of reaching it were also dependent on 
the synaptic weight of the coupling connections. The direction of the phase differ- 
ence, that is, whether the postsynaptic oscillator was lagging or leading, depended 
both on the type of postsynaptic cell and the sign of the coupling inptt to it. If 
the postsynaptic cell was one which speeds the network (LIN or EIN) then their 
excitation by the coupling connection produced a lead of the postsynaptic network 
and their inhibition produced a lag. The opposite pattern held for CCs, which slow 
the network. 
An example of a coupling scheme that satisfied several criteria for lamprey-like cou- 
pling is shown in Fig. 4. In this case (Fig. 4A), there was bidirectional, symmetric 
coupling of EINs in the two oscillators. This gave the network the ability to toler- 
ate intrinsic frequency differences between the oscillators (buffering capacity). To 
provide a phase lag of oscillator b, EINs were connected to LINs bidirectionally but 
with greater weight in one direction (b-,a). Such coupling reached a steady-state 
within a single cycle (Fig. 4B), and the phase difference was maintained at the 
same value over a range of cycle periods (Fig. 4C). 
4.2 BACKWARD SWIMMING 
It has been shown recently that there is rhythmic presynaptic inhibition of in- 
terneuronal axons in the lamprey spinal cord (Alford et al., 1990). This type of 
cycle-by-cycle modulation of synaptic strength could account for shifts in phase 
coupling in the lamprey, such as occurs when the animal switches to brief bouts 
of backward swimming. One mechanism for backward swimming might be the in- 
hibitory connection of LIN-,CCs. The LINs have axons which descend up to 50 
segments (one-half body length). In the neural network model, this descending in- 
hibition of CC interneurons promotes backward swimming, i.e. a phase lead of the 
postsynaptic oscillators. Thus, presynaptic inhibition of these connections in non- 
local segments would allow forward swimming, while a removal of this presynaptic 
inhibition would initiate backward swimming (Fig. 4D). 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
The modeling described here demonstrates that the identified interneurons in the 
lamprey spinal cord may be multi-functional. They are known to contribute to the 
synaptic input to motoneurons during fictive swimming and thus to the shaping of 
the final motor output, but they may also function as components of the rhythm 
generating network itself. Finally, by virtue of their multi-segmental connections, 
they may have the additional role of providing the coupling signals among oscil- 
lators. Further experimental work will be required to determine which of these 
connections are actually used in the lamprey spinal cord for these functions. 
108 Buchanan 
References
S. Alford, J. Christenson, & S. Grillnet. (1990) Presynaptic GABAA and GABAn 
receptor-mediated phasic modulation in axons of spinal motor interneurons. Eur. 
J. Neurosci., 3:107-117. 
J.T. Buchanan. (1982) Identification of interneurons with contralateral, caudal 
axons in the lamprey spinal cord: synaptic interactions and morphology. J. Neuro- 
physiol., 47:961-975. 
J.T. Buchanan. (1991) Electrophysiological properties of lamprey spinal neurons. 
Soc. Neurosci. Abstr., 17:1581. 
J.T. Buchanan. (1992) Neural network simulations of coupled locomotor oscillators 
in the lamprey spinal cord. Biol. Cybern., 74: in press. 
J.T. Buchanan & A.H. Cohen. (1982) Activities of identified interneurons, mo- 
toneurons, and muscle fibers during fictive swimming in the lamprey and effects of 
reticulospinal and dorsal cell stimulation. J. Neurophysiol., 47:948-960. 
J.T. Buchanan, S. Grillnet, S. Cullheim, & M. Risling. (1989) Identification of exci- 
tatory interneurons contributing to generation of locomotion in lamprey: structure, 
pharmacology, and function. J. Neurophysiol., B2:59-69. 
A.H. Cohen. (1986) The intersegmental coordinating system of the lamprey: exper- 
imental and theoretical studies. In S. Grillnet, P.S.G. Stein, D.G. Stuart, H. Forss- 
berg, R.M. Herman (eds.), Neurobiology of Vertebrate Locomotion, 371-382. Lon- 
don: Macmillan. 
A.H. Cohen & P. Wallen. (1980) The neuronal correlate of locomotion in fish: 
"fictive swimming" induced in an in vitro preparation of the lamprey spinal cord. 
Ezp. Brain Res., 41:11-18. 
S. Grillnet. (1981) Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, and fish. In 
V.B. Brooks (ed.), Handbook of Physiology, Sect. 1. The Nervous System Vol. 
II. Motor Control, 1179-1236. Maryland: Wavefly Press. 
J.A. Kahn. (1982) Patterns of synaptic inhibtion in moroneurons and interneurons 
during ticrive swimming in the lamprey, as revealed by CI- injections. J. Comp. 
Neurol., 147:189-194. 
C.M. Rovainen. (1974) Synaptic interactions of identified nerve cells in the spinal 
cord of the sea lamprey. J. Comp. Neurol., 154:189-204. 
D.F. Russell & P. Wallen. (1983) On the control of myotomal motoneurones during 
"fictive swimming" in the lamprey spinal cord in vitro. Acta Physiol. Scand., 
117:161-170. 
A.I. Selverston, J.P. Miller, & M. Wadepuhl. (1983) Cooperative mechanisms for 
the production of rhythmic movements. Sym. Soc. Ezp. Biol., 37:55-88. 
P. Wallen & T.L. Williams. (1984) Fictive locomotion in the lamprey spinal cord 
in vitro compared with swimming in the intact and spinal animal. J. Physiol., 
64:862-871. 
