Improved Hidden Markov Model 
Speech Recognition Using 
Radial Basis Function Networks 
Elliot Singer and Richard P. Lippmann 
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT 
Lexington, MA 02173-9108, USA 
Abstract 
A high performance speaker-independent isolated-word hybrid speech rec- 
ognizer was developed which combines Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) 
and Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural networks. In recognition ex- 
periments using a speaker-independent E-set database, the hybrid rec- 
ognizer had an error rate of 11.5% compared to 15.7% for the robust 
unimodal Gaussian HMM recognizer upon which the hybrid system was 
based. These results and additional experiments demonstrate that RBF 
networks can be successfully incorporated in hybrid recognizers and sug- 
gest that they may be capable of good performance with fewer parameters 
than required by Gaussian mixture classifiers. A global parameter opti- 
mization method designed to minimize the overall word error rather than 
the frame recognition error failed to reduce the error rate. 
1 HMM/RBF HYBRID RECOGNIZER 
A hybrid isolated-word speech recognizer was developed which combines neural 
network and Hidden Markov Model (HMM) approaches. The hybrid approach is 
an attempt to capitalize on the superior static pattern classification performance of 
neural network classifiers [6] while preserving the temporal alignment properties of 
HMM Viterbi decoding. Our approach is unique when compared to other studies 
[2, 5] in that we use Radial Basis Function (RBF) rather than multilayer sigmoidal 
networks. RBF networks were chosen because their static pattern classification 
performance is comparable to that of other networks and they can be trained rapidly 
using a one-pass matrix inversion technique [8]. 
The hybrid HMM/RBF isolated-word recognizer is shown in Figure 1. For each 
159 
160 Singer and Lippmann 
WORD 
MODELS 
BEST WORD MATCH 
DECODE UNKNOWN uI'rERANCE 
WEIGHTS 
UNKNOWN 
WORD - L AT TIME t I 
BACKGROUND 
NSE MODEL 
NETWORK 
OUTPUTS 
BASIS FUNCTIONS 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the hybrid recognizer for a two word vocabulary. 
pattern presented at the input layer, the RBP network produces nodal outputs 
which are estimates of Bayesian probabilities [9]. The RBF network consists of an 
input layer, a hidden layer composed of Gaussian basis functions, and an output 
layer. Connections from the input layer to the hidden layer are fixed at unity 
while those from the hidden layer to the output layer are trained by minimizing 
the overall mean-square error between actual and desired output values. Each 
RBF output node has a corresponding state in a set of HMM word models which 
represent the words in the vocabulary. HMM word models are left-to-right with 
no skip states and have a one-state background noise model at either end. The 
background noise models are identical for all words. In the simplified diagram of 
Figure 1, the vocabulary consists of 2 E-set words and the HMMs contain 3 states 
per word model. The number of RBF output nodes (classes) is thus equal to the 
total number of HMM non-background states plus one to account for background 
noise. In recognition, Viterbi decoders use the nodal outputs of the RBF network 
as observation probabilities to produce word likelihood scores. Since the outputs of 
the RBF network can take on any value, they were initially hard limited to 0.0 and 
1.0. The transition probabilities estimated as part of HMM training are retained. 
The final response of the recognizer corresponds to that word model which produces 
the highest Viterbi likelihood. Note that the structure of the HMM/RBF hybrid 
recognizer is identical to that of a tied-mixture HMM recognizer. For a discussion 
and comparison of the two recognizers, see [10]. 
Training of the hybrid recognizer begins with the preliminary step of training an 
HMM isolated-word recognizer. The robust HMM recognizer used provides good 
recognition performance on many standard difficult isolated-word speech databases 
[7]. It uses continuous density, unimodal diagonal-covariance Gaussian classifiers 
for each word state. Variances of all states are equal to the grand variance averaged 
over all words and states. The trained HMM recognizer is used to force an alignment 
of every training token and assign a label to each frame. Labels correspond to both 
states of HMM word models and output nodes of the RBF network. 
The Gaussian centers in the RBF hidden layer are obtained by performing k-means 
Improved Hidden Markov Model Speech Recognition Using Radial Basis Function Networks 161 
clustering on speech frames and separate clustering on noise frames, where speech 
and noise frames are distinguished on the basis of the initial Viterbi alignment. The 
RBF weights from the hidden layer to the output layer are computed by presenting 
input frames to the RBF network and setting the desired network outputs to 1.0 
for the output node corresponding to the frame label and 0.0 for all other nodes. 
The RBF hidden node outputs and their correlations are accumulated across all 
training tokens and are used to estimate weights to the RBF output nodes using a 
fast one-pass algorithm [8]. Unlike the performance of the system reported in [5], 
additional training iterations using the hybrid recognizer to label frames did not 
improve performance. 
2 DATABASE 
All experiments were performed using a large, speaker-independent E-set (9 word) 
database derived from the ISOLET Spoken Letter Database [4]. The training set 
consisted of 1,080 tokens (120 tokens per word) spoken by 60 female and 60 male 
speakers for a total of 61,466 frames. The test set consisted of 540 tokens (60 
tokens per word) spoken by a different set of 30 female and 30 male speakers for 
a total of 30,406 frames. Speech was sampled at 16 kHz and had an average SNR 
of 31.5 dB. Input vectors were based on a mel-cepstrum analysis of the speech 
waveform as described in [7]. The input analysis window was 20ms wide and was 
advanced at 10ms intervals. Input vectors were created by adjoining the first 12 
non-energy cepstral coefficients, the first 13 first-difference cepstral coefficients, and 
the first 13 second-difference cepstral coefficients. Since the hybrid was based on 
an 8 state-per-word robust HMM recognizer, the RBF network contained a total of 
73 output nodes (72 speech nodes and 1 background node). The error rate of the 8 
state-per-word robust HMM recognizer on the speaker-independent E-set task was 
15.7%. 
3 MODIFICATIONS TO THE HYBRID RECOGNIZER 
The performance of the baseline HMM/RBF hybrid recognizer described in Sec- 
tion 1 is quite poor. We found it necessary to select the recognizer structure carefully 
and utilize intermediate outputs properly to achieve a higher level of performance. 
A full description of these modifications is presented in [10]. Briefly, they include 
normalizing the hidden node outputs to sum to 1.0, normalizing the RBF outputs 
by the corresponding a priori class probabilities as estimated from the initial Viterbi 
alignment, expanding the RBF network into three individually trained subnetworks 
corresponding to the ceptrum, first difference cepstrum, and second difference cep- 
strum data streams, setting a lower limit of 10 -5 on the values produced at the RBF 
output nodes, adjusting a global scaling factor applied to the variances of the RBF 
centers, and setting the number of centers to 33, 33, and 65 for the first, second, and 
third subnets, respectively. The structure of the final hybrid recognizer is shown in 
Figure 2. This recognizer has an error rate of 11.5% (binomial standard deviation 
= -t-1.4) on the E-set test data compared to 15.7% (4-1.6) for the 8 state-per-word 
unimodal Gaussian HMM recognizer, and 9.6% (4-1.3) for a considerably more com- 
plex tied-mixture HMM recognizer [10]. The final hybrid system contained a total 
of 131 Gaussians and 9,563 weights. On a SUN SPARCstation 2, training time for 
162 
Singer and Lippmann 
the final hybrid recognizer was about 1 hour and testing time was about 10 minutes. 
WORD MODELS 
BEST WORD MATCH 
DECODE UNKNOWN U i I,-RANCE 
BACKGROUND 
NOISE MODEL 
CEPSTRA ZCEPSTRA 
INPUT 
Figure 2' Block diagram of multiple subnet hybrid recognizer. 
4 GLOBAL OPTIMIZATION 
In the hybrid recognizer described above, discriminative training is performed at 
the frame level. A preliminary segmentation by the HMM recognizer assigns each 
speech frame to a specific RBF output node or, equivalently, an HMM word state. 
The RBF network weights are then computed to minimize the squared error be- 
tween the network output and the desired output over all input frames. The goal of 
the recognizer, however, is to classify words. To meet this goal, discriminant train- 
ing should be performed on word-level rather than frame-level outputs. Recently, 
several investigators have described techniques that optimize parameters based on 
word-level discriminant criteria [1, 3]. These techniques seek to maximize a mutual 
information type of criterion: 
Lc 
C = log L ' 
where Lc is the likelihood score of the word model corresponding to the correct 
result and L = Y'w Lw is the sum of the word likelihood scores for all models. By 
computing OC/00, the gradient of C with respect to parameter 0, we can optimize 
any parameter in the hybrid recognizer using the update equation 
oc 
where J is the new value of parameter 0, 0 is the previous value, and r/is a gain 
term proportional to the learning rate. Following [1], we refer to the word-level 
optimization technique as "global optimization." 
Improved Hidden Markov Model Speech Recognition Using Radial Basis Function Networks 163 
To apply global optimization to the HMM/RBF hybrid recognizer, we derived the 
formulas for the gradient of C with respect to wiij, the weight connecting RBF center 
i to RBF output node j in subnet k; p, the RBF output normalization factor for 
RBF output node j in subnet k; and m/}l, the I th element of the mean of center i of 
subnet k. For each token of length T frames, these are given by 
oc 
and 
where 
oc _ (5, i - Pw 
Op - Lw 
L = likelihood score for word model w, 
Pw = L/y] L is the normalized word likelihood, 
i if RBF output node j is a member of the correct word model 
5j = 0 otherwise, 
cut = forward partial probability of HMM state j at time t, 
flit = backward partial probability of HMM state j at time t, 
rt = unnormalized output of RBF node j of subnet k at time t, 
(I)/t = normalized output of i tn Gaussian center of subnet k at time t, 
Ei ,:I:,', = 1, 
xt = 1 tn element of the input vector for subnet k at time t, 
h k = global scaling factor for the variances of subnet k, 
o'ikl = l th component of the standard deviation of the i h Gaussian center 
of subnet k, 
Nk = number of RBF output nodes in subnet k. 
In implementing global optimization, the frame-level training procedure described 
earlier serves to initialize system parameters and hill climbing methods are used to 
reestimate parameters iteratively. Thus, weights are initialized to the values derived 
using the one-pass matrix inversion procedure, RBF output normalization factors 
are initialized to the class priors, and Gaussian means are initialized to the k-means 
clustering values. Note that while the priors sum to one, no such constraint was 
placed on the RBF output normalization factors during global optimization. 
It is worth noting that since the RBF network outputs in the hybrid recognizer 
are a posteriori probabilities normalized by a priori class probabilities, their values 
may exceed 1. The accumulation of these quantities in the Viterbi decoders often 
leads to values of cjtfijt and Lw in the range of 10 sø or greater. Numerical problems 
with the implementation of the global optimization equations were avoided by using 
log arithmetic for intermediate operations and working with the quantity 
throughout. Values of r/ which produced reasonable results were generally in the 
range of i0 -ø to i0 -e 
164 Singer and Lippmann 
The results of using the global optimization technique to estimate the RBF weights 
are shown in Figure 3. Figure 3(a) shows the recognition performance on the train- 
ing and test sets versus the number of training iterations and Figure :3(b) tracks 
the value of the criterion C = Lc/L on the training and test set under the same 
conditions. It is apparent that the method succeeds in iteratively increasing the 
value of the criterion and in significantly lowering the error rate on the training 
data. Unfortunately, this behavior does not extend to improved performance on 
the test data. This suggests that global optimization is overfitting the hybrid word 
models to the training data. Results using global optimization to estimate RBF 
output normalization factors and the Gaussian means produced similar results. 
ß /.ERROR C = log ( L c / L) 
0 5 10 15 20 
NUMBER OF ITERATIONS 
i i I 
 .  - ,. TEST 
I I I 
5 10 15 20 
NUMBER OF ITERATIONS 
Figure 3: (a) Error rates for training and test data. (b) Criterion C for training 
and test data. 
5 
ACCURACY OF BAYES PROBABILITY 
ESTIMATION 
Three methods were used to determine how well RBF outputs estimate Bayes prob- 
abilities. First, since network outputs must sum to one if they are probabilities, we 
computed the RMS error between the sum of the RBF outputs and unity for all 
frames of the test data. The average RMS error was low (10 -4 or less for each 
subnet). Second, the average output of each RBF node was computed because this 
should equal the a priori probability of the class associated with the node [9]. This 
condition was true for each subnet with an average RMS error on the order of 10 -5. 
For the final method, we partitioned the outputs into 100 equal size bins between 
0.0 and 1.0. For each input pattern, we used the output values to select the appro- 
priate bins and incremented the corresponding bin counts by one. In addition, we 
incremented the correct-class bin count for the one bin which corresponded to the 
class of the input pattern. For example, data indicated that for the 61,466 frames 
of training tokens, nodal outputs of the cepstra subnet in the range 0.095-0.105 oc- 
curred 29,698 times and were correct classifications (regardless of class) 3,067 times. 
If the outputs of the network were true Bayesian probabilities, we would expect the 
Improved Hidden Markov Model Speech Recognition Using Radial Basis Function Networks 165 
relative frequency of correct labeling to be close to 0.1. Similarly, relative frequen- 
cies measured in other intervals would also be expected to be close to the value of 
the corresponding center of the interval. Thus, a plot of the relative frequencies for 
each bin versus the bin centers should show the measured values lying close to the 
diagonal. 
The measured relative frequency data for the cepstra subnet and :t:2a bounds for 
the binomial standard deviations of the relative frequencies are shown in Figure 4. 
Outputs below 0.0 and above 1.0 are fixed at 0.0 and 1.0, respectively. Although 
the relative frequencies tend to be clustered around the diagonal, many values lie 
outside the bounds. Furthermore, goodness-of-fit measurements using the X  test 
indicate that fits fail at significance levels well below .01. We conclude that although 
the system provides good recognition accuracy, better performance may be obtained 
with improved estimation of Bayesian probabilities. 
1 
0.8 
[u 0.7 
o 0.6 
u. 0.5 
o 
[u 0.4 
u.. 0.3 
i=: 0.2 
,,, 0.1 
oo 
.-ñ 20 BOUNDS 
) 
o 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.g 1 
RBF NETWORK OUTPUT (All Nodes) 
Figure 4: Relative frequency of correct class labeling and :t:2a bounds for the bino- 
mial'standard deviation, cepstra subnet. 
6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
This paper describes a hybrid isolated-word speech recognizer which successfully 
integrates Radial Basis Function neural networks and Hidden Markov Models. The 
hybrid's performance is better than that of a tied-mixture recognizer of comparable 
complexity and near that of a tied-mixture recognizer of considerably greater com- 
plexity. The structure of the RBF networks and the processing of network outputs 
had to be carefully selected to provide this level of performance. A global opti- 
mization technique designed to maximize a word discrimination criterion did not 
succeed in improving performance further. Statistical tests indicated that the accu- 
racy of the Bayesian probability estimation performed by the RBF networks could 
166 Singer and Lippmann 
be improved. We conclude that RBF networks can be used to provide good perfor- 
mance and short training times in hybrid recognizers and that these systems may 
require fewer parameters than Gaussian-mixture-based recognizers at comparable 
performance levels. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. The 
views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or 
position of the U.S. Government. 
References 
[9] 
[10] 
[1] Yoshua Bengio, Renato De Mort, Giovanni Flammia, and Ralf Kompe. Global 
optimization of a neural network - Hidden Markov model hybrid. Technical 
Report TR-SOCS-90.22, MgGill University School of Computer Science, Mon- 
treal, Qc., Canada, December 1990. 
[2] Herve Boutlard and Nelson Morgan. A continuous speech recognition system 
embedding MLP into HMM. In D. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing 2, pages 186-193. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 
1990. 
[3] John S. Bridle. Alpha-nets: A recurrent neural network architecture with a 
hidden Markov model interpretation. Speech Communication, 9:83-92, 1990. 
[4] Ron Cole, Yeshwant Muthusamy, and Mark Fanty. The Isolet spoken letter 
database. Technical Report CSE 90-004, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science 
and Technology, Beverton, OR, March 1990. 
[5] Michael Franzini, Kai-Fu Lee, and Alex Waibel. Connectionist viterbi train- 
ing: A new hybrid method for continuous speech recognition. In Proceedings 
of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing. 
IEEE, April 1990. 
[6] Richard P. Lippmann. Pattern classification using neural networks. IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 27(11):47-54, November 1989. 
[7] Richard P. Lippmann and Ed A. Martin. Multi-style training for robust 
isolated-word speech recognition. In Proceedings International Conference on 
Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, pages 705-708. IEEE, April 1987. 
[8] Kenney Ng and Richard P. Lippmann. A comparative study of the practi- 
cal characteristics of neural network and conventional pattern classifiers. In 
R. P. Lippmann, J. Moody, and D. S. Touretzky, editors, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing 3. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1991. 
Mike D. Richard and Richard P. Lippmann. Neural network classifiers estimate 
Bayesian a postertort probabilities. Neural Computation, In Press. 
Elliot Singer and Richard P. Lippmann. A speech recognizer using radial ba- 
sis function neural networks in an HMM framework. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. IEEE, 
1992. 
