Constrained Optimization Applied to the 
Parameter Setting Problem for Analog Circuits 
David Kirk, Kurt Fleischer, Lloyd Watts Alan Bart 
Computer Graphics 350-74 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
We use constrained optimization to select operating parameters for two 
circuits: a simple 3-transistor square root circuit, and an analog VLSI 
artificial cochlea. This automated method uses computer controlled mea- 
surement and test equipment to choose chip parameters which minimize 
the difference between the actual circuit's behavior and a specified goal 
behavior. Choosing the proper circuit parameters is important to com- 
pensate for manufacturing deviations or adjust circuit performance within 
a certain range. As biologically-motivated analog VLSI circuits become 
increasingly complex, implying more parameters, setting these parameters 
by hand will become more cumbersome. Thus an automated parameter 
setting method can be of great value [Fleischer 90]. Automated parameter 
setting is an integral part of a goal-based engineering design methodology 
in which circuits are constructed with parameters enabling a wide range 
of behaviors, and are then "tuned" to the desired behaviors automatically. 
I Introduction 
Constrained optimization methods are useful for setting the parameters of analog 
circuits. We present two experiments in which an automated method successfully 
finds parameter settings which cause our circuit's behavior to closely approximate 
the desired behavior. These parameter-setting experiments are described in Sec- 
tion 3. The difficult subproblems encountered were (1) building the electronic setup 
*Dept of Electrical Engineering 116-81 
789 
790 Kirk, Fleischer, Watts, and Barr 
to acquire the data and control the circuit, and (2) specifying the computation of de- 
viation from desired behavior in a mathematical form suitable for the optimization 
tools. We describe the necessary components of the electronic setup in Section 2, 
and we discuss the selection of optimization technique toward the end of Section 3. 
Automated parameter setting can be an important component of a system to build 
accurate analog circuits. The power of this method is enhanced by including appro- 
priate parameters in the initial design of a circuit: we can build circuits with a wide 
range of behaviors and then "tune" them to the desired behavior. In Section 6, we 
describe a comprehensive design methodology which embodies this strategy. 
2 Implementation 
We have assembled a system which allows us to test these ideas. The system can 
be conceptually decomposed into four distinct parts: 
circuit: an analog VLSI chip intended to compute a particular function. 
target function: a computational model quantitatively describing the desired be- 
havior of the circuit. This model may have the same parameters as the circuit, 
or may be expressed in terms of biological data that the circuit is to mimic. 
error metric: compares the target to the actual circuit function, and computes a 
difference measure. 
constrained optimization tool: a numerical analysis tool, chosen based on the 
characteristics of the particular problem posed by this circuit. 
parameters 
Constrained Optimization Tool 
I Target Function   
difference 
measure 
The constrained optimization tool uses the error metric to compute the difference 
between the performance of the circuit and the target function. It then adjusts 
the parameters to minimize the error metric, causing the actual circuit behavior to 
approach the target function as closely as possible. 
2.1 A Generic Physical Setup for Optimization 
A typical physical setup for choosing chip parameters under computer control has 
the following elements: an analog VLSI circuit, a digital computer to control the 
optimization process, computer programmable voltage/current sources to drive the 
chip, and computer programmable measurement devices, such as electrometers and 
oscilloscopes, to measure the chip's response. 
The combination of all of these elements provides a self-contained environment for 
testing chips. The setting of parameters can then be performed at whatever level 
Constrained Optimization Applied to the Parameter Setting Problem for Analog Circuits 791 
of automation is desirable. In this way, all inputs to the chip and all measurements 
of the outputs can be controlled by the computer. 
3 The Experiments 
We perform two experiments to set parameters of analog VLSI circuits using con- 
strained optimization. The first experiment is a simple one-parameter system, a 
3-transistor "square root" circuit. The second experiment uses a more complex 
time-varying multi-parameter system, an analog VLSI electronic cochlea. The ar- 
tificial cochlea is composed of cascaded 2nd order section filters. 
3.1 Square Root Experiment 
In the first experiment we examine a "square-root" circuit [Mead 89], which actually 
computes ax ' + b, where ( is typically near 0.4. We introduce a parameter (V) into 
this circuit which varies a indirectly. By adjusting the voltage V in the square root 
circuit, as shown in Figure l(a), we can alter the shape of the response curve. 
v 
lout, 
I 
I 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
.6 
a*sq(x)+b ........ 
chip data x 
1 2 3 4 
ln (10-6) 
Figure 1: (a) Square root circuit. (b) Resulting fit. 
We have little control over the values of a and b in this circuit, so we choose an 
error metric which optimizes a, targeting a curve which has a slope of 0.5 in log-log 
Ii, vs. Io,t space. Since b << av , we can safely ignore b for the purposes of this 
parameter-setting experiment. The entire optimization process takes only a few 
minutes for this simple one-parameter system. Figure l(b) shows the final results 
of the square root computation, with the circuit output normalized by a and b. 
3.2 Analog VLSI Cochlea 
As an example of a more complex system on which to test the constrained optimiza- 
tion technique, we chose a silicon cochlea, as described by [Lyon 88]. The silicon 
cochlea is a cascade of lowpass second-order filter sections arranged such that the 
natural frequency v of the stages decreases exponentially with distance into the 
792 Kirk, Fleischer, Watts, and Barr 
cascade, while the quality factor Q of the filters is the same for each section (tap). 
The value of Q determines the peak gain at each tap. 
Vo 
Voutl Voot2 
V outN 
Figure 2: Cochlea circuit 
To specify the performance of such a cochlea, we need to specify the natural frequen- 
cies of the first and last taps, and the peak gain at each tap. These performance 
parameters are controlled by bias voltages V L Vn, and VQ, respectively. The 
parameter-setting problem for this circuit is to find the bias voltages that give the 
desired performance. This optimization task is more lengthy than the square root 
optimization. Each measurement of the frequency response takes a few minutes, 
since it is composed of many individual instrument readings. 
3.2.1 Cochlea Results 
The results of our attempts to set parameters for the analog VLSI cochlea are quite 
encouraging. 
45 
4O 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
 First tap 
Last tap ...... 
. 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Optinxization 
Figure 3: Error metric trajectories for gradient descent on cochlea 
Figure 3 shows the trajectories of the error metrics for the first and last tap of the 
cochlea. Most of the progress is made in the early steps, after which the optimization 
Constrained Optimization Applied to the Parameter Setting Problem œor Analog Circuits 793 
is proceeding along the valley of the error surface, shown in Figure 5. 
6 
4 
2 
0 
-2 
-4 
-6 
-8 
100 
lOOO 
Frequcy 
First tap goal 
First tap data -*--- 
Last tap goal ....... 
Last tap data ...6 ...... 
10000 
Figure 4: Target frequency response and gradient descent optimized data for cochlea 
Figure 4 shows both the target frequency response data and the frequency responses 
which result from our chosen parameter settings. The curves are quite similar, and 
the differences are at the scale of measurement noise and instrument resolution in 
our system. 
3.2.2 Cochlea Optimization Strategies 
We explored several optimization strategies for finding the best parameters for the 
electronic cochlea. Of these, two are of particular interest: 
special knowledge: use a priori knowledge of the effect of each knob to guide the 
optimization 
gradient descent: assume that we know nothing except the input/output relation 
of the chip. Then we can estimate the gradient for gradient descent by varying 
the inputs. Robust numerical techniques such as conjugate gradient can also 
be helpful when the energy landscape is steep. 
We found the gradient descent technique to be reliable, although it did not converge 
nearly as quickly as the "special knowledge" optimization. This corresponds with 
our intuition that any special knowledge we have about the circuit's operation will 
aid us in setting the parameters. 
4 Choosing An Appropriate Optimization Method 
One element of our system which has worked without much difficulty is the optimiza- 
tion. However, more complex circuits may require more sophisticated optimization 
methods. A wide variety of constrained optimization algorithms exist which are 
794 Kirk, Fleischer, Watts, and Bart 
2OO 
15( 
10 
5C 
0.05 
Vq bias 
0.06 
0.6 
.9 
0.8 
}.7 Vtl bias 
0.07 
Figure 5: The error surface for the error metric for the frequency response of the 
first tap of the cochlea. Note the narrow valley in the error surface. Our target (the 
minimum) lies near the far left, at the deepest part of the valley. 
effective on particular classes of problems (gradient descent, quasi-newton, simu- 
lated annealing, etc) [Platt 89, Gill 81, Press 86, Fleischer 90], and we can choose 
a method appropriate to the problem at hand. Techniques such as simulated an- 
nealing can find optimal parameter combinations for multi-parameter systems with 
complex behavior, which gives us confidence that our methods will work for more 
complex circuits. 
The choice of error metric may also need to be reconsidered for more complex 
circuits. For systems with time-varying signals, we can use an error metric which 
captures the time course of the signal. We can deal with hysteresis by beginning at 
a known state and following the same path for each optimization step. Noisy and 
non-smooth functions can be improved by averaging data and using robust numeric 
techniques which are less sensitive to noise. 
5 Conclusions 
The constrained optimization technique works well when a well-defined goal for chip 
operation can be specified. We can compare automated parameter setting with 
adjustment by hand: consider that humans often fail in the same situations where 
optimization fails (eg. multiple local minima). In contrast, for larger dimensional 
spaces, hand adjustment is very difficult, while an optimization technique may 
succeed. We expect to integrate the technique into our chip development process, 
and future developments will move the optimization and learning process gradually 
into the chip. It is interesting to note that our gradient descent method "learns" 
the parameters of the chip in a manner similar to backpropagation. Seen from this 
Constrained Optimization Applied to the Parameter Setting Problem for Analog Circuits 795 
perspective, this work is a step on the path toward robust on-chip learning. 
In order to use this technique, there are two moderately difficult problems to ad- 
dress. First, one must assemble and interface the equipment to set parameters 
and record results from the circuit under computer control (eg. voltage and cur- 
rent sources, electrometer, digital oscilloscope, etc). This is a one-time cost since a 
similar setup can be used for many different circuits. A more difficult issue is how 
to specify the target function of a circuit, and how to compute the error metric. 
For example, in the simple square-root circuit, one might be more concerned about 
behavior in a particular region, or perhaps along the entire range of operation. Care 
must be taken to ensure that the combination of the target model and the error 
metric accurately describes the desired behavior of the circuit. 
The existence of an automated parameter setting mechanism opens up a new avenue 
for producing accurate analog circuits. The goal of accurately computing a function 
differs from the approach of providing a cheap (simple) circuit which loosely approz- 
imates the function [Gilbert 68] [Mead 89]. By providing appropriate parameters 
in the design of a circuit, we can ensure that the desired function is in the domain 
of possible circuit behaviors (given expected manufacturing tolerances). Thus we 
define the domain of the circuit in anticipation of the parameter setting apparatus. 
The optimization methods will then be able to find the best solution in the domain, 
which could potentially be accurate to a high degree of precision. 
6 The Goal-based Engineering Design Technique 
The results of our optimization experiments suggest the adoption of a comprehensive 
Goal-based Engineering Design Technique that directly affects how we design and 
test chips. 
Our results change the types of circuits we will try to build. The optimization 
techniques allow us to aggresively design and build ambitious circuits and more 
frequently have them work as expected, meeting our design goals. As a corollary, 
we can confidently attack larger and more interesting problems. 
The technique is composed of the following four steps: 
1) goal-setting: identify the target function, or behavioral goals, of the design 
2) circuit design: design the circuit with "knobs" (adjustable parameters) in it, 
attempting to make sure desired (target) circuit behavior is in gamut of the 
actual circuit, given expected manufacturing variation and device characteris- 
tics. 
3) optimization plan: devise optimization strategy to explore parameter set- 
tings. This includes capabilities such as a digital computer to control the opti- 
mization, and computer-driven instruments which can apply voltages/currents 
to the chip and measure voltage/current outputs. 
4) optimization: use optimization procedure to select parameters to minimize de- 
viation of actual circuit performance from the target function the optimization 
may make use of special knowledge about the circuit, such as "I know that this 
knob has effect z," or interaction, such as "I know that this is a good region, 
so explore here." 
796 Kirk, Fleischer, Watts, and Barr 
Design Goal Circuit Design 
Optimization Plan 
Circuit 
I Optimization 
The goal-setting process produces design goals that influence both the circuit design 
and the form of the optimization plan. It is important to produce a match between 
the design of the circuit and the plan for optimizing its parameters. 
Acknowledgement s 
Many thanks to Carver Mead for ideas, encouragement, and support for this project. 
Thanks also to John Lemoncheck for help getting our physical setup together. 
Thanks to Hewlett-Packard for equipment donation. This work was supported 
in part by an AT&T Bell Laboratories Ph.D. Fellowship. Additional support was 
provided by NSF (ASC-89-20219). All opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommen- 
dations expressed in this document are those of the author and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the sponsoring agencies. 
References 
[Fleischer 90] Fleischer, K., J. Platt, and A. Barr, "An Approach to Solving the 
Parameter Setting Problem," IEEE/ACM 23rd Intl Conf on System Sci- 
ences, January 1990. 
[Gilbert 68] Gilbert, B., "A Precise Four-Quadrant Multiplier with Sub-nanosecond 
Response," IEEE Journal of Solid-Sate Circuds, SC-3:365, 1968. 
[Gill 81] Gill, P. E., W. Murray, and M. H. Wright, "Practical Optimization," 
Academic Press, 1981. 
[Lyon 88] Lyon, R. A., and C. A. Mead, "An Analog Electronic Cochlea," IEEE 
Trans. Acous. Speech, and Signal Proc., Volume 36, Number 7, July, 
1988, pp. 1119-1134. 
[Mead 89] Mead, C. A., "Analog VLSI and Neural Systems," Addison-Wesley, 1989. 
[Platt 89] Platt, J. C., "Constrained Optimization for Neural Networks and Com- 
puter Graphics," Ph.D. Thesis, California Institute of Technology, 
Caltech-CS-TR-89-07, June, 1989. 
[Press 86] Press, W., Flannery, B., Teukolsky, S., Vetterling, W., "Numerical 
Recipes: the Art of Scientific Computing," Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1986. 
