Learning Control Under Extreme 
Uncertainty 
Vijaykumar Gullapalli 
Computer Science Department 
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, MA 01003 
Abstract 
A peg-in-hole insertion task is used as an example to illustrate 
the utility of direct associative reinforcement learning methods for 
learning control under real-world conditions of uncertainty and 
noise. Task complexity due to the use of an unchainfeted hole 
and a clearance of less than 0.2ram is compounded by the presence 
of positional uncertainty of magnitude exceeding 10 to 50 times the 
clearance. Despite this extreme degree of uncertainty, our results 
indicate that direct reinforcement learning can be used to learn a 
robust reactive control strategy that results in skillful peg-in-hole 
insertions. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Many control tasks of interest today involve controlling complex nonlinear systems 
under uncertainty and noise.  Because traditional control design techniques are not 
very effective under such circumstances, methods for learning control are becoming 
increasingly popular. Unfortunately, in many of these control tasks, it is difficult 
to obtain training information in the form of prespecified instructions on how to 
perform the task. Therefore supervised learning methods are not directly applicable. 
At the same time, evaluating the performance of a controller on the task is usually 
fairly straightforward, and hence these tasks are ideally suited for the application 
of associative reinforcemerit learning (Barto & Anandan, 1985). 
IFor our purposes, noise can be regarded simply as one of the sources of uncertainty. 
327 
328 Gullapalli 
In associative reinforcement learning, the learning system's interactions with its 
environment are evaluated by a critic, and the goal of the learning system is to 
learn to respond to each input with the action that has the best expected evalua- 
tion. In learning control tasks, the learning system is the controller, its actions are 
control signals, and the critic's evaluations are based on the performance criterion 
associated with the control task. Two kinds of associative reinforcement learning 
methods, direct and indirect, can be distinguished (e.g., Gullapalli, 1992). Indi- 
rect reinforcement learning methods construct and use a model of the environment 
and the critic (modeled either separately or together), while direct reinforcement 
learning methods do not. 
We have previously argued (Gullapalli, 1992; Barto & Gullapalli, 1992) that in the 
presence of uncertainty, hand-crafting or learning an adequate model--imperative 
if one is to use indirect methods for training the controllermcan be very difficult. 
Therefore, it can be expeditious to use direct reinforcement learning methods in 
such situations. In this paper, a peg-in-hole insertion task is used as an example to 
illustrate the utility of direct associative reinforcement learning methods for learning 
control under real-world conditions of uncertainty. 
2 PEG-IN-HOLE INSERTION 
Peg-in-hole insertion has been widely used by roboticists for testing various ap- 
proaches to robot control and has also been studied as a canonical robot assembly 
operation (Whitney, 1982; Gustavson, 1984; Gordon, 1986). Although the abstract 
peg-in-hole task can be solved quite easily, real-world conditions of uncertainty due 
to (1) errors and noise in sensory feedback, (2) errors in execution of motion com- 
mands, and (3) uncertainty due to movement of the part grasped by the robot can 
substantially degrade the performance of traditional control methods. Approaches 
proposed for peg-in-hole insertion under uncertainty can be grouped into two major 
classes: methods based on off-line planning, and methods based on reactive control. 
Off-line planning methods combine geometric analysis of the peg-hole configuration 
with analysis of the task statics to determine motion strategies that will result in 
successful insertion (Whitney, 1982; Gustavson, 1984; Gordon, 1986). In the pres- 
ence of uncertainty in sensing and control, researchers have suggested incorporating 
the uncertainty into the geometric model of the task in configuration space (e.g., 
Lozano-Perez et al., 1984; Erdmann, 1986; Caine et al., 1989; Donald, 1986). Off- 
line planning is based on the assumption that a realistic characterization of the 
margins of uncertainty is available, which is a strong assumption when dealing with 
real-world systems. 
Methods based on reactive control, in comparison, try to counter the effects of 
uncertainty with on-line modification of the motion control based on sensory feed- 
back. Often, compliant motion control is used, in which the trajectory is modified 
by contact forces or tactile stimuli occurring during the motion. The compliant 
behavior either is actively generated or occurs passively due to the physical char- 
acteristics of the robot (Whitney, 1982; Asada, 1990). However, as Asada (1990) 
points out, many tasks including the peg insertion task require complex nonlin- 
ear compliance or admittance behavior that is beyond the capability of a passive 
mechanism. Unfortunately, humans find it quite difficult to prespecify appropri- 
Learning Control Under Extreme Uncertainty 329 
ate compliant behavior (Lozano-Perez et al., 1984), especially in the presence of 
uncertainty. Hence techniques for learning compliant behavior can be very useful. 
We demonstrate our approach to learning a reactive control strategy for peg-in-hole 
insertion by training a controller to perform peg-in-hole insertions using a Zebra 
Zero robot. The Zebra Zero is equipped with joint position encoders and a six- 
axis force sensor at its wrist, whose outputs are all subject to uncertainty. Before 
describing the controller and presenting its performance in peg insertion, we present 
some experimental data quantifying the uncertainty in position and force sensors. 
3 QUANTIFYING THE SENSOR UNCERTAINTY 
In order to quantify the position uncertainty under varying load conditions similar 
to those that occur when the peg is interacting with the hole, we compared the 
sensed peg position with its actual position in cartesian space under different load 
conditions. In one such experiment, the robot was commanded to maintain a fixed 
position under five different loads conditions applied sequentially: no load, and a 
fixed load of 0.12Kgf applied in the Ò: and ÒY directions. Under each condition, 
the position and force feedback from the robot sensors, as well as the actual 
position of the peg were recorded. 
The sensed and actual z-y positions of the peg are shown in Table 1. The sensed 
positions were computed from the joint positions sensed by the Zero's joint position 
encoders. As can be seen from the table, there is a large discrepancy between the 
sensed and actual positions of the peg: while the actual change in the peg's position 
under the external load was of the order of 2 to 3ram, the largest sensed change 
in position was less than 0.025min. In comparison, the clearance between the peg 
and the hole (in the 3D task) was 0.175min. From observations of the robot, we 
could determine that the uncertainty in position was primarily due to gear backlash. 
Other factors affecting the uncertainty include the posture of the robot arm, which 
affects the way the backlash is loaded, and interactions between the peg and the 
environment. 
Table 1: Sensed And Actual Positions Under 5 Different Load Conditions 
Load Condition Sensed x-y Position (ram) Actual x-y Position (mm) 
No load position 
With -/load 
With +z load 
With +y load 
With -z load 
Final (no load) position 
(0.0, 0.000000) 
(0.0,-0.014673) 
(0.0, 0.000000) 
(0.0,0.024646) 
(o.o, o.ooo26) 
(o.o, o.oooooo) 
(0.0, 0.0) 
(o.o,-2.s) 
(-2.9,-0.2) 
(0.a, =.=) 
(0.0,-0.6) 
Figure 1 shows 30 time-step samples of the force sensor output for each of the load 
conditions described above. As can be seen from the figure, there is considerable 
sensor noise, especially in recording moments. Although designing a controller that 
can robustly perform peg insertions despite the large uncertainty in sensory input 
330 Gullapalli 
is difficult, our results indicate that a controller can learn a robust peg insertion 
strategy. 
 Fx 
v 
 F 
Nok)md L(:dln-y Loedln+x I,.o1+æ Loedln-x Nolod 
Figure 1: 30 Time-step Samples Of The Sensed Forces and Moments Under 5 
Different Load Conditions. With An Ideal Sensor, The Readings Would Be Constant 
In Each 30 Time-step Interval. 
4 LEARNING PEG-IN-HOLE INSERTION 
Our approach to learning a reactive control strategy for peg insertion under un- 
certainty is based on active generation of compliant behavior using a nonlinear 
mapping from sensed positions and forces to position commands? The controller 
learns this mapping through repeated attempts at peg insertion. 
The Peg Insertion Tasks As depicted in Figure 2, both 2D and 3D versions 
of the peg insertion task were attempted. In the 2D version of the task, the peg 
used was 50ram, long and 22.225mm (7/8in) wide, while the hole was 23.8125mm 
(15/16in) wide. Thus the clearance between the peg and the hole was 0.79375turn 
(1/32in). In the 3D version, the peg used was 30rnrn long and 6ram in diameter, 
while the hole was 6.35turn in diameter. Thus the clearance in the 3D case was 
0.175turn. 
The Goatroller The controller was implemented as a connectionist network 
that operated in closed loop with the robot so that it could learn a reactive con- 
trol strategy for performing peg insertions. The network used in the 2D task had 
6 inputs, viz., the sensed positions and forces, (X, Y, ©) and (F=, F, Mz), three 
2See also (Gullapalli et al., 1992). 
Learning Control Under Extreme Uncertainty 331 
The 2D peg Insertion task 
The 3D peg Insertion task 
,,,,,,,,, Sensations are: 
Posion (X, Y, Z. % ,O 2 ) and 
Forces/ (F ,F ,F,M , ,Mz). 
Moments  æ = x My 
Controls are: 
\ ',.,t (X,Y,Z) 
Posmon commands (x y 
ﬂ z, e 1 , %) 
Figure 2: The 2D And 3D Peg-in-hole Insertion Tasks. 
outputs forming the position command (a:, y, 0), and two hidden layers of 15 units 
each. For the 3D task, the network had 11 inputs, the sensed positions and forces, 
(X, Y, Z, ©, 02) and (F=, Fy, Fz, _M=, My, 2kl), five outputs forming the position 
command (:e, y, z, 0, 02), and two hidden layers of 30 units each. 
In both networks, the hidden units used were back-propagation units, while the 
output units used were stochastic real-valued (SRV) reinforcement learning units 
(Gullapalli, 1990). SRV units use a direct reinforcement learning algorithm to find 
the best real-valued output for each input (see Gullapalli (1990) for details). The 
position inputs to the network were computed from the sensed joint positions using 
the forward kinematics equations for the Zero. The force and moment inputs were 
those sensed by the six-axis force sensor. A PD servo loop was used to servo the 
robot to the position output by the network at each time step. 
Training Methodology The controller network was trained in a s.equence of 
trials, each of which started with the peg at a random position and orientation 
with respect to the hole and ended either when the peg was successfully inserted in 
the hole, or when 100 time steps had elapsed. An insertion was termed successful 
when the peg was inserted to a depth of 25ram into the hole. At each time step 
during training, the sensed peg position and forces were input to the network, and 
the computed control output was executed by the robot, resulting in some motion 
of the peg. An evaluation of the controllet's performance, r, ranging from 0 to 1 
with I denoting the best possible evaluation, was computed based on the new peg 
position and the forces acting on the peg as 
max(O.O, 1.0 - O.0111position errorll ) 
max(O.O, 1.0 - O.0111position errorl[ - O.1Fmax) 
if all forces <_ 0.SKgf, 
otherwise, 
where Fmax denotes the largest magnitude force component. Thus, the closer the 
sensed peg position was to the desired position with the peg inserted in the hole, 
the higher the evaluation. Large sensed forces, however, reduced the evaluation. 
Using this evaluation, the network adjusted its weights appropriately and the cycle 
was repeated. 
332 Gullapalli 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
A learning curve showing the final evaluation over 500 consecutive trials on the 2D 
task is shown in Figure 3 (a). The final evaluation levels off close to 1 after about 
C 1.00 
Trlal Trlel 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3: Smoothed Final Evaluation Received And Smoothed Insertion Time (In 
Simulation Time Steps) Taken On Each Of 500 Consecutive Trials On The 2D Peg 
Insertion Task. The Smoothed Curve Was Obtained By Filtering The Raw Data 
Using A Moving-Average Window Of 25 Consecutive Values. 
150 trials because after that amount of training, the controller is consistently able 
to perform successful insertions within 100 time steps. However, performance as 
measured by insertion time continues to improve, as is indicated by the learning 
curve in Figure 3 (b), which shows the time to insertion decreasing continuously 
over the 500 trials. These curves indicate that the controller becomes progressively 
more skillful at peg insertion with training. Similar results were obtained for the 
3D task, although learning was slower in this case. The performance curves for the 
3D task are shown in Figure 4. 
6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The 
pled 
task 
The 
ance 
also 
Our 
high degree of uncertainty in the sensory feedback from the Zebra Zero, cou- 
with the fine motion control requirements of peg-in-hole insertion make the 
under consideration an example of learning control under extreme uncertainty. 
positional uncertainty, in particular, is of the order of 10 to 50 times the clear- 
between the peg and the hole and is primarily due to gear backlash. There is 
significant uncertainty in the sensed forces and moments due to sensor noise. 
results indicate that direct reinforcement learning can be used to learn a teac- 
tire control strategy that works robustly even in the presence of a high degree of 
uncertainty. 
Learning Control Under Extreme Uncertainty 333 
(a) (b) 
Figure 4: Smoothed Final Evaluation Received And Smoothed Insertion Time (In 
Simulation Time Steps) Taken On Each Of 800 Consecutive TriMs On The 3D Peg 
Insertion Task. The Smoothed Curve Was Obtained By Filtering The Raw Data 
Using A Moving-Average Window Of 25 Consecutive Values. 
Although others have studied similar tasks, in most other work on learning peg-in- 
hole insertion (e.g., Lee & Kim, 1988) it is assumed that the positional uncertainty 
is about an order of magnitude less than the clearance. Moreover, results are 
often presented using simulated peg-hole systems. Our results indicate that our 
approach works well with a physical system, despite the much higher magnitudes 
of noise and consequently greater degree of uncertainty inherent in dealing with 
physical systems. Furthermore, the success of the direct reinforcement learning 
approach to training the controller indicates that this approach can be useful for 
automatically synthesizing robot control strategies that satisfy constraints encoded 
in the performance evaluations. 
Acknowledgements 
This paper has benefited from many useful discussions with Andrew Barto and 
Roderic Grupen. I would also hke to thank Kamal Souccar for assisting with running 
the Zebra Zero. This materiM is based upon work supported by the Air Force 
Office of Scientific Research, Bolling AFB, under Grant AFOSR-89-0526 and by 
the National Science Foundation under Grant ECS-8912623. 
References 
[1] H. Asada. Teaching and learning of comphance using neural nets: Representa- 
tion and generation of nonhnear compliance. In Proceedin9s of the i0 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 1237-1244, 1990. 
334 Gullapalli 
[2] A. G. Barto and P. Anandan. Pattern recognizing stochastic learning au- 
tomata. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 15:360-375, 
1985. 
[3] A. G. Barto and V. Gullapalli. Neural Networks and Adaptive Control. In 
P. Rudomin, M. A. Arbib, and F. Cervantes-Perez, editors, Natural and Ar- 
tificial Intelligence. Research Notes in Neural Computation, Springer-Verlag: 
Washington. (in press). 
[4] M. E. Caine, T. Lozano-Prez, and W. P. Seering. Assembly strategies for 
chamferless parts. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, pages 472-477, May 1989. 
[5] B. R. Donald. Robot motion planning with uncertainty in the geometric models 
of the robot and environment: A formal framework for error detection and 
recovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation, pages 1588-1593, 1986. 
[6] M. Erdmann. Using backprojections for fine motion planning with uncertainty. 
International Journal of Robotics Research, 5( 1): 19-45, 1986. 
[7] S. J. Gordon. Automated assembly using feature localization. PhD thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT AI Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, 
1986. Technical Report 932. 
[8] V. Gullapalli. A stochastic reinforcement learning algorithm for learning real- 
valued functions. Neural Networks, 3:671-692, 1990. 
[9] V. Gullapalli. Reinforcement Learning and its application to control. PhD 
thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, 1992. 
[10] V. Gullapalli, R. A. Grupen, and A. G. Barto. Learning reactive admittance 
control. In Proceedings of the 1992 IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation, pages 1475-1480, Nice, France, 1992. 
[11] R. E. Gustavson. A theory for the three-dimensional mating of chamfered 
cylindrical parts. Journal of Mechanisms, Transmissions, and Automated De- 
sign, December 1984. 
[12] S. Lee and M. H. Kim. Learning expert systems for robot fine motion control. 
In H. E. Stephanou, A. Meystal, and J. Y. S. Luh, editors, Proceedings of the 
1988 IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control, pages 534-544, 
Arlington, Virginia, USA, 1989. IEEE Computer Society Press: Washington. 
[13] T. Lozano-Prez, M. T. Mason, and R. H. Taylor. Automatic synthesis of fine- 
motion strategies for robots. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 
3(1):3-24, Spring 1984. 
[14] D. E. Whitney. Quasi-static assembly of cornpliantly supported rigid parts. 
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, 104, March 1982. 
Also in Robot Motion: Planning and Control, (Brady, M., et at. eds.), MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1982. 
