Learning Fuzzy Rule-Based Neural 
Networks for Control 
Charles M. Higgins and Rodney M. Goodman 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 116-81 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
A three-step method for function approximation with a fuzzy sys- 
tem is proposed. First, the membership functions and an initial 
rule representation are learned; second, the rules are compressed 
as much as possible using information theory; and finally, a com- 
putational network is constructed to compute the function value. 
This system is applied to two control examples: learning the truck 
and trailer backer-upper control system, and learning a cruise con- 
trol system for a radio-controlled model car. 
1 Introduction 
Function approximation is the problem of estimating a function from a set of ex- 
amples of its independent variables and function value. If there is prior knowledge 
of the type of function being learned, a mathematical model of the function can be 
constructed and the parameters perturbed until the best match is achieved. How- 
ever, if there is no prior knowledge of the function, a model-free system such as a 
neural network or a fuzzy system may be employed to approximate an arbitrary 
nonlinear function. A neural network's inherent parallel computation is efficient 
for speed; however, the information learned is expressed only in the weights of the 
network. The advantage of fuzzy systems over neural networks is that the informa- 
tion learned is expressed in terms of linguistic rules. In this paper, we propose a 
method for learning a complete fuzzy system to approximate example data. The 
membership functions and a minimal set of rules are constructed automatically from 
the example data, and in addition the final system is expressed as a computational 
350 
Learning Fuzzy Rule-Based Neural Networks for Control 351 
E N 
-5.0 -1.0 0 1.0 5.0 
Variable Value 
Pos 
Figure 1: Membership function example 
(neural) network for efficient parallel computation of the function value, combining 
the advantages of neural networks and fuzzy systems. The proposed learning algo- 
rithm can be used to construct a fuzzy control system from examples of an existing 
control system's actions. 
Hereafter, we will refer to the function value as the output variable, and the inde- 
pendent variables of the function as the input variables. 
2 Fuzzy Systems 
In a fuzzy system, a function is expressed in terms of membership functions and 
rules. Each variable has membership functions which partition its range into over- 
lapping classes (see figure 1). Given these membership functions for each variable, 
a function may be expressed by making rules from the input space to the output 
space and smoothly varying between them. 
In order to simplify the learning of membership functions, we will specify a number 
of their properties beforehand. First, we will use piecewise linear membership func- 
tions. We will also specify that membership functions are fully overlapping; that is, 
at any given value of the variable the total membership sums to one. Given these 
two properties of the membership functions, we need only specify the positions of 
the peaks of the membership functions to completely describe them. 
We define a fuzzy rule as if y then X, where y (the condition side) is a conjunction 
in which each clause specifies an input variable and one of the membership func- 
tions associated with it, and X (the conclusion side) specifies an output variable 
membership function. 
3 Learning a Fuzzy System from Example Data 
There are three steps in our method for constructing a fuzzy system: first, learn the 
membership functions and an initial rule representation; second, simplify (compress) 
the rules as much as possible using information theory; and finally, construct a 
computational network with the rules and membership functions to calculate the 
function value given the independent variables. 
352 Higgins and Goodman 
3.1 Learning the Membership Functions 
Before learning, two parameters must be specified. First, the maximum allowable 
RMS error of the approximation from the example data; second, the maximum 
number of membership functions for each variable. The system will not exceed 
this number of membership functions, but may use fewer if the error is reduced 
sufficiently before the maximum number is reached. 
3.1.1 Learning by Successive Approximation to the Target Function 
The following procedure is performed to construct membership functions and a set 
of rules to approximate the given data set. All of the rules in this step are cell- 
based, that is, they have a condition for every input variable; there is a rule for 
every combination of input variables (cell). 
We begin with input membership functions at input extrema. The closest example 
point to each "corner" of the input space is found and a membership function for 
the output is added at its value at the corner point. The initial rule set contains 
a rule for each corner, specifying the closest output membership function to the 
actual value at that corner. 
We now find the example point with the greatest RMS error from the current model 
and add membership functions in each variable at that point. Next, we construct 
a new set of rules to approximate the function. Constructing rules simply means 
determining the output membership function to associate with each cell. While 
constructing this rule set, we also add any output membership functions which are 
needed. The best rule for a given cell is found by finding the closest example point 
to the rule (recall each rule specifies a point in the input space). If the output 
value at this point is "too far" from the closest output membership function value, 
this output value is added as a new output membership. After this addition has 
been made, if necessary, the closest output membership function to the value at the 
closest point is used as the conclusion of the rule. At this point, if the error threshold 
has been reached or all membership functions are full, we exit. Otherwise, we go 
back to find the point with the greatest error from the model and iterate again. 
3.2 Simplifying the Rules 
In order to have as simple a fuzzy system as possible, we would like to use the min- 
imum possible number of rules. The initial cell-based rule set can be "compressed" 
into a minimal set of rules; we propose the use of an information-theoretic algorithm 
for induction of rules from a discrete data set [1] for this purpose. The key to the 
use of this method is the interpretation of each of the original rules as a discrete 
example. The rule set becomes a discrete data set which is input to a rule-learning 
algorithm. This algorithm learns the best rules to describe the data set. 
There are two components of the rule-learning scheme. First, we need a way to tell 
which of two candidate rules is the best. Second, we need a way to search the space 
of all possible rules in order to find the best rules without simply checking every 
rule in the search space. 
Learning Fuzzy Rule-Based Neural Networks for Control 353 
3.2.1 Ranking Rules 
Smyth and Goodman[2] have developed an information-theoretic measure of rule 
value with respect to a given discrete data set. This measure is known as the 
j-measure; defining a rule as ify then X, the j-measure can be expressed as follows: 
j(Xly) - p(Xly)og2 ) + p(.ly)og2 p(œ) j 
[2] also suggests a modified rule measure, the J-measure: 
J(Xly) = p(y)j(Xly) 
This measure discounts rules which are not as useful in the data set in order to 
remove the effects of "noise" or randomness. The probabilities in both measures 
are computed from relative frequencies counted in the given discrete data set. 
Using the j-measure, examples wi be combined only when no error is caused in the 
prediction of the data set. The J-measure, on the other hand, will combine examples 
even if some prediction ability of the data is lost. If we simply use the j-measure 
to compress our original rule set, we don't get significant compression. However, 
we can only tolerate a certain margin of error in prediction of our original rule set 
and maintain the same control performance. In order to obtain compression, we 
wish to allow some error, but not so much as the J-measure will create. We thus 
propose the following measure, which allows a gradual variation of the amount of 
noise tolerance: 
1 - e 
L(Xly)--f(p(y),a)j(Xly ) where f(z,oO= l_e_  
The parameter a may be set at 0 + to obtain the J-measure since f(x, 0 +) -- x or 
at o<> to obtain the j-measure, since f(x, o<>) - 1 (x  0). Any value of a between 
0 and o<> will result in an amount of compression between that of the J-measure 
and the j-measure; thus if we are able to tolerate some error in the prediction of 
the original rule set, we can obtain more compression than the j-measure could give 
us, but not as much as the J-measure would require. We show an example of the 
variation of a for the truck backer-upper control system in section 4.1. 
3.2.2 Searching for the Best Rules 
In [1], we presented an efficient method for searching the space of all possible rules to 
find the most representative ones for discrete data sets. The basic idea is that each 
example is a very specific (and quite perfect) rule. However, this rule is applicable 
to only one example. We wish to generalize this very specific rule to cover as many 
examples as possible, while at the same time keeping it as correct as possible. The 
goodness-measures shown above are just the tool for doing this. If we calculate the 
"goodness" of all the rules generated by removing a single input variable from the 
very specific rule, then we will be able to tell if any of the slightly more general 
rules generated from this rule are better. If so, we take the best and continue in this 
manner until no more general rule with a higher "goodness" exists. When we have 
performed this procedure on the very specific rule generated from each example 
(and removed duplicates), we will have a set of rules which represents the data set. 
354 Higgins and Goodman 
Lateral inhibitory connecti.ons 
Input Rules Oulput 
Membership Membership 
Functions Functions 
Figure 2: Computational network constructed from fuzzy system 
3.3 Constructing a Network 
Constructing a computational network to represent a given fuzzy system can be 
accomplished as shown in figure 2. From input to output, layers represent input 
membership functions, rules, output membership functions, and finally defuzzifica- 
tion. A novel feature of our network is the lateral links shown in figure 2 between 
the outputs of various rules. These links allow inference with dependent rules. 
3.3.1 The Layers of the Network 
The first layer contains a node for every input membership function used in the rule 
set. Each of these nodes responds with a value between zero and one to a certain 
region of the input variable range, implementing a single membership function. 
The second layer contains a node for each rule - each of these nodes represents 
a fuzzy AND, implemented as a product. The third layer contains a node for 
every output membership function. Each of these nodes sums the outputs from 
each rule that concludes that output fuzzy set. The final node simply takes the 
output memberships collected in the previous layer and performs a defuzzification 
to produce the final crisp output by normalizing the weights from each output node 
and performing a convex combination with the peaks of the output membership 
functions. 
3.3.2 The Problem with Dependent Rules and a Solution 
There is a problem with the standard fuzzy inference techniques when used with 
dependent rules. Consider a rule whose conditions are all contained in a more spe- 
cific rule (i.e. one with more conditions) which contradicts its conclusion. Using 
standard fuzzy techniques, the more general rule will drive the output to an inter- 
mediate value between the two conclusions. What we really want is that a more 
general rule dependent on a more specific rule should only be allowed to fire to 
the degree that the more specific rule is not firing. Thus the degree of firing of the 
more specific rule should gate the maximum firing allowed for the more general 
rule. This is expressed in network form in the links between the rule layer and the 
output membership functions layer. The lateral arrows are inhibitory connections 
which take the value at their input, invert it (subtract it from one), and multiply 
it by the value at their output. 
Learning Fuzzy Rule-Based Neural Networks for Control 355 
Truck and Trailer 
Loading 
Dock 
Y position 
(of truck rear) 
Figure 3: The truck and trailer backer-upper problem 
4 Experimental Results 
In this section, we show the results of two experiments: first, a truck backer-upper 
in simulation; and second, a simple cruise controller for a radio-controlled model 
car constructed in our laboratory. 
4.1 Truck and Trailer Backer-Upper 
Jenkins and Yuhas [3] have developed by hand a very efficient neural network for 
solving the problem of backing up a truck and trailer to a loading dock. The truck 
and trailer backer-upper problem is parameterized in figure 3. 
The function approximator system was trained on 225 example runs of the Yuhas 
controller, with initial positions distributed symmetrically about the field in which 
the truck operates. In order to show the effect of varying the number of membership 
functions, we have fixed the maximum number of membership functions for the y 
position and cab angle at 5 and set the maximum allowable error to zero, thus 
guaranteeing that the system will fill out all of the allowed membership functions. 
We varied the maximum number of truck angle membership functions from 3 to 9. 
The effects of this are shown in figure 4. Note that the error decreases sharply and 
then holds constant, reaching its minimum at 5 membership functions. The Yuhas 
network performance is shown as a horizontal line. At its best, the fuzzy system 
performs slightly better than the system it is approximating. 
For this experiment, we set a goal of 33% rule compression. We varied the parameter 
a in the L-measure for each rule set to get the desired compression. Note in figure 4 
the performance of the system with compressed rules. The performance is in every 
case almost identical to that of the original rule sets. The number of rules and the 
amount of rule compression obtained can be seen in table 1. 
4.2 Cruise Controller 
In this section, we describe the learning of a cruise controller to keep a radio con- 
trolled model car driving at a constant speed in a circle. We designed a simple PD 
controller to perform this task, and then learned a fuzzy system to perform the same 
task. This example is not intended to suggest that a fuzzy system should replace 
a simple PD controller, since the fuzzy system may represent far more complex 
356 Higgins and Goodman 
Call,4 and 
a) Control on'or:, Final y position 
Figure 4: Results of experiments with the truck backer-upper 
Number of truck angle membership functions 
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Number of Rules 
Compression 
Cell-Based 
Compressed 
75 100 125 150 175 200 225 
48 67 86 100 114 138 154 
36% 33% 31% 33% 35% 31% 32% 
Table 1' Number of rules and compression figures for learned TBU systems 
functions, but rather to show that the fuzzy system can learn from real control data 
and operate in real-time. 
The fuzzy system was trained on 6 runs of the PD controller which included runs 
going forward and backward, and conditions in which the car's speed was perturbed 
momentarily by blocking the car or pushing it. Figure 5 shows the error trajectory 
of both the hand-crafted PD and learned fuzzy control systems from rest. The car 
builds speed until it reaches the desired set point with a well-damped response, then 
holds speed for a while. At a later time, an obstacle was placed in the path of the 
car to stop it and then removed; figure 5 shows the similar recovery responses of 
both systems. It can be seen from the numerical results in table 2 that the fuzzy 
system performs as well as the original PD controller. 
No compression was attempted because the rule sets are already very small. 
PD Controller Learned Fuzzy System 
Time from 90% error to 10% error (s) 0.9 0.7 
RMS error at steady state (uncal) 59 45 
Time to correct after obstacle (s) 6.2 6.2 
Table 2' Analysis of cruise control performance 
Learning Fuzzy Rule-Based Neural Networks for Control 357 
Time (e) Time 
ß ) PD CmU'ol Syscm 
b) Fuzzy Control System 
Figure 5: Performance of PD controller vs. learned fuzzy system 
Summary and Conclusions 
We have presented a method which, given examples of a function and its inde- 
pendent variables, can construct a computational network based on fuzzy logic to 
predict the function given the independent variables. The user must only specify 
the maximum number of membership functions for each variable and the maximum 
RMS error from the example data. 
The final fuzzy system's actions can be explicitly explained in terms of rule firings. 
If a system designer does not like some aspect of the learned system's performance, 
he can simply change the rule set and the membership functions to his liking. This 
is in direct contrast to a neural network system, in which he would have no recourse 
but another round of training. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by Pacific Bell, and in part by DARPA and ONR 
under grant no. N00014-92-J-1860. 
References 
[1] C. Higgins and R. Goodman, "Incremental Learning using Rule-Based Neural 
Networks," Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 
vol. 1,875-880, July 1991. 
[2] R. Goodman, C. Higgins, J. Miller, P. Smyth, "Rule-Based Networks for Classi- 
fication and Probability Estimation," Neural Computation 4(6), 781-804, November 
1992. 
[3] R. Jenkins and B. Yuhas, "A Simplified Neural-Network Solution through Prob- 
lem Decomposition: The Gase of the Truck Backer-Upper," Neural Computation 
4(5), 647-9, September 1992. 
PART IV 
VISUAL 
PROCESSING 
