Probability Estimation from a Database 
Using a Gibbs Energy Model 
John W. Miller 
Microsoft Research (9/1051) 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 
Rodney M. Goodman 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering (116-81) 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
We present an algorithm for creating a neural network which pro- 
duces accurate probability estimates as outputs. The network im- 
plements a Gibbs probability distribution model of the training 
database. This model is created by a new transformation relating 
the joint probabilities of attributes in the database to the weights 
(Gibbs potentials) of the distributed network model. The theory 
of this transformation is presented together with experimental re- 
sults. One advantage of this approach is the network weights are 
prescribed without iterative gradient descent. Used as a classifier 
the network tied or outperformed published results on a variety of 
databases. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
This paper addresses the problem of modeling a discrete database. The database 
is viewed as a collection of independent samples from a probability distribution. 
This distribution is called the underlying distribution. In contrast, the empirical 
distribution is the distribution obtained if you take independent random samples 
from the database (with replacement). The task of creating a probability model 
can be separated into two parts. The first part is the problem of choosing statistics 
of the samples which are expected to accurately represent the underlying distribu- 
tion. The second part is the problem of choosing a model which is consistent with 
these statistics. Under reasonable assumptions, the optimal solution to the second 
problem is the method of Maximum Entropy. For a broad class of statistics, the 
531 
532 Miller and Goodman 
Maximum Entropy solution is a Gibbs probability distribution (Slepian, 1972). In 
this paper, the background and theoretical result of a transformation from joint 
statistics to a Gibbs energy (or network weight) representation is presented. We 
then outline the experimental test results of an efficient algorithm implementing 
this transform without using gradient descent iteration. 
2 BACKGROUND 
Define a set T to be the set of attributes (or fields) in a database. For a particular 
entry (or record) of the database, define the associated set of attribute values to be 
the configuration w of the attributes. The set of attribute values associated with 
a subset b C T is called a subconfiguration wb. Using this set notation the Gibbs 
probability distribution may be defined: 
p(W) --- Z -1 ß e VT(w) 
where 
(1) 
(2) 
bCT 
The function V is called the energy. The function Jo, called the potential function, 
defines a real value for every subconfiguration of the set b. Z is the normalizing 
constant that makes the sum of probabilities of all configurations equal to unity. 
Prior work in the neural network literature using the Gibbs distribution (such as 
the Boltzmann Machine) has primarily used second order models (J -- 0 if lb] > 2) 
(Hinton, 1986). By adding new attributes not in the original database, second order 
potentials have been used to model complex distributions. The work presented in 
this paper, in contrast, uses higher order potentials to model complex probability 
distributions. We begin by considering the case where every potential of every order 
is used to model the distribution. 
The Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion from set theory states that the following two 
equations are equivalent: 
g(A) 
f(A) 
bCA 
= E(-1) It-bl g(b). (4) 
bCA 
The method of inverting an equation from the form of (3) into one in the form of 
(q) is a special case of MSbius Inversion. Clifford-Hammersley (Kindermann, 1980) 
used this relation to invert formula (2): 
J.a(w) = E(-1) It-*l ¬(w) (5) 
bCA 
Define the probability of a subconfiguration p(wb) to be the probability that the 
attributes in set b take on the values defined in the configuration w. Using (1) 
to describe the probability distribution of subconfigurations, equation (5) can be 
written: 
JA(w) = E(-1) It-*l ln(p(wb) ) (6) 
bCA 
Probability Estimation from a Database Using a Gibbs Energy Model 533 
3 A TRANSFORMATION TO GIBBS POTENTIALS 
Equation (6) provides a technique for modeling distributions by potential functions 
rather than directly through the observable joint statistics of sets of attributes. If 
the model is truncated by setting high order potentials to zero, then the energy 
model becomes an estimate of the model obtained by collecting the joint statistics, 
rather than an exact equivalent. If equation (6) is used directly, the error in the 
energy due to setting all potentials of order d to zero grows quickly with d. For 
this reason (6) must be normalized if it is going to be used in a truncated modeling 
scheme. A normalization version of equation (2) that corrects for the unequal 
number of potentials of different orders is: 
= _ (7) 
bCA 
This equation can be inverted to show the surprising result, a weight associated 
with 
JA(w) = ln(pA(W)) -- (IAI- 1) - E ln(pb(w)) (8) 
tA 
bA 
For example, with three attribute values {x, y, z}, the following potentials are de- 
fined: 
J{z) = ln(p(x)) 
J{y} = ln(p(y)) 
J{z) = ln(p(z)) 
J{zy} -- In(p(xy) 
p(x)p(y) ) 
J{yz} = In(p(yz) ) 
k,p(y)p(z) 
J{zz} = ln(p(zz) ) 
k,p(z)p(z) 
j{zyz} = ln ( p(xyz) ) 
V/P( zY )P( YZ )P( X Z ) 
For a given database sample, a potential is activated if all of its defined attribute 
values are true for the sample. The weighted sum of all activated potentials recovers 
an approximation of the probability of the database sample. If all potentials of every 
order have been used to create the model, then this approximation is exactly the 
probability of the sample in the empirical distribution. The correct weighting is 
given by equation (7). For example it is easily verified that: 
ln(p(xyz)) = J{zyz} + (J{zy} + J{zz) + J{yz}) 
-1 
+(20) (J{x} + J{y} + J{z)). 
534 Miller and Goodman 
The Gibbs model truncated to second order potentials would estimate the proba- 
bility in this example by: 
(21)-1 () 
ln(p(xyz))  (J{zy) d- J{zz) d- J{yz)) d- 
 In V/p(xy)p(yz)p(xz) 
-1 
4 PROOF OF THE INVERSION FORMULA 
Theorem: 
Let T be a finite set. Each element of T will be called an attribute. Each attribute 
can take on one of a finite set of states called attribute values. A collection of 
attribute values for every element of T is called a configuration w. For all A C_ T 
(including both the empty set A - 0 and the full set A - T), let VA(W) and JA(w) 
be functions mapping the states of the elements of A to the real numbers. Define 
= n)! . to be "m choose n." 
Let V(w) = 0, Jo(w) = 0, and let VA(W) = JA(w) if IAI = 1. 
Then for IAI > 1: 
and 
(9) 
JA('O) = VA() --  (IAI- 1) - V(w) (10) 
b(A 
I'I=IAI-- 
are equivalent in that any assignment of VA and JA values for all A C_ T will satisfy 
(9) if and only if they also satisfy (10). 
Proof: 
Let `7 be any assignment of the values JA(W) for all A _C T. Let 12 be any assignment 
of all the values VA(W) for all A C- T. Then clearly (9) maps any assignment `7 to a 
unique 12. We will represent this mapping by the function f, so (9) is abbreviated 
¾ = f(,7). Similarly (10) maps any assignment 12 to a unique ,7. Equation (10) 
will be abbreviated ,7 = g(12). The result of Lemma C1 below, applied with the 
value 7) set to n, shows that f(g(12)) = ¾. In Lemma C2 below, it is shown 
g(f(,7)) = ,7. Therefore the equations (9) and (10) are inverse one-to-one mappings 
and the association of assignments between ,7 and V are identical for the two 
equations. Q.E.D. 
Lemma C 1: 
Rather than simply showing f(g()2)) = 12, a more general result will be shown. Since 
the number of potentials of a given order increases exponentially with the order, it 
is useful to approximate the energy of a configuration by defining a maximum order 
7) such that all potentials of greater order are assumed to be zero 
Jb(w) ---- 0 V b such that Ibl > v. 
Let IT(w) be the resulting approximation to the energy VA(w). Let IAI = . 
Probability Estimation from a Database Using a Gibbs Energy Model 535 
Given 
JA() = v.(,,,) -  (n- )- 
I,1=,',-  
and the order 7) approximation to equation (7): 
then 
¬(w) (11) 
 Jb(), 
,C_A 
I'l=> 
(12) 
Note: 
For the case D - n, the approximation is exact 
½() = v(). 
and so f(g(12)) = 12 is shown. 
The lemma's result has a simple interpretation. The energy of a configuration is 
approximated by a scaled average of the energies of the configurations of order 
D. Using equation (1) to relate energies to probabilities, shows that the estimated 
probability is a scaled geometric mean of the order D marginal probabilities. 
Proof: 
We start with the given equation for 13'A(W) 
Use equation (11) to substitute Jb(w) out of the equation: 
i=1 _ 
Ibl= 14=1,1- 
Separate the term in the first sum where i - D 
Q,(w) = c_ (;-11)-lV,(w) + ,,=x (.-) -1 V(w) 
- E E (i- 1) -x V(w). 
By subtracting zt(w) from both sides using equation (12) and noting the second 
summation over i has no terms when i - i we see that it is sufficient to show 
536 Miller and Goodman 
The right hand side inner double summation counts a given %(w) once for every b 
such that c C b C_ A with i = [b[ = Icl + 1. This occurs exactly IAI- Icl-- - - i + 1 
times. Thus 
r k(:. 
i - V,(w) = - n- i + 1 Ve(w). 
- - i-1 
Ibl=, 
Now perform a change of variables. Let j = i - 1 on the right hand side 
Z E ¬(w) - Z n-1 n-j V(w). 
Ibl=* 14=5 
Clearly both sides are identical since 
Q.E.D. 
Lemma C2: g(f(J))- ,7' 
Let IAI -- n. It is sufficient to show that substituting V out of (10) using (9) yields 
an identity: 
JA(W) 
b(2A,nl 
E [b[- 1 Jb(w)-- E 
bCA 
- ibl_-_  
-1 
Separate the term in the first sum for which b = A 
jA() : J() 
+ It, l- 1 
bCA 
-1 
[bl_-n_ 1 - 
;c(). 
&(). 
Subtract JA(w) from both sides. The right hand side double sum counts a given 
Jc(w) once for every b such that c C_ b C A with Ibl- IAI- 1 - n - 1. This occurs 
IAI- Ic[ = n- Icl times. It is sufficient to show 
(n-l) - ( ) 
 lal-1 J,(w) =  "- Icl -- - 
bCA,bA cCA,cA n- 1 Icl- 1 Jc(w). 
Both sides are identical since: 
Q.E.D. 
Probability Estimation from a Database Using a Gibbs Energy Model 537 
5 
USING THE INVERSION FORMULA TO SET 
NETWORK WEIGHTS 
Our method of probability estimation is to first collect empirical frequencies of 
patterns (sub configurations) from the database. (An efficient hash table implemen- 
tation of the algorithm is described in (Miller, 1993). The basic idea is to remove 
from the database a pattern with low potential whenever there is a hash collision 
which prevents a new pattern count from being stored.) Second, interpreting these 
frequencies as probabilities, we convert each pattern frequency to a potential using 
equation (8). We assume patterns with unknown or uncalculated frequencies have 
zero potential. Low order patterns which never occur are assigned a large negative 
potential (this approximation is needed to model events with zero probability in 
the empirical distribution). Finally, we calculate the probability of any new pattern 
not in the training set using the neural network implementation of equations (7) 
and (1). 
6 RESULTS 
One way to validate the performance of a probability model is to test its performance 
as a classifier. The probability model is used as a classifier by calculating the 
probabilities of each unknown class value together with the known attribute values. 
The most probable combination is then chosen as the predicted class. Used as a 
classifier the Gibbs model tied or outperformed published results on a variety of 
databases. Table 1 outlines results on three datasets taken from the UC Irvine 
archive (Murphy, 1992). The Gibbs model results were collected from the very 
first experiment using the algorithm with the datasets. No difficult parameter 
adjustment is necessary to get the algorithm to classify at these rates. The iris 
database has 4 real value attributes. Each attribute was quantized into a decile 
ranking for use by the algorithm. 
7 CONCLUSION 
A new method of extracting a Gibbs probability model from a database has been 
presented. The approach uses the Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion to invert a set of 
collected statistics into a set of potentials for a Gibbs energy model. A hash table 
implementation is used to efficiently process database records in order to collect the 
most important potentials, or weights, which can be stored in the available memory. 
Although the model is designed to give accurate probability estimates rather than 
simply class labels, the model in practice works well as a classifier on a variety of 
databases. 
Acknowledgement s 
This work is funded in part by DARPA and ONR under grant N00014-92-J-1860. 
538 Miller and Goodman 
Database 
Table 1: Summary of Classification Results 
A C R Train Test Trials Gibbs Rate 
Compare 
House Voting 
Iris 
Iris 
Breast Cancer 
Breast Cancer 
A= 
C= 
R= 
Train = 
Test - 
Trials - 
Gibbs Rate = 
Compare - 
16 2 435 335 100 50 95.3% 95% 
4 3 150 120 30 100 96.3% n.a. 
4 3 150 149 i 1000 97.1% 98.0% 
9 2 699 599 100 100 97.3% n.a. 
9 2 369 200 169 100 95.7% 93.7% 
Attribute count in the database, excluding the class attribute 
Class count 
Record count 
Number of records used to create the energy for one trial 
Number of records tested in a single trial 
Number of independent train-test trials used to calculate the rate 
Gibbs energy model classification rate 
Baseline classification result of other methods (Schlimmer, 1987), 
(Weiss, 1992),(Zhang, 1992) respectively 
References 
D. Slepian, "On Maxentropic Discrete Stationary Processes," Bell System 
Technical Journal, 51, pp.629-653, 1972. 
G.E. Hinton and T.J. Sejnowski, "Learning and Relearning in Boltzmann 
Machines," in Parallel Distributed Processing, Vol. I., pp.282-317, Cambridge 
MA: MIT Press, 1986. 
R. Kindermann, J.L. Snell, Markov Random Fields and their Applications, 
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1980. 
J. W. Miller, "Building Probabilistic Models from Databases" California Institute 
of Technology, Ph.D. Thesis 1993. 
P. Murphy, and D. Aha, UCI Repository of Machine Learning Databases 
[Machine-readable data repository at ics.uci.edu in directory 
/pub/machine-learning-databases]. Irvine, CA: University of California, 
Department of Information and Computer Science, 1992. 
Schlimmer, J. C., "Concept Acquisition Through Representational Adjustment" 
University of California at Irvine, Ph.D. Thesis 1987. 
S. Weiss, and I. Kapouleas, "An Empirical Comparison of Pattern Recognition, 
Neural Nets, and Machine Learning Classification Methods," in Proceedings of 
the 11th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence Vol. 1, 
pp.781-787, Los Gatos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. 
J. Zhang, "Selecting Typical Instances in Instance-Based Learning," in 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Machine Learning Conference Aberdeen, 
Scotland, pp.470-479, San Mateo CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. 
