Modeling Consistency in a Speaker Independent 
Continuous Speech Recognition System 
Yochai Konig, Nelson Morgan, Chuck Wooters 
International Computer Science Institute 
1947 Center Street, Suite 600 
Berkeley, CA 94704, USA. 
Victor Abrash, Michael Cohen, Horacio Franco 
SRI International 
333 Ravenswood Ave. 
Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 
Abstract 
We would like to incorporate speaker-dependent consistencies, such as 
gender, in an otherwise speaker-independent speech recognition system. 
In this paper we discuss a Gender Dependent Neural Network (GDNN) 
which can be tuned for each gender, while sharing most of the speaker 
independent parameters. We use a classification network to help generate 
gender-dependent phonetic probabilities for a statistical (HMM) recogni- 
tion system. The gender classification net predicts the gender with high 
accuracy, 98.3% on a Resource Management test set. However, the in- 
tegration of the GDNN into our hybrid HMM-neural network recognizer 
provided an improvement in the recognition score that is not statistically 
significant on a Resource Management test set. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Earlier work [Bourlard and Morgan, 1991] has shown the ability of Multilayer Perceptrons 
(MLPs) to estimate emission probabilities for Hidden Markov Models (HMM). As shown 
in their report, with a few assumptions, an MLP may be viewed as estimating the probability 
P (q Ix) where q is a subword model (or a state of a subword model) and x is the input acoustic 
682 
Modeling Consistency in a Speaker Independent Continuous Speech Recognition System 683 
speech data. In this hybrid HMM/MLP recognizer, it was shown that these estimates 
led to improved performance over standard estimation techniques when a fairly simple 
HMM was used. More recent results have shown improvements using hybrid HMM/MLP 
probability estimation over a state-of-the-art pure HMM-based system[Cohen et al., 1993; 
Renals et al., 1992]. 
Some speaker dependencies exist in common parametric representations of speech, and it 
is possible that making the dependencies explicit may improve performance for a given 
speaker (essentially enabling the recognizer to soften the influence of the speaker depen- 
dency). The basic problem with modeling and estimating explicitly speaker dependent 
pt rameters is the lack of training data. In the limit, the only available information about a 
new speaker is the utterance to be recognized. This limit is our starting point for this study. 
Even with this limited information, we can incorporate constraints on analysis that rely on 
the same speaker producing all the frames in an utterance, thus ensuring consistency. As 
has been observed for some mainstream Hidden Markov Models (HMM) systems [Murveit 
et al., 1990], given enough training data, separate phonetic models for male and female 
speakers can be used to improve performance. Our first attack on consistency, then, is to 
incorporate gender consistency in the recognition process. In contrast to non-connectionist 
HMM systems, our proposed architecture attempts to share the gender-independent param- 
eters. 
Our study had two steps: first we trained an MLP to estimate the probability of gender. 
Then, we investigated ways to integrate the gender consistency constraint into our existing 
MLP-HMM hybrid recognizer, resulting in our GDNN architecture. We will give a short 
description of some related work, followed by an explanation of the two steps described 
above. We conclude with some discussion and thoughts about future work. 
2 RELATED AND PREVIOUS WORK 
Our previous experiments with the Gender-Dependent Neural Network (GDNN) are de- 
scribed in [Abrash et al., 1992; Konig and Morgan, 1992]. Other researchers have worked 
on related problems. For example Hampshire and Waibel presented the "Meta-Pi" archi- 
tecture [Hampshire and Waibel, 1990]. The building blocks for the "Meta-Pi" architecture 
are multiple TDNN's that are trained to recognize the speech of an individual speaker. 
These building blocks are integrated by another multiple TDNN trained in a Bayesian 
MAP scheme to maximize the phoneme recognition rate of the overall architecture. The 
performance of the "Meta-Pi" architecture on a six speaker/b,d,g/task was comparable to 
a speaker dependent system on the same task. 
Another example of related work is speaker normalization, which attempts to minimize 
between-speaker variations by transforming the data of a new speaker to that of a reference 
speaker, and then applying the speaker dependent system for the reference speaker [Huang 
et al., 1991]. 
3 THE CLASSIFICATION NET 
In order to classify the gender of a new speaker we need features that distinguish between 
speakers, in contrast to the features that are used for phoneme recognition that are chosen 
to suppress speaker variations. Given our constraint that the only available information 
684 Konig, Morgan, Wooters, Abrash, Cohen, and Franco 
about the new speaker is the sentence to be recognized, we chose features that are a 
rough estimate of the vocal tract properties and the fundamental frequency of the new 
speaker. Furthermore, we tried to suppress the linguistic information in our estimate. More 
specifically, the goal was to build a net that estimates the probability P(GenderlData ). 
After some experimentation, the first twelve LPC cepstral coefficients were calculated over 
a 20 msec window every 10 msec (50% overlap) and averaged along each sentence. The 
sampling rate was 16khz. These features were augmented by an estimate of the fundamental 
frequency for a total of 13 features per sentence. The MLP had one hidden layer with 24 
hidden units. There were two output units, one for each gender. The training set was the 
109-speaker DARPA Resource Management corpus. 3500 sentences were used for the 
training set and 490 in the cross validation set. The size of the test set was 600 sentences, 
and it was a combination of the DARPA Resource Management speaker-independent Feb89 
and Oct89 test sets. The trained MLP predicts the gender for the test set with less than 1.7% 
error on the sentence level. 
4 
INCORPORATING GENDER CONSISTENCY INTO OUR 
HYBRID HMM/MLP RECOGNIZER 
4.1 DISCUSSION 
Our goal is to find an architecture that shares the gender independent parameters and 
models the gender dependent parameters. Given our gender consistency constraint we 
estimate a probability that is explicitly conditioned on gender, as if the phonetic models 
were simply doubled to permit male and female forms of each phoneme. We can ex- 
press P(male, phone [data) (which is then divided by priors to get the corresponding data 
likelihood) by expansion to P(phone[male, data) x P(male[data). This factorization 
is realized by two separate MLP's: P(male[data) is estimated by the classification net 
described above, and P(phone[male, data) is realized by our GDNN described below. 
For further description on how to factorize probabilities by neural networks see [Morgan 
and Bourlard, 1992]. The final likelihood for the male case can be expressed as: 
P(data[phone, male)= P(phønelmale'data) x P(male[data) x P(data) 
P(phonelmale) x P(male) 
(1) 
Note that during recognition, P(data) can be ignored. Similarly, a female-assumed prob- 
ability can be computed for each hypothesized phone. These male and female-assumed 
probabilities can then be used in separate Viterbi calculations (since we do not permit any 
hypothesis to switch gender in the midst of an utterance). In other words, dynamic pro- 
gramming is used with the framewise network outputs to evaluate the best hypothesized 
utterance assuming male gender, and then the same is done for the female case. The case 
with the lowest cost (highest probability) is then chosen. Note that the output of the clas- 
siftcation net only helps in choosing between the sentence recognized according to female 
gender or male gender. 
The critical question is how to estimate P(phone[gender, data). A possible answer is to 
have two separate nets, one trained only on males, and the other trained only on females. 
This approach has the potential disadvantages of doubling the number of parameters in the 
system, and of not sharing the gender independent parameters. We have experimented with 
a such a net [Konig and Morgan, 1992] and it improved our result over the baseline system. 
Modeling Consistency in a Speaker Independent Continuous Speech Recognition System 685 
P(phonelgender, data) 
69 
units 
1000 units 
if(gender == Male) 
{M=I,F=0} 
otherwise 
{M=0,F=I} 
9 x (12 mel cepstral + log energy + 
first derivatives) = 234 
Figure 1: A Gender Dependent Neural Network(GDNN) 
We present here a hybrid GDNN architecture that has the flexibility to tune itself to each 
gender. The idea is to have extra binary inputs that specify the gender of the speaker and 
then the probabilities that the network estimates will be conditioned on the gender. The 
architecture is shown in figure 1. 
4.2 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
We have compared four different architectures. The first architecture is our baseline system, 
namely, one large net that was trained on all the sentences in the training set. The second 
uses two separate nets, for males and females. The third is the hybrid GDNN architecture 
described in figure 1. The fourth architecture is a variant of the third architecture, the 
difference being that the binary units are connected to the output units instead of to the 
hidden units. All the nets have 1000 hidden units and 69 output units, including the totally 
separate male and female nets. While one might think that the consequent doubling of 
686 Konig, Morgan, Wooters, Abrash, Cohen, and Franco 
Table 1: Result Summary 
Architecture Test Set Word Error 
Baseline 10.6% 
Two Separate Nets 10.9% 
Hybrid Architecture - Variant(Binary to Output) 10.9% 
GDNN Binary to hidden 10.2% 
the number of parameters in the system might explain the observed degradation for the 
performance for the second architecture, we have also experimented with several sizes of 
male and female separate nets, by changing the number of the hidden units and the number 
of input frames. None of these experiments resulted in a significant improvement. We used 
12 mel-cepstral features and the log-energy along with their first derivatives, so the number 
of input features per frame was 26. The features were calculated from 20ms of speech, 
computed every 10 msec (as before). The length of the temporal window (the number of 
input frames) was 9, so the total number of input features was 234. The training set was 
the 109-speaker DARPA Resource Management corpus. 3500 sentences were used for the 
training set and 490 in the cross validation set. The size of the test was the 600 sentences 
making up the DARPA Feb89 and Oct89 test sets. The results are summarized in table 1, 
and are achieved using the standard Resource Management wordpair grammar(perplexity 
= 60) with a simple context-independent HMM recognizer. We should note here that these 
results are all somewhat worse than our other results published in [Renals et al., 1992; 
Cohen et al., 1993], as the latter were achieved using SRI's phonological models, and these 
were done with a single-pronunciation single-state HMM (with each state repeated for a 
rough duration model). 
5 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The best results were achieved by the GDNN hybrid architecture that shares the gender- 
independent parameters while modeling the gender dependent parameters. 'However the 
improvement over our baseline is not statistically significant for this test set, although it is 
consistent with our experiments with other test sets, not reported here. A possible source 
for further improvement is using a training set with a more balanced representation of 
gender. In the DARPA Resource Management speaker independent training set there are 
2830 sentences uttered by males versus only 1160 sentences uttered by females. Thus, 
performance may have suffered from an insufficient number of female training sentences. 
A reasonable extension to this work would be the modeling of additional speaker dependent 
parameters such as speech rate, accent, etc. Another direction that might be more fruitful 
is to combine the gender-dependent models in the local estimation of phonemes, and not 
to do separate Viterbi recognitions for each gender. We are currently examining this latter 
alternative. 
Modeling Consistency in a Speaker Independent Continuous Speech Recognition System 687 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Steve Renals for his comments along the way. Computations were done on the 
RAP machine, with support from software guru Phil Kohn, and hardware wiz Jim Beck. 
Thanks to Hynek Hermansky for advising us about the features for the gender classification 
net. Thanks to the other members of the speech group at ICSI for their helpful comments. 
This work was partially funded by DARPA contract MDA904-90-C-5253. 
References 
[Abrash et al., 1992] V. Abrash, H. Franco, M. Cohen, N. Morgan, and Y. Konig. Con- 
nectionist gender adaptation in a hybrid neural network / hidden markov model speech 
recognition system. In Proc. Int'l Conf. on Spoken Lang. Processing, Banff, Canada, 
October 1992. 
[Bourlard and Morgan, 1991] H. Bourlard and N. Morgan. Merging multilayer percep- 
ttons & hidden markov models: Some experiments in continuous speech recognition. 
In E. Gelenbe, editor, Artificial Neural Networks: Advances and Applications. North 
Holland Press, 1991. 
[Cohen et al., 1993] M. Cohen, H. Franco, N. Morgan, D. Rumelhart, and V. Abrash. 
Context-dependent multiple distribution phonetic modeling. In C.L. Giles, Hanson S.J, 
and J.D. Cowan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 5. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 1993. 
[Hampshire and Waibel, 1990] J.B. Hampshire and A. Waibel. Connectionist architectures 
for multi-speaker phoneme recognition. In D.S. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 2, San mateo, CA, 1990. Morgan Kaufman. 
[Huang et al., 1991] X.D. Huang, K.F. Lee, and A. Waibel. Connectionist speaker nor- 
malization and its application to speech recognition. In Neural Networks for Siganl 
Processing, proc. of 1991 IEEE Workshop,, Princeton, New Jersey, October 1991. 
[Konig and Morgan, 1992] Y. Konig and N. Morgan. Gdnn: A gender -dependent neural 
network for continuous speech recognition. In Proc. international Joint Conference on 
Neural Networks, Baltimore, Maryland, June 1992. 
[Morgan and Bourlard, 1992] N. Morgan and H. Bourlard. Factoring neural networks by 
a statistical method. Neural Computation, (4):835-838, 1992. 
[Murveit et al., 1990] H. Murveit, M. Weintraub, and M. Cohen. Training set issues in sri's 
decipher speech recognition system. In Proc. speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
pages 337-340, June 1990. 
[Renals et al., 1992] S. Renals, N. Morgan, M. Cohen, H. Franco, and H. Bourlard. Con- 
nectionist probability estimation in the decipher speech recognition system. In Pro- 
ceedings IEEE Intl. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, San Francisco, 
California, March 1992. IEEE. 
