Harmonic Grammars 
for Formal Languages 
Paul Smolensky 
Department of Computer Science 
Institute of Cognitive Science 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0430 
Abstract 
Basic connectionist principles imply that gramxnars should take the 
form of systems of parallel soft constraints defining an optimization 
problem the solutions to which are the well-formed structures in 
the language. Such Harmonic Grammars have been successfully 
applied to a number of problems in the theory of natural languages. 
IIere it is shown that formal languages too can be specified by 
Harmonic Grammars, rather than by conventional serial re-write 
rule systems. 
I HARMONIC GRAMMARS 
In collaboration with Gdraldine Legendre, Yoshiro Miyata, and Alan Prince, I have 
been studying how symbolic computation in human cognition can arise naturally 
as a higher-level virtual machine realized in appropriately designed lower-level con- 
nectionist networks. The basic computational principles of the approach are these: 
(1) 
a. When analyzed at the lower level, mental representations are dis- 
tributed patterns of connectionist activity; when analyzed at a higher 
level, these same representations constitute symbolic structures. The 
particular symbolic structure s is characterized as a set of filler/role 
bindings {i/ri), using a collection of structural roles {ri} each of 
which may be occupied by a filler :fi--a constituent symbolic struc- 
847 
848 Smolensky 
Co 
ture. The corresponding lower-level description is an activity vector 
s = ifi©ri' These tensor product representations can be defined 
recursively: fillers which are themselves complex structures are rep- 
resented by vectors which in turn are recursively defined as tensor 
product representations. (Smolensky, 1987; Smolensky, 1990). 
When analyzed at the lower level, mental processes are massively par- 
allel numerical activation spreading; when analyzed at a higher level, 
these same processes constitute a form of symbol manipulation in which 
entire structures, possibly involving recursive embedding, are manipu- 
lated in parallel. (Dolan and Smolensky, 1989; Legendre et al., 1991a; 
Smolensky, 1990). 
When the lower-level description of the activation spreading processes 
satisfies certain mathematical properties, this process can be analyzed 
on a higher level as the construction of that symbolic structure includ- 
ing the given input structure which maximizes Harmony (equivalently, 
minimizes 'energy'. The IIarmony can be computed either at the lower 
level as a particular mathematical function of the numbers conaprising 
the activation pattern, or at the higher level as a function of the sym- 
bolic constituents comprising the structure. In the simplest cases, the 
core of the tIarmony function can be written at the lower, connec- 
tionist level simply as the quadratic form H = aTWa, where a is the 
network's activation vector and W its connection weight matrix. At 
the higher level, H = c,c Hc; c; each Hc; c is the Harmony of hav- 
ing the two symbolic constituents c and c2 in the same structure (the 
ci are constituents in particular structural roles, and may be the same). 
(Cohen and Grossberg, 1983; Golden, 1986; GoldenD 1988; Hinton and 
Sejnowski, 1983; Hinton and Sejnowski, 1986; Hopfield, 1982; Hop- 
field, 1984; IIopfield, 1987; Legendre et al., 1990a; Smolensky, 1983; 
Smolensky, 1986). 
Once Itarmony (connectionist well-formedness) is identified with grammaticality 
(linguistic well-formedness), the following results (lc) (Legendre et al., 1990a): 
(2) 
a. The explicit form of the Harmony function can be computed to be a 
sum of terms each of which measures the well-formedness arising from 
the coexistence, within a single structure, of a pair of constituents in 
their particular structural roles. 
b. A (descriptive) grammar can thus be identified as a set of soft rules 
each of the form: 
If a linguistic structure $ simultaneously contains constituent c 
in structural role r and constituent c2 in structural role r2, then 
add to H($), the Harmony value of $, the quantity 
(which may be positive or negative). 
A set of such soft rules (or "constraints," or "preferences") defines a 
Harmonic Grammar. 
c. The constituents in the soft rules include both those that are given 
in the input and the "hidden" constituents that are assigned to the 
input by the grammar. The problem for the parser (computational 
Harmonic Grammars for Formal Languages 849 
grainmar) is to construct that structure $, containing both input and 
"hidden" constituents, with the highest overall Harmony H(S). 
Harmonic Grainmar (IIG) is a formal developlnent of conceptual ideas linking Iiar- 
mony to linguistics which were first proposed in Lakoff's cognitive phonology (Lakoff, 
1988; Lakoff, 1989) and Goldsmith's harmonic phonology (Goldsmith, 1990; Gold- 
smith, in press). For an application of HG to natural language syntax/semantics, 
see (Legendre et al., 1990a; Legendre et al., 1990b; Legendre et al., 1991b; Legendre 
et al., in press). IIarmonic Grammar has more recently evolved into a non-numerical 
formalism called Optimality Theory which has been successfully applied to a range 
of problems in phonology (Prince and Smolensky, 1991; Prince and Smolensky, in 
preparation). For a comprehensive discussion of the overall research program see 
(Smolensky et al., 1992). 
2 HGs FOR FORMAL LANGUAGES 
One means for assessing the expressive power of Harxnonic Grammar is to apply 
it to the specification of formal languages. Can, e.g., any Context-Free Language 
(CFL) L be specified by an ItG? Can a set of soft rules of the form (2b) be given 
so that a string s  L iff the maximum-Harmony tree with s as terminals has, say, 
H >_ 07 A crucial limitation of these soft rules is that each may only refer to a 
pair of constituents: in this sense, they are only second order. (It simplifies the 
exposition to describe as "pairs" those in which both constituents are the same; 
these actually correspond to first order soft rules, which also exist in tIG.) 
For a CFL, a tree is well-formed iff all of its local trees arewhere a local tree is 
just some node and all its children. Thus the HG rules need only refer to pairs of 
nodes which fall in a single local tree, i.e., parent-child pairs and/or sibling pairs. 
The H value of the entire tree is just the sum of all the numbers for each such pair 
of nodes given by the soft rules defining the IIG. 
It is clear that for a general context-free grammar (CFG), pairwise evalu- 
ation doesn't suffice. Consider, e.g., the following CFG fragment, Go ' 
A-.B C, A--D E, F--B E, and the ill-formed local tree (A ; (B E)) (here, 
A is the parent, B and E the two children). Pairwise well-formedness checks fail 
to detect the ill-formedness, since the first rule says B can be a left child of A, 
the second that E can be a right child of A, and the third that B can be a left 
sibling of E. The ill-formedness can be detected only by examining all three nodes 
simultaneously, and seeing that this triple is not licensed by any single rule. 
One possible approach would be to extend HG to rules higher than second order, 
involving more than two constituents; this corresponds to H functions of degree 
higher than 2. Such H functions go beyond standard connectionist networks with 
pairwise connectivity, requiring networks defined over hypergraphs rather than or- 
dinary graphs. There is a natural alternative, however, that requires no change at 
all in ItG, but instead adopts a special kind of grammar for the CFL. The basic 
trick is a modification of an idea taken from Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar 
(Gazdar et al., 1985), a theory that adapts CFGs to the study of natural languages. 
It is useful to introduce a new normal form for CFGs, Harmonic Normal Form 
850 Smolensky 
(HNF). In HNF, all rules of are three types: A[i]---B C, A-.a, and A---A[i]; and 
there is the further requirement that there can be only one branching rule with a 
given left hand side--the unique branching condition. Here we use lowercase letters 
to denote ternfinal symbols, and have two sorts of non-terminals: general symbols 
like A and subcategorized symbols like A[1],A[2], ...,A[i]. To see that every CFL L 
does indeed have an HNF grammar, it suffices to first take a CFG for L in Chomsky 
Normal Form, and, for each (necessarily binary) branching rule AB C, (i) replace 
the symbol A on the left hand side with A[i], using a different value of i for each 
branching rule with a given left hand side, and (ii) add the rule A--.A[i]. 
Subcategorizing the general category A, which may have several legal branching 
expansions, into the specialized subcategories A[i], each of which has only one legal 
branching expansion, makes it possible to determine the well-formedness of an entire 
tree simply by examining each parent/child pair separately: an entire tree is well- 
formed iff every parent/child pair is. The unique branching condition enables us 
to evaluate the Harmony of a tree simply by adding up a collection of numbers 
(specified by the soft rules of an IIG), one for each node and one for each link of 
the tree. Now, any CFL L can be specified by a Harmonic Grammar. First, find an 
HNF grammar GH:W' for L; from it, generate a set of soft rules defining a Harmonic 
Grammar G via the correspondences: 
GHNF GH 
A[i] 
start symbol $ 
A---e (ct = a or A[i]) 
A[il--B C' 
Ra: If a is at any node, add -1 to H 
RA: If A is at any node, add -2 to H 
Ratq: If A[i] is at any node, add -3 to H 
R,.oot: If S is at the root, add +1 to H 
If a is a left child of A, add +2 to H 
If B is a left child of A[i], add +2 to H 
If C' is a right child of A[i], add +2 to H 
The soft rules Ra, RA, RA[i] and R,.oot are first-order and evaluate tree nodes; the 
remaining second-order soft rules are legal domination rules evaluating tree links. 
This IIG assigns H = 0 to any legal parse tree (with S at the root), and H < 0 for 
any other tree; thus s  L iff the maximal-Itarmony completion of s to a tree has 
H>0. 
Proof. h. Ve evaluate the Harmony of any tree by conceptually break- 
ing up its nodes and links into pieces each of which contributes 
either +1 or -1 to H. In legal trees, there will be complete cancel- 
lation of the positive and negative contributions; illegal trees will 
have uncancelled -Is leading to a total H < 0. 
The decomposition of nodes and links proceeds as follows. Replace 
each (undirected) link in the tree with a pair of directed links, one 
pointing up to the parent, the other down to the child. If the link 
joins a legal parent/child pair, the corresponding legal domination 
rule will contribute +2 to H; break this +2 into two contributions 
of + 1, one for each of the directed links. We similarly break up the 
non-terminal nodes into sub-nodes. A non-terminal node labelled 
Harmonic Grammars for Formal Languages 851 
A[i] has two children in legal trees, and we break such a node into 
three sub-nodes, one corresponding to each downward link to a 
child and one corresponding to the upward link to the parent of 
A[i]. According to soft rule tA[i] , the contribution of this node 
A[i] to H is -3; tiffs is distributed as three contributions of-1, 
one for each sub-node. Similarly, a non-terminal node labelled A 
has only one child in a legal tree, so we break it into two sub-nodes, 
one for the downward link to the only child, one for tle upward 
link to the parelit of A. The contribution of -2 dictated by soft 
rule tgA is similarly decmnposed into two contributions of -1, one 
for each sub-node. There is no need to break up terminal nodes, 
which in legal trees have only one outgoing link, upward to the 
parent; the contribution froin Ra is already just -1. 
We can evaluate the Harmony of any tree by examining each node, 
now decomposed into a set of sub-nodes, and determining the con- 
tribution to H made by the node and its outgoing directed links. 
We will not double-count link contributions this way; half the con- 
tribution of each original undirected link is counted at each of the 
nodes it connects. 
Consider first a non-terminal node n labelled by A[i]; if it has a 
legal parent, it will have an upward link to the parent that con- 
tributes + 1, which cancels the -1 contributed by n's corresponding 
sub-node. If n has a legal left child, the downward link to it will 
contribute +1, cancelling the -1 contributed by n's corresponding 
sub-node. Similarly for the right child. Thus the total contribution 
of this node will be 0 if it has a legal parent and two legal children. 
For each missing legal child or parent, the node contributes an un- 
cancelled -1, so the contribution of this node n in the general case 
is: 
(3) H,= -(the nmnber of ntissing legal children and parents 
of node n) 
The saine result (3) holds of the non-branching non-terminals la- 
belled A; the only difference is that now the only child that could 
be ntissing is a legal left child. If A happens to be a legal start sym- 
bol in root position, then the -1 of the sub-node corresponding to 
the upward link to a parent is cancelled not by a legal parent, as 
usual, but rather by the +1 of the soft rule Rroot. The result (3) 
still holds even in this case, if we simply agree to count the root 
position itself as a legal parent for start symbols. And finally, (3) 
holds of a terminal node n labelled a; such a node can have no 
ntissing child, but might have a missing legal parent. 
Thus the total Harmony of a tree is H = n Hn, with Hn given 
by (3). That is, H is the minus the total lmmber of missing legal 
children and parents for all nodes in the tree. Thus, H = 0 if each 
node has a legal parent and all its required legal children, otherwise 
H <_ 0. Because the grammar is in Harmonic Normal Forin, a parse 
tree is legal iff every every node has a legal parent and its required 
852 Smolensky 
nuxnber of legal children, where "legal" parent/child doxninations 
are defined only pairwise, in terms of the parent and one child, 
blind to any other children that might be present or absent. Thus 
we have established the desired result, that the maximum-llarmony 
parse of a string s has H >_ 0 iff s  L. 
We can also now see how to understand the soft rules of GH, and 
how to generalize beyond Context-Free Languages. The soft rules 
say that each node makes a negative contribution equal to its va- 
lence, while each link makes a positive contribution equal to its 
valence (2); where the "valence" of a node (or link) is just the 
number of links (or nodes) it is attached to in a legal tree. The 
negative contributions of the nodes are made any time the node 
is present; these are cancelled by positive contributions from the 
links only when the link constitutes a legal domination, sanctioned 
by the grammar. 
So in order to apply the sanhe strategy to unrestricted grainmars, 
we will simply set the magnitude of the (negative) contributions of 
nodes equal to their valence, as determined by the grammar. [] 
We can illustrate the technique by showing how ItNF solves the problem with 
the simple three-rule grammar fragment Go introduced early in this section. The 
corresponding HNF grammar fragment GHNF given by the above construction is 
A[1]-+B C, A---A[1], A[2]--.D E, A-+A[2], F[1]-+B E, F-+F[1]. To avoid ex- 
traneous complications froIn adding a start node above and terminal nodes below, 
suppose that both A and F are valid start symbols and that B, C, D, E are terminal 
nodes. Then the corresponding HG GH assigns to the ill-formed tree (A; (B E)) 
the Harmony -4, since, according to GHNF, B and E are both missing a legal par- 
ent and A is missing two legal children. Introducing a now-necessary subcategorized 
version of A helps, but not enough: (A; (A[1]; (B E))) and (A; (A[2]; (B E))) 
both have H = -2 since in each, one leaf node is missing a legal parent (E and B, 
respectively), and the A[i] node is ntissing the corresponding legal child. But the 
correct parse of the string B E, (F; (FIll; (B E))), has H = 0. 
This technique can be generalized froIn context-free to unrestricted (type 0) formal 
languages, which are equivalent to Turing Machines in the languages they generate 
(e.g., (Itopcroft and Ullman, 1979)). The ith production rule in an unrestricted 
grammar, Ri : aa2...an,  flfl2'"tim. is replaced by the two rules: R : 
r[i] and r[i] introducing new non-terminal 
symbols F[i]. The corresponding soft rules in the Harmonic Grammar are then: "If 
the kth parent of F[i] is a/, add +2 to H" and "If 3/ is the kth child of F[i], add 
+2 to H"; there is also the rule Rr[i]: "If F[i] is at any node, add -hi- mi to H." 
There are also soft rules Ra, R.4, and Rroot, defined as in the context-free case. 
Acknowledgement s 
I aln grateful to Gdraldine Legendre, Yoshiro Miyata, and Alan Prince for many 
helpful discussions. The research presented here has been supported in part by 
NSF grant BS-9209265 and by the University of Colorado at Boulder Council on 
Research and Creative Work. 
Harmonic Grammars for Formal Languages 853 
References 
Cohen, M. A. and Grossberg, S. (1983). Absolute stability of global pattern for- 
mation and parallel memory storage by competitive neural networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 13:815-825. 
Dolan, C. P. and Smolensky, P. (1989). Tensor Product Production System: A 
modular architecture and representation. Connection Science, 1:53-68. 
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullurn, G., and Sag, I. (1985). Generalized Phrase Structure 
Grammar. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Golden, R. M. (1986). The "Brain-State-in-a-Box" neural model is a gradient de- 
scent algorithm. Mathematical Psychology, 30-31:73-80. 
Golden, R. M. (1988). A unified framework for connectionist systems. Biological 
Cybernetics, 59:109-120. 
Goldsmith, J. A. (1990). Autosegmental and Metrical Phonology. Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford. 
Goldsmith, J. A. (In press). Phonology as an intelligent system. In Napoli, D. J. and 
Kegl, J. A., editors, Bridges between Psychology and Linguistics: A Swarthmore 
Festschrifi for Lila Gleitman. Cainbridge University Press, Cainbridge. 
Hinton, G. E. and Sejnowski, T. J. (1983). Analyzing cooperative computation. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 
Rochester, NY. Erlbaum Associates. 
Hinton, G. E. and Sejnowski, T. J. (1986). Learning and relearning in Boltzmann 
machines. In Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., and the PDP Research 
Group, editors, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstruc- 
ture of Cognition, Volume I: Foundations, chapter 7, pages 282-317. MIT 
Press/Bradford Books, Canabridge, MA. 
Hopcroft, J. E. and Ullman, J. D. (1979). Introduction to Automata Theory, Lan- 
guages, and Computation. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collec- 
tive computational abilities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 79:2554-2558. 
tIopfield, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded response have collective computational 
properties like those of two-state neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, USA, 81:3088-3092. 
IIopfield, J. J. (1987). Learning algorithms and probability distributions in feed- 
forward and feed-back networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- 
ences, USA, 84:8429-8433. 
Lakoff, G. (1988). A suggestion for a linguistics with connectionist foundations. In 
Touretzky, D., ttinton, G. E., and Sejnowski, T. J., editors, Proceedins of the 
Connectionist Models Summer School, pages 301-314, San Mateo, CA. Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Lakoff, G. (1989). Cognitive phonology. Paper presented at the UC-Berkeley Work- 
shop on Rules and Constraints. 
854 Smolensky 
Legendre, G., Miyata, Y., and Smolensky, P. (1990a). Harmonic Grammar--A for- 
real multi-level connectionist theory of linguistic well-formedness: Theoretical 
foundations. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, pages 388-395, Cambridge, MA. Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Legendre, G., Miyata, Y., and Smolensky, P. (1990b). Harmonic Grammar--A 
formal multi-level connectionist theory of linguistic well-formedness: An ap- 
plication. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, pages 884-891, Cambridge, MA. Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Legendre, G., Miyata, Y., and Smolensky, P. (1991a). Distributed recursive struc- 
ture processing. In Touretzky, D. S. and Lippman, R., editors, Advances in Neu- 
ral Information Processing Systems 3, pages 591-597, San Mateo, CA. Morgan 
Kaufmann. Slightly expanded version in Brian Mayoh, editor, Scandinavian 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence--91, pages 47-53. IOS Press, Amsterdam. 
Legendre, G., Miyata, Y., and Smolensky, P. (1991b). Unifying syntactic and se- 
mantic approaches to unaccusativity: A connectionist approach. In Sutton, L. 
and Johnson (with Ruth Shields), C., editors, Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, pages 156-167, Berkeley, 
CA. 
Legendre, G., Miyata, Y., and Smolensky, P. (In press). Can connectionism con- 
tribute to syntax? tIarmonic Grammar, with an application. In Deaton, K., 
Noske, M., and Ziolkowski, M., editors, Proceedings of the œ6th Meeting of the 
Chicago Li7guistic Society, Chicago, IL. 
Prince, A. and Smolensky, P. (1991). Notes on connectionism and Harmony Theory 
in linguistics. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University 
of Colorado at Boulder. Technical Report CU-CS-533-91. 
Prince, A. and Smolensky, P. (In preparation). Optimality Theory: Constraint 
interaction in generative grammar. 
Smolensky, P. (1983). Schema selection and stochastic inference in modular envi- 
ronments. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
pages 378-382, Washington, DC. 
Smolensky, P. (1986). Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations 
of Harmony Theory. In Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., and the PDP 
Research Group, editors, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the 
Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 1: FouTdations, chapter 6, pages 194-281. 
MIT Press/Bradford Books, Canabridge, MA. 
Smolensky, P. (1987). On variable binding and the representation of symbolic struc- 
tures in connectionist systems. Technical report, Department of Computer 
Science, University of Colorado at Boulder. Technical Report CU-CS-355-87. 
Smolensky, P. (1990). Tensor product variable binding and the representation of 
symbolic structures ill connectionist networks. Artificial Intelligence, 46:159- 
216. 
Smolensky, P., Legendre, G., and Miyata, Y. (1992). Principles for an integrated 
connectionist/symbolic theory of higher cognition. Technical report, Depart- 
ment of Computer Science, University of Colorado at Boulder. Technical Report 
CU-CS-600-92. 
