Network Structuring And Training Using 
Rule-based Knowledge 
Volker Tresp 
Siemens AG 
Central Research 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
8000 Miinchen 83, Germany 
Jiirgen Hollatz* 
Institut fiir Informatik 
TU M/inchen 
Arcisstrate 21 
8000 Miinchen 2, Germany 
Subutai Ahmad 
Siemens AG 
Central Research 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
8000 Miinchen 83, Germany 
Abstract 
We demonstrate in this paper how certain forms of rule-based 
knowledge can be used to prestructure a neural network of nor- 
malized basis functions and give a probabilistic interpretation of 
the network architecture. We describe several ways to assure that 
rule-based knowledge is preserved during training and present a 
method for complexity reduction that tries to minimize the num- 
ber of rules and the number of conjuncts. After training the refined 
rules are extracted and analyzed. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Training a network to model a high dimensional input/output mapping with only a 
small amount of training data is only possible if the underlying map is of low com- 
plexity and the network, therefore, can be of low complexity as well. With increasing 
*Mail address: Siemens AG, Central Research, Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 8000 Mfinchen 83. 
871 
872 Tresp, Hollatz, and Ahmad 
network complexity, parameter variance increases and. the network prediction be- 
comes less reliable. This predicament can be solved if we manage to incorporate 
prior knowledge to bias the network as it was done by RSscheisen, Hofmann and 
Tresp (1992). There, prior knowledge was available,in the form of an algorithm 
which summarized the engineering knowledge accumulated over many years. Here, 
we consider the case that prior knowledge is available in the form of a set of rules 
which specify knowledge about the input/output mapping that the network has to 
learn. This is a very common occurrence in industrial and medical applications 
where rules can be either given by experts or where rules can be extracted from the 
existing solution to the problem. 
The inclusion of prior knowledge has the additional advantage that if the network 
is required to extrapolate into regions of the input space where it has not seen any 
training data, it can rely on this prior knowledge. Furthermore, in many on-line 
control applications, the network is required to make reasonable predictions right 
from the beginning. Before it has seen sufficient training data it has to rely primarily 
on prior knowledge. 
This situation is also typical for human learning. If we learn a new skill such 
as driving a car or riding a bicycle, it would be disastrous to start without prior 
knowledge about the problem. Typically, we are told some basic rules, which we 
try to follow in the beginning, but which are then refined and altered through 
experience. The better our initial knowledge about a problem, the faster we can 
achieve good performance and the less training is required (Towel, Shavlik and 
Noordewier, 1990). 
2 FROM KNOWLEDGE TO NETWORKS 
We consider a neural network y = A/'A/'(x) which makes a prediction about the state 
of y G  given the state of its input x G ". We assume that an expert provides 
information about the same mapping in terms of a set of rules. The premise of a 
rule specifies the conditions on x under which the conclusion can be applied. This 
region of the input space is formally described by a basis function hi(x). Instead 
of allowing only binary values for a basis function (1: premise is valid, 0: premise 
is not valid), we permit continuous positive values which represent the certainty or 
weight of a rule given the input. 
We assume that the conclusion of the rule can be described in form of a mathemat- 
ical expression, such as conclusioni: the output is equal to wi(x) where wi(x) is a 
function of the input (or a subset of the input) and can be a constant, a polynomial 
or even another neural network. 
Since several rules can be active for a given state of the input, we define the output 
of the network to be a weighted average of the conclusions of the active rules where 
the weighting factor is proportional to the activity of the basis function given the 
input 
y(x) = = 
b(x ) (1) 
This is a very general concept since we still have complete freedom to specify the 
form of the basis function b,(x) and the conclusion wi(x). f hi(x) and wi(x) are 
Network Structuring And Training Using Rule-based Knowledge 873 
described by neural networks themselves, there is a close relationship with the 
adaptive mixtures of local experts (Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan and Hinton, 1991). On 
the other hand, if we assume that the basis function can be approximated by a 
multivariate Gaussian 
1 (zj -- ]lij) 2 
b,(x) = exp[- % 1, (2) 
J 
and if the wi are constants, we obtain the network of normalized basis functions 
which were previously described by Moody and Darken (1989) and $pecht (1990). 
In some cases the expert might want to formulate the premise as simple logical 
expressions. As an example, the rule 
IF [((Xl '* a) AND (x4 , b)] OR (x2 , c) THEN y = d x x  
is encoded as 
I (1 -- a)  + (4 -- b) 2 i (x - c) 2 ] 
premisei ß hi(x) = exp[- tr  ] + exp[- 2 tr  
conclusioni ß wi(x) = d x x 2. 
This formulation is related to the fuzzy logic approach of Tagaki and Sugeno (1992). 
3 PRESERVING THE RULE-BASED KNOWLEDGE 
Equation 1 can be implemented as a network of normalized basis functions jffifinit 
which describes the rule-based knowledge and which can be used for prediction. 
Actual training data can be used to improve network performance. We consider 
four different ways to ensure that the expert knowledge is preserved during training. 
Forget. We use the data to adapt jfjfinit with gradient descent (we typically adapt 
all parameters in the network). The sooner we stop training, the more of the initial 
expert knowledge is preserved. 
Freeze. We freeze the parameters in the initial network and introduce a new basis 
function whenever prediction and data show a large deviation. In this way the 
network learns an additive correction to the initial network. 
Correct. Whereas normal weight decay penalizes the deviation of a parameter from 
zero, we penalize a parameter if it deviates from its initial value q?it 
1 y.(qj _initx2 
= - (3) 
where he q is  generic network prmeer. 
Internal teacher. We formulate  penMy in erms of he mpping rher hn in 
erms of he prmeers 
Ep =  (init(x) -- (x))2dx. 
This h the advantage that we do not have to specify priors on relatively unintu- 
itive network parameters. Instead, the prior directly reflects the certainty that we 
874 Tresp, Hollatz, and Ahmad 
associate with the mapping of the initialized network which can often be estimated. 
RSscheisen, Hofmann and Tresp (1992) estimated this certainty from problem spe- 
cific knowledge. We can approximate the integral in Equation 3 numerically by 
Monte-Carlo integration which leads to a training procedure where we adapt the 
network with a mixture of measured training data and training data artificially gen- 
erated by A/'A/'init(x) at randomly chosen inputs. The mixing proportion directly 
relates to the weight of the penalty, c (RSscheisen, Hofmann and Tresp, 1992). 
4 COMPLEXITY REDUCTION 
After training the rules can be extracted again from the network but we have to 
ensure that the set of rules is as concise as possible, otherwise the value of the 
extracted rules is limited. We would like to find the smallest number of rules that 
can still describe the knowledge sufficiently. Also, the network should be encouraged 
to find rules with the smallest number of conjuncts, which in this case means that 
a basis function is only dependent on a small number of input dimensions. 
We suggest the following pruning strategy for Gaussian basis functions. 
1. Prune basis functions. Evaluate the relative weight of each basis function at its 
center wi = bi(li)/j bj (li) which is a measure of its importance in the network. 
Remove the unit with the smallest wi. Figure I illustrates the pruning of basis 
functions. 
2. Prune conjuncls. Successively, set the largest crij equal to infinity, effectively 
removing input j from basis function i. 
Sequentially remove basis functions and conjuncts until the error increases above a 
threshold. Retrain after a unit or a conjunct is removed. 
5 A PROBABILISTIC INTERPRETATION 
One of the advantages of our approach is that there is a probabilistic interpretation 
of the system. In addition, if the expert formulates his or her knowledge in terms 
of probability distributions then a number of useful properties can be derived (it is 
natural here to interpret probability as a subjective degree of belief in an event.). 
We assume that the system can be in a number of states si which are unobservable. 
Formally, each of those hidden states corresponds to a rule. The prior probability 
that the system is in state si is equal to P(si). Assuming that the system is in state 
si there is a probability distribution P(x, ylsi) that we measure an input vector x 
and an output y and 
P(x, y) = P(x, yls, ) P(s,) = P(ylx, si) P(xls,) P(s,). 
i i 
(4) 
For every rule the expert specifies the probability distributions in the last sum. Let's 
consider the case that P(x, ylsi ) = P(xlsi ) P(ylsi) and that P(xlsi ) and P(ylsi) 
can be approximated by Gaussians. In this case Equation 4 describes a Gaussian 
mixture model. For every rule, the expert has to specify 
Network Structuring And Training Using Rule-based Knowledge 875 
A 
F 
20 units 5 units 
Figure 1:80 values of a noisy sinusoid (A) are presented as training data to a 
network of 20 (Cauchy) basis functions, (hi(x) = ni [1+ -'.j (xj -/aij)2/o'j]-2). (B) 
shows how this network also tries to approximate the noise in the data. (D) shows 
the basis functions hi(x) and (F) the normalized basis functions bi(x)/'.j bj(x). 
Pruning reduces the network architecture to 5 units placed at the extrema of the 
sinusoid (basis functions: E, normalized basis functions: G). The network output 
is shown in (C). 
x x 
Figure 2: Left: The two rectangles indicate centers and standard deviations of two 
Gaussians that approximate a density. Right: the figure shows the expected values 
œ(yl x) (continuous line) and œ(xly ) (dotted line). 
876 Tresp, Hollatz, and Ahmad 
P(si), the probability of the occurrence of state si (the overall weight of 
the rule), 
P(xlsi ) = Ni(x; tti, Zi), the probability that an input vector x occurs, given 
that the system is in state si, and 
P(ylsi) = Ni y (y; wi, r), the probability of output y given state si. 
The evidence for a state given an input x becomes 
P(xls)P(s) 
P(slx) = E P(xls1)P(sl) 
and the expected value of the output 
œ(ylx) = Eif Y P(ylx, si) dy P(xlsi)P(si) 
Ea 
(5) 
where, P(xlsi) = fP(x, ylsi ) dy. If we substitute bi(x) = P(xlsi)P(si ) and 
wi(x) = f y P(ylx, bi) dy we can calculate the expected value of y using the same 
architecture as described in Equation 1. 
Subsequent training data can be employed to improve the model. The likelihood of 
the data {x k, y/Z} becomes 
L: II Y]- P( xk, y}lsi) 
k i 
which can be maximized using gradient descent or EM. These adaptation rules are 
more complicated than supervised learning since according to our model the data 
generating process also makes assumptions about the distributions of the data in 
the input space. 
Equation 4 gives an approximation of the joint probability density of input and 
output. Input and output are formally equivalent (Figure 2) and, in the case of 
Gaussian mixtures, we can easily calculate the optimal output given just a subset 
of inputs (Ahmad and Tresp, 1993). 
A number of authors used clustering and Gaussian approximation on the input 
space alone and resources were distributed according to the complexity of the input 
space. In this method, resources are distributed according to the complexity of both 
input and output space. 1 
6 CLASSIFICATION 
A conclusion now specifies the correct class. Let {bi}li = 1...N}} denote the set of 
basis functions whose conclusion specifies classy. We set w = 8};, where w. }. is the 
weight from basis function bij to the kth output and 8y is the Kronecker symbol. 
The kth output of the network 
y,(x) = = 
 Note, that a probabstic interpretation is only possible if the integrM over a bis 
function is finite, i.e. MI variances are finite. 
Network Structuring And Training Using Rule-based Knowledge 877 
specifies the certainty of classy, given the input. During training, we do not adapt 
the output weights wij. Therefore, the outputs of the network are always positive 
and sum to one. 
probabilistic interpretation can be found if we assume that P(xlclass)P(class) 
']i bi(x). We obtain, 
P(xlclass )P(class ) 
P(classlx) = ']a P(xlclassOP(class) 
and recover Equation 6. If the basis functions are Gausssians, again we obtain a 
Gaussian mixture learning problem and, as a special case (one unit per class), a 
Gaussian classifier. 
7 APPLICATIONS 
We have validated our approach on a number of applications including a network 
that learned how to control a bicycle and an application in the legal sciences (Hollatz 
and Tresp, 1992). Here we present results for a well known data set, the Boston 
housing data (Breiman et al., 1981), and demonstrate pruning and rule extraction. 
The task is to predict the housing price in a Boston neighborhood as a function of 
13 potentially relevant input features. We started with 20 Gaussian basis functions 
which were adapted using gradient descent. We achieved a generalization error of 
0.074. We then pruned units and conjuncts according to the procedure described 
in Section 4. We achieved the best generalization error (0.058) using 4 units (this 
is approximately 10% better than the result reported for CART in Breiman et al., 
1981). With only two basis functions and 3 conjuncts, we still achieved reasonable 
prediction accuracy (generalization error of 0.12; simply predicting the mean results 
in a generalization error of 0.28). Table 1 describes the final network. Interestingly, 
our network was left with the input features which CART also considered the most 
relevant. 
The network was trained with normalized inputs. If we translate them back into 
real world values, we obtain the rules: 
Rulel4: IF the number of rooms (RM) is approximately 5.4 (0.62 corresponds to 
5.4 rooms which is smaller than the average of 6.3) AND the pupil/teacher value is 
approximately 20.2 (0.85 corresponds to 20.2 pupils/teacher which is higher than 
the average of 18.4) THEN the value of the home is approximately $14000 (0.528 
corresponds to $14000 which is lower than the average of $22500). 
Table 1: Network structure after pruning. 
conclusion feature j CART rating center: /i d width: ai d 
Unit#: i= 14 wi = 0.528 RM second 0.62 0.21 
ni = 0.17 P/T third 0.85 0.35 
Unit#: i = 20 wi = 1.6 LSTAT most important 0.06 0.24 
ni = 0.83 
878 Tresp, Hollatz, and Ahmad 
Rule2o: IF the percentage of lower-status population (LSTAT) is approximately 
2.5% (0.06 corresponds to 2.5% which is lower than the average of 12.65%), THEN 
the value of the home is approximately $34000 (1.6 corresponds to $34000 which is 
higher than the average of $22500). 
8 CONCLUSION 
We demonstrated how rule-based knowledge can be incorporated into the structur- 
ing and training of a neural network. Training with experimental data allows for 
rule refinement. Rule extraction provides a quantitative interpretation of what is 
"going on" in the network, although, in general, it is difficult to define the domain 
where a given rule "dominates" the network response and along which boundaries 
the rules partition the input space. 
Acknowledgement s 
We acknowledge valuable discussions with Ralph Neuneier and his support in the 
Boston housing data application. V.T. was supported in part by a grant from 
the Bundesminister fiir Forschung und Technologie and J. H. by a fellowship from 
Siemens AG. 
References 
S. Ahmad and V. Tresp. Some solutions to the missing feature problem in vision. 
This volume, 1993. 
L. Breiman et al.. Classification and regression trees. 
1981. 
Wadsworth and Brooks, 
R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan and G. E. Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of 
local experts. Neural Computation, Vol. 3, pp. 79-87, 1991. 
J. Hollatz and V. Tresp. A Rule-based network architecture. Artificial Neural 
Networks II, I. Aleksander, J. Taylor, eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1992. 
J. Moody and C. Darken. Fast learning in networks of locally-tuned processing 
units. Neural Computation, Vol. 1, pp. 281-294, 1989. 
M. RSscheisen, R. Hofmann and V. Tresp. Neural control for rolling mills: in- 
corporating domain theories to overcome data deficiency. In: Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems d, 1992. 
D. F. Specht. Probabilistic neural networks. Neural Networks, Vol. 3, pp. 109-117, 
1990. 
T. Takagi and M. Sugeno. Fuzzy identification of systems and its applications to 
modeling and control. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol. 
15, No. 1, pp. 116-132, 1985. 
G. G. Towell, J. W. Shavlik and M. O. Noordewier. Refinement of approximately 
correct domain theories by knowledge-based neural networks. In Proceedings of the 
Eights National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 861-866, MA, 1990. 
