ReviewID: --YIAZOeDSrOEq7bjNvk5A
ReviewerID: nmhEQgo-aZVnAmhEB-CjbA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Dresden Room Restaurant
Category: Lounges
Oh where to begin...My girlfriend just recently had a birthday at the Dresden for drinks and dinner in their swanky, funky dinning room.  We've been there before and had a pretty good dinning experience, just the two of us nothing to really rave about, but basic surf and turf, fish special kind of menu. Mostly we like the ambiance, and the "old school" feel in the dinning room, the kind of look like you just might see the Rat Pack walk in.  All the love we had for the place went right out the window and in to the dumpster the night we decided to have an astounding...EIGHT GUESTS join us for a birthday celebration..             From the beginning we were a bit confused when our "server," spoke very poor english, and wanted to crack beyond ridiculous jokes on pretty much everything we asked about the menu.  In addition to forgetting my girlfriend's drink a couple of times, ALL EIGHT entrees came out cold and the wrong temperatures on the lamb chops and filet!!!! Just when I thought it couldn't get any worse...it did.  .             When I went up to the fragile, small framed man of whom was the manager I got nothing but straight faced attitude. He actually had to question my complaints and not  ONCE came over to apologize or even to greet the table in the beginning! After several trips to the little, old pathetic man hovering at his lame "post," I got the bill somewhat knocked down..             We will NEVER, EVER have dinner again at that poor, pathetic excuse of a restaurant let alone have an over priced, WEAK drink in the bar if ask by a friend to meet them there. The place may look like it still has the charm of the old days, but we found out the hard way that looks are in fact DECEIVING at the Dresden Dining NIGHTMARE FROM HELLLLLLLLL!!!  . . P. S. The Dresden is lucky that there isn't a feature to shred the one PATHETIC star they aren't even worth.
