ReviewID: -14UGMKUMdCaMo2V-QoGcw
ReviewerID: ttKhjhjy8TzGtNj_iaj-8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
party: 3. table #: The SOFA in the back (pretty much like a private room!). wait time: 10-15min. server: SERGIO (cute face &amp; some killa guns). time: 10:15 am (01/05/08) on Saturday. . what we ordered:. "Peanut Bubba" Crunchy French Toast $10.95. Omelette "Pomodoro" $9.95. Apple Cobbler $10.95. "Boysenberry Rain" $9.95. . wait time for our order: 10-15min. **only cuz we couldn't figure out WTF to order from their extensive, overwhelming menu!! . . Walter, myself and our girlfriend (whom we're trying to convince to join YELP) Erica went out for brunch this morning.  The past few times, we'd gone to the Alhambra IHOP. This morning, we were feeling a little different. So, we thought we'd try some place new. I'd been talking about the Griddle Cafe a while ago, and how I wanted to go there to check it out sometime. So, we took a ride down Sunset to the Griddle!! . . We were shocked.  This place looks jam packed and kinda small. To our surprise, there is a lot of space in the back.  We got lucky and got the room with the SOFA!! Awesome, considering each of us needed naps after TRYING to devour our meals. There are before and after pix, if you look closely!! Anyway, the sofa room is so nice. The sofa has tons of over sized, plush grey toss pillows, lit with primarily natural light from the sky light above. I thought that was pretty!! The light was real nice, pleasant and not jaring. PERFECT (since last night was a crazy night at the LITTLE ROCK in Tarzana, CA). . Aside from the room we had, we had tons of food. We thought, it's breakfast, we'll do it BIG. We had no idea that doing it BIG would mean doing it HUGE!!! *(Christina forgot what she'd read in the reviews and we didn't bother to look at other people's plates as we walked in.) That's why we ordered four different things. . . My pancakes were tasty, drizzled with boysenberry juices, dusted with their magic powdered sugar, and prepared with boysenberries right in the pancakes.  There was NO need for syrup. The natural juices and sugar from the boysenberry fruit, itself, was just enough! . . Walter's peanut butter french toast was amazing. There were NUTTER BUTTER crumbles on top, not to mention icing and powdered sugar.  When we asked Sergio about them, he said that they rocked! He's the one who mentioned the nutter butter factor.  That's what sold it! Walter LOVES nutter butter. Without the icing was better, not as sweet and still crunchy! . . Erica's apple cobbler french toast was amazing too. It is made with some super tasty apple bread.  I thought that there were nuts in the bread, but I was wrong. The apple cinnamon apples, like pie filling, on the side were perfect. You can't eat to much of that pie filling with this french toast. There's no need, but also, it'd be too sweet. . . Another thing we liked about breakfast this morning is that the coffee was refillable via french press. I thought that was awesome. Well, it impressed me anyways. Yippee! . . The omelette we had was so good. I'm a fan of garlic but not usually this much garlic will be appealing to me. Today was time for a change, something new, something different. The omelette was packed full of cheese, garlic, onions, and fresh tomatoes. Typically, it comes with basil too but I am allergic. SORRY!! It was so good just like this though. If there were one person that I could think of who would love this omelette, it would have to be my MOMMY. So, Walter and I think we should take her out for breakfast sometime. Too bad it's horribly bad for DADDY. Guess we'll have to go while he's out on his own. haha. . Take a look at our pictures. LOVED IT!! . . Service was awesome and the food was HuGe!. . total cost: $47.95 (including tax, w/o tip). . ASK FOR THE SOFA in the BACK!!
