ReviewID: -1H7iXtCTvX6WxmEcWkGDQ
ReviewerID: m5DgMl5LzafxOoNkbCUA4A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I went here on memorial day with boyfriend. It was our last meal in LA right before we left. Considering the food quality, taste, and atmosphere, we  thought the prices were pretty decent. But we also thought overall food price in LA were on the cheaper side compared to san francisco.. . However, I had to take a star off for their service.. I see that someone has mentioned already, but one of the workers made me feel like she's too good to serve me too! The person who took my order was actually very friendly and helpful, but when I came back inside to ask a quick question, the worker next to her gave me attitude and made me stand there and wait 10 minutes just to ask where i'm supposed to get our drinks.(not to mention it was PACKED inside and there were about 5 other people waiting to ask a question too) I just went back to our table and went back 30 minutes later to get the drinks. I mean, I don't mind waiting if you're THAT busy, but at least you could've asked nicely?. . We were seated around 2:30, and by that time other tables were clearing off. It took us 45 minutes to get our food, but i guess that's okay since our food wasn't cold? xp. I had Grilled Portabella Mushroom Sandwich with side salad. and boyfriend had Carribean Jerk Chicken Sandwich with sweet potato fires.. They were all very tastey!. vegetables were fresh, and all the other ingredients were in good quality. It was a bit hard to eat though cuz presentation was really sloppy. Everything was falling off the bun in every different directions.. but the food was still good... Oh, and their portions are really big too.. I was debating if i should give this place 3 stars or 4,. but I guess the food and the atmosphere made up for the wait and the rude worker xp haha. I wish i could go back to try other things on their menu!. They should open one in the bay area tooo :p. It'd be a nice place to have lunch and chat with girlfriends =)
