ReviewID: -3lTetHlB2KDhpxh1dLriw
ReviewerID: amotMinCzGTQsT2I7fH_Sg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roy&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Asian Fusion
Went to Roy's last night for a intimate birthday celebration with two of my girls and it was fantastic!. . Started the evening off at the bar, because our reservations were at 8:15pm, which is later than I usually like to eat dinner on a week night.. but if there is liquor involved, it makes it easier :). . Got the lobster potstickers - very good.  Very lobstery, but not overly "seafoody" if you know what I mean.  Had the Hawaiian Martini and felt very James Bond with the stainless steel martini glass.  Also had the Hawaiian Colada, and both were very good, and very sweet.  Which is exactly what I was looking for.. . Service at the bar was great, the bartenders were super busy, but very friendly and nice.. . We were seated, and opened the menus and ta-da! They had inserted a nice little "Happy Birthday" message personalized for our birthday girl.  Which I know, I know, super easy, but it was very thoughtful and a little something most places don't do, right?  Our server was fantastic - she knew her wines like nobodys business, and gave excellent recommendations.  I ordered the 1888, which I hadn't really given much consideration to at the bar, because it sounded more tart, but our lady recommended it, so I tried it, and I'm glad I did - a welcome change to the sweet drinks I'd been drinking.. . I ended up going with the Restaurant Week Menu, which was really good - a 'sampler' appetizer, I picked the blue crab crusted mahi mahi, and the pineapple strudel.  I do wish they would note on the menu that the appetizers are a sampler, and you're not picking one because I deliberated over the sushi, the shrimp and the short rib for a bit.  The mahi mahi was excellent - nice and creamy with the crab on top.  And the pineapple strudel was good - I think it would be an excellent breakfast.. . My companions had the Winter Fusion, and actually got the same things - the shrimp appetizer, the salmon entree, and the chocolate lava cake dessert.  I tried the salmon and the cake and both were very, very good.. . We also got a nice plate with a birthday candle (no singing, thank goodness!) and a scoop of what looked like ice cream, but tasted like sherbet.  It was really, really good.  At the same time, you wanted to believe it was ice cream, but also wanted to believe that it was sherbet.. . Anyway.  Excellent meal, lovely ambiance (maybe a tad on the too dark side though), and excellent service.. . I would love to go back and try some of their other items.
