ReviewID: -4shPa6-n6aNAVXLIWr35A
ReviewerID: Pi4rrLZomgg405RLy9gAdw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
Looking for that perfect heart attack food? Then Oinkster is it!. . So first let me talk about how Oinkster came about into my food diet. The bf and I would pass by this place often (usually on the way to the Target at Eagle Rock Plaza) and I always laughed whenever we passed by just because of the name-- I mean "Oinkster"? How good can it really be? Never thought much about it. Then one day while sitting around letting my brain rot and my stomach grumble while watching the Food Network, I saw on the guide that DDD would be featuring a local food joint in Eagle Rock so I figured I'd watch it. Being new to driving around aimlessly on this area, I thought it'd be nice to devour some food at local eateries. Next thing I know, Guy is at *dun dun dunnnn* Oinkster. Don't need to go into detail about how he reviewed the place (you can read all about that here). So the thought of trying out Oinkster crossed my mind. Then I saw Oinkster was actually "Hot on Yelp" and read the reviews and I was all in.. . So I got the bf to go with me to try this place out.. . Atmosphere: Was very mellow. Seating doesn't really LOOK all too ample but it was pretty spacious for the size of the building. They've got both indoor and outdoor seating and the night we went, they were televising a bball game which is all fine and dandy with me. . . Food: We ordered two of the Oinkster Pastramis and made one a meal with a fountain drink and regular fries. The sammie didn't look too, too big or that it would fill me up. Deceiving! By the time I got through the first half, I was almost done for. You know that feeling where you are so full that you are start chewing at half the speed you normally would? That was me while trying to get through the second half of my sammie... The sammie itself was loaded was pastrami, some of the best pastrami I've had actually. Normally, when I think pastrami, I think salt and more salt. Not so much the case here. It actually had sort of a pepper-y taste and not salty at all. It was also stuffed with red cabbage slaw and carmelized onions. The cabbage slaw is a great touch to a carnivore's dream sandwich. The only bad thing about it was how greasy the whole darn thing was, soaked right through the paper! If I hadn't known it was wrapped in paper, I probably would have eaten right through that, too.. . Fries: God bless the Belgians!! (OK, whether or not they are "belgian," heck if I know...) These are absolutely THE best fries I've ever had. They're cut the perfect size-- thick but not too thick to where they're like "wedges"... and they're fried twice which gives it that perfect crispiness. The fries are not coated in an overseasoned batter, so you can actually taste the potato. What goes great witht he belgian fries? Oinkster's garlic aioli. Great stuff but beware-- it's definitely not for those weak in taste. The garlic aioli packs a whole lot of punch and you really only need a little bit to get a taste of it. Too bad (for my bf haha) that I love garlic so much that I drench my fries in the stuff.. . Dipping sauces: So in addition to the garlic aioli, they've also got chipotle ketchup, house ketchup, and carolina bbq sauce. The bbq sauce to me had a super strong vinegar taste, didn't tickle my taste buds the right way at all. The house ketchup was fine, nothing special, a bit thinner that regular ketchup you find in a bottle like Heinz. The chipotle ketchup was a winner though. It had a subtle kick to it that makes you want to keep eating more and more of it.. . Now, to add onto all that (since I just got back from my second trip to Oinkster about an hour ago), I can now tell you all that the ube shake is pretty damn good, too. When I think ube shakes, I think filipino restaurants. I never would have thought they'd have ube shakes at the same place that serves up pastrami, chicken, burgers, and beer. The shake is super thick but super yummy. A little sweet for me but I would still down the whole thing. The filipino in me keeps imagining that there is macapuno in this thing as well... I don't think there is... but IF there is, double points to you, Oinkster ;).. . So with all the good things I've just said about this place, why only four stars instead of five. The grease. Granted, grease kind of comes hand-in-hand with pastrami, but I'm sure it's not so hard to drain some of the grease from the meat before sticking it on the bun-- made the bread soggy and hard to handle while eating. It's not the cheapest place to eat either. I forgot how much I spent the first time around, but today for two Oinkster pastrami meals with one upgrade to a shake ran me just over $30... . Would I come back? I obviously would since I just want back again today. If you're in the area, give it a try. But if you're going to make a journey alll the way out here, you just might find an equally appetizing place for possibly less money (and the line I have to wait in will be much shorter ;D).
