ReviewID: -8FcIgx0WAPyRIyH9B69cA
ReviewerID: 1y5P9XD-m2pNyAjV2anuaw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Alfredo&#39;s Italian Restaurant
Category: Italian
God, this pains me to write.  I feel like I have lost a best friend, and I know how this is going to look.  "How can you be so polarized in your update?" you may ask.  I don't know, consider one review for food, and the other for service.  I wouldn't forgive myself if i didn't share this evening's experience with Yelp.. . I called on Wednesday to make reservations for the night before Valentine's day.  I figured the chances were slim that i'd be able to get in, but heck, it's worth a try.  I called Alfredo's and was quickly told that they can make a reservation for 9:00PM, and all was well.  Then, suddenly, the skeptical side of my mind started thinking "Did they really take a reservation, or is it going to be bedlam when I show up there on Friday?". . The latter my friends, the latter.  I showed up at 8:55pm.  The place was packed.  I wasn't expecting otherwise, but i'm thinking "i've made reservations, we should be 'ok'".  Oh how it was not ok.  I'm told that a table will be available shortly, I smile and nod.  9:35 rolls around and we're still standing there.  People are coming in and out and things are getting chaotic.  Reservations or no reservations, it seems like everyone's being bunched into the same basket.  . . Please keep in mind that I am a regular at Alfredo's, and please do not take that to mean that I expect preferential treatment, as I certainly do not.  I figured the fact that they knew me allowed me to at least get an update on how much longer I may have to wait.  . . I approached the owner of the establishment (Pierre), smiled and asked him if the wait was much longer.  . . He immediately gets frustrated and defensive and I slowly see things turning ugly.  He starts to get loud with me.  He tells me that it's busy and that everyone has to wait.  At this point I ask him what the point of me making a reservation was, if I still have to wait 40 minutes for a table.  He continues to be abusive and says "What? You expect to come in here and find a table waiting for you?  What do you think this is?". . Hm, well.  Shame on me.  I must have misunderstood what a reservation was.  At this point, I try to defuse the situation by thanking him and shaking his hand.  He reluctantly obliges to shake my hand and says the words I never thought i'd hear "if that's not good enough for you, you can stay or you can leave.". . At this point, my heart sunk.  It was like an old relationship coming to an end, right in front of my eyes.  Like an old girlfriend breaking up with you the night before Valentine's day, the pain cut deep.  I promise you folks, never once was I rude, loud or abusive, but I got nothing but diatribe.. . I turned around and walked out feeling insulted.  I'll never ever be able to slate the food here, it's fantastic, always was, always is.  My previous 5 star review is a testament of what I think of it.  However, I'll never allow myself to be treated that way at a restaurant.  I'll miss Alfredo's. . . Shame.
