ReviewID: -bwZRizr3EfVha0JSOgBGw
ReviewerID: ejgaVdo8SPj0WqZz6uED2g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
This place has a great inside decor, beautiful women, and some attentive service.  I'm glad to see that a place like this is employing so many people during these rough times.  That was about all this place did for me.. . My friends wanted to go here because it was a cool looking place with decent prices.  Cool looking, yes... decent prices.. well.... once you add up the sides and the drinks it is mildly affordable.. . I tried to keep it under $20 with a half-glass of wine and the chicken parm sandwich.  The bread brought to the table before hand was ok, and the wine I had (a pinot on the menu) wasn't very good.. . My order came out to me as the wrong one.. they brought me chicken parm instead of a sandwich after I directly pointed to it on the menu.  They took it back, and brought me a sandwich that probably would have been better down the street out of some corner pizza place.  . . One annoying part about this place is the constant... CONSTANT pouring of water.  The bottles are on the table.. yet the servers constantly fill your glass even when it is not full... sometimes it is nice to just sit there and do it yourself... or allow your glass to be empty towards the end of your meal! : )  It became somewhat intrusive after a while.. . One thing that I think is good service is bringing food to your group in one trip.  It was kind of strange having each thing come out and then be followed by another with 5 minute intervals.. . Finally to top off the night, after the service was SO attentive... they took about 15 minutes just to take our cards and get them back to us.  I think I used the bathroom at least 3 times while I was there due to all the water they poured in my glass.. . I will try it again.. maybe for lunch or when I don't have to be somewhere  after dinner.  I was really anticipating art-walk while here, so maybe that tainted my enjoyment of it!
