ReviewID: -CinhKnHg3ZncUI7G7FXYA
ReviewerID: lZ9onjC5i5y3cDCXbX0vOw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
You may call me the Gringo of East LA, if you wish. I still say, I look good in a sombrero though.. I have logged more miles, consulted more maps, acquired more frequent flier miles, painstakingly tracking down a multitude of over the counter food establishments, rummaged through an amalgamation of hole-in-the-walls, I have tested a thousand and one, so called ethnic places; scurrying forth with nothing more than a scant word of the mere reference of a good Mexican restaurants. I love them and they stretch forth as far as the eye can see. We may have more Mexican restaurants in Southern California than American restaurants?  It is Heaven on earth for this Restaurant Reporter.  With so many restaurants the options are limitless but too many have above average food and drinks that remind me of cough medicine!!!  Or the drinks are good but the food is uninspiring!!!  Well my friends, since I am observing temperance with liquor to begin the New Year, the food part of this story will be central. This past week, I dined with my friend Janice, (who claims to be a restaurant critic that is soon to be discovered), I trekked down to the Original El Tepeyac Café on Evergreen, in the heart of East LA.. . The restaurant has a modest space twelve to fifteen seats plus a with a counter and ample parking.  The atmosphere is lively and the patrons like Los Angeles itself, come from a cross-section of our colorful city.  What brings patrons from all parts of the city to this Café?  It's the food, and it's muy excellente.  Portions are large and you'll always seem to leave with half of your food in a to-go bag.  I'm telling you, I unwisely tried to order the whole menu so I could give a full report on this restaurant, but I failed, the portions are too big. I asked the server for a few suggestions and I went with the Taquitos with Guacamole ($7), as soon as saw this plate arrive, I realized that I ordered for a whole team and not just for the two of us.  Next was the Manuel tacos, my friend Janice wouldn't share, but by the look in her eyes, I can tell she was pleased, or was it that I am handsome?  Why does it always have to be one or the other? Okay it was the food!! Next, I tried the signature dish at El Tepeyac, the burrito, my selection was the #2 A chile Colorado at ($10) this is a great dish and is pork slowly simmered in a red chili sauce.  That is Mexican Heaven! You know it is good when the men in blue (cops) are dinning there on a regular basis.  The Hollenbeck Burrito is a favorite of the police and is ($8.25) and comes with chips and guacamole.  Next time I'm going to order the Okie de Pollo...shredded chicken breast at ($8.50) It is a curious name, what does El Tepeyac mean? It is the hill that the Virgin Mary was sighted on!!!  This place is a shrine as well!. . No beer or wine.
