ReviewID: -cqjMOcnrf3AN7RYUzBsew
ReviewerID: J1bhmkDXD8R7H0ftt0XaYg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Veerasway
Category: Indian
I think this place is a perfect addition to Randolph street's restaurant row.  As other reviewers have said, you don't come for traditional Indian cuisine, just like you wouldn't go to an Asian or Mexican fusion place expecting strictly traditional dishes. But that's what makes this place a fun alternative.  . . I made 8pm reservations for 2 the same day (Friday) and had no problem.  We arrived about 20 min. early thinking we'd have a drink at the bar. And that's exactly how it worked out.  We often like to sit at the bar for a bit before sitting down to dinner. The down-side to that here is that the bar space is very small (the whole place is small).  We did get seats at the bar but it was a tight fit with service staff squeezing in and out behind us.  But the cocktails were amazing.  The rum mango lassi was DANGEROUS.  and the mahjarita (their take on a margarita)  sounded weird (it has cumin sprinkled on it) but was amazing. It really works.  We ended up ordering a pitcher when we got to the dinner table.  Just as we were deciding whether to order a second drink at the bar, our table was ready. PERFECT.. . We had no problem with service or timing.  the papadums served in a basket with three different sauces were addictive. We ordered two samosas and the bollywood lolipops (spicy chicken drumsticks served in individual dishes with a spicy chili sauce and a creamy dill sauce).  Both were very good and sizable portions.  The chicken is an order of three, but our server asked if we wanted four (since there are two of us) and that was a nice option.  . . after the appetizers and the papadums we decided to share an entree and ordered the matar paneer and a garlic naan.  The matar paneer was pretty standard.  I was expecting a bit of a twist on the dish, but it was about the same as at an indian restaurant - but more peas and it was served with pea shoots on top. Good but not especially interesting.  The naan was the same.  Good but not different.  . . All of this was just enough food for both of us.  I don't see where the 'tiny portions" criticism comes from.  These were not huge take-half-of-it-home portions but I thought it was just right.  If we had ordered just one appetizer to split, we would have ordered two main dishes and I am sure it would also been the perfect size meal.. . And it really wasn't that expensive. With our cocktail pitcher, two aps, naan and a main dish the bill came in at $80.  Next door at sushi wabi or De Cero or any other place on this street would have been as much or likely more.. . Decor is great. Modern but not screaming it.  Simple design, the chairs and bar stools look like they were inspired by classroom chairs or shop class stools - in  a quirky good way.. . All in all very good. And again, we had great service, perfectly timed and the food was very good, though the Indian main dishes were not especially innovative.  The drinks were very inventive and exceptional.
