ReviewID: -eNXlBt8f3peANJvNHz6Cw
ReviewerID: 3LoxtpzH8lamJG1fF2x7Uw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Rosebud
Category: Southern
LET YOUR TASTE BUDS ROCK OUT AT ROSEBUD. Why Rosebud and no longer Food 101- Morningside? Ron Eyester recently took over full ownership of the restaurant and wanted an identity change, but more so to honor Jerry Garcia whom Ron is a huge fan. Ron is able showcase his self-taught skills creating foods that speak flavors.. . To help forget the rainy evening dampness, Jason and Jeff, the masterminds behind the bar, suggested "The Aviator", a blend of Aviation Gin, Lemon-Lavender juice, with a splash of Crème de Cassis and of course, fresh lemons. After two of these, I could have been back outside, singin' in the rain.. . Ron's passion is to keep one focused on how fresh ingredients can play on each other. The tender, long-finned Point Judith Calamari showed their sweet silky tastes. No sauce needed here, but the pickled fennel and apricot curry took these delights to a much higher level. The other crowd-pleaser appetizer is a southern thing, the house-made pimento cheese made with aged Tillamook Cheddar with Semolina toast points. Yes, this pimento cheese is like no other- good stuff!!!. . Lizzie, our delightful server, was on a mission to wow us with Ron's creations, and she did. To compliment the rest of the dishes, she recommended the unfiltered 2007 Foris Pinot Noir from Oregon's Rogue Valley with bright Asian spices, cherries, raspberries with a slight earthiness in the finish.. . The off-menu juicy Blackjack Garden Beefsteak tomato salad with Cypress Grove's Midnight Moon Cheese and delicate White Anchovies (alici) is Ron playing in the kitchen to showcase the absolute freshest ingredients available. The Arugula Salad from Woodland Gardens is married with smoky Benton's bacon, creamy goat cheese from Vermont, and red wine poached Seckel pears with a buttermilk corn dressing- totally mind-boggling.... .. Ron kicked it up with the delicate yet sweet tasting Jonah Crab Cakes served over a sweet corn chow-chow. The seared delectable Georges Bank U-10 scallops served with pineapple infused Carolina gold rice, smoky bacon, and a tomato glaze was absolutely perfect. The signature Wild Georgia Shrimp with Riverview Farm grits, and tasty Andouille Sausage were over the top. The delicate flavors of sage and caramelized onions with Cremini mushroom's earthiness partnered well with Via Elisa Ravioli and Riverview Farm's braised pork shoulder. Lizzie took us to the limit when she delivered the perfect brunch slider, The Big Nasty, lightly fried Springer Mountain chicken, scrambled local egg, Benton's bacon, and melted cheddar cheese- outrageous. Do yourself a favor and go to a Weekend Brunch.... . To tempt the taste buds with Ron's desserts was criminal. The Chocolate Crepes filled with El Rey ganache was sinful, Homemade Belgian Waffles with Butter Pecan Ice Cream was sensual, and the decedent Chocolate Bread Pudding was absolutely blissful.. . The heartbeat of Rosebud is Ron's rock 'n' roll approach to food- lively, energetic, and fun. If fresh, organic, sustainable food is your thing then Rosebud is waiting to take your palate to limits at reasonable prices.
