ReviewID: -EXEuzhMzWBO5d9BoEza9g
ReviewerID: jhp6ZViiNefz9ax_NHLTvw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Let me preface this review by saying The Boiling Crab will provide good service only if you are a friend to the employees. Otherwise, you'd be lucky to receive borderline acceptable service. .  My most recent trip involved a party of 9. My friends and I were seated at a table big enough for 9 although 2 of us were running late - driving all the way from Riverside. By the time the last 2 members of our party arrived, the rest of us were nearly finished with our meal. At this time, the staff informed us that our remaining 2 friends could sit with us, but could not order any food. Their reasoning was that it was the "store's policy" and there were other people waiting for tables. We disputed with the staff for quite some time, trying to understand why they were essentially refusing to let paying customers order more food. Ordering food for our 2 friends would have been equivalent to ordering extra food if we hadn't ordered enough in the first place, something the staff would have allowed. Needless to say, it boggled our minds that the "store's policy" was telling us to have our friends sit there and literally watch us finish our meal. .  We paid our bill in full, but did not feel the staff deserved any type of gratuity, especially since they addressed us in the most rude and condescending manner. In response to this, the staff sent 3 of their tallest, largest employees after us as we left the restaurant, perhaps in hopes of intimidating us. When we explained that we had paid the bill in full and therefore did not do anything wrong, the 3 guys looked confused and did not know what else to say. That's when the lady [with whom we'd been having a "boiling" argument all night] came out and threatened to call the cops because we "did not pay the bill," which was apparently synonymous with "did not leave tip" in her mind. We explained that gratuity by definition is not an obligation, and they clearly did not deserve our gratitude. She did not have an argument against this..  In a nutshell, the employees at The Boiling Crab do not fully understand the meaning of quality customer service. It is essential to the success of any business that its employees demonstrate utmost respect and reason when dealing with customers, whether the customers are right or not.
