ReviewID: -Gs8BH_jD05VrTHYpRsDwg
ReviewerID: P0B3Yg_l6RiDiiQP5Ei_WA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
Where do I start.... . We decided to stop in here kind of on a whim.  We were in the area and it looked decent from the outside so we decided to grab a "quick" bite.. . Let me start off by saying that this restaurant is FILTHY.  By the looks of it, these guys have an insider at the health department because there is no way in hell it should have an A rating.  There was dirt and food all over the floor.  The worst part?  There are FLIES all over the place!  My girlfriend had 2 drinks and both had flies in them!  Details later in the review...  . . We ordered some tacos which ended up taking like 40 minutes to come out.  Mind you, there was hardly anyone in the restaurant.  When it got to my table, it was straight up COLD.  Not even luke warm.  You won't believe the nerve of the waiter.  He tried to tell me that the cheese they sprinkled on top made the meat cold!!  Maybe I'm crazy, but usually hot meat makes cheese melt.  Cheese steaks wouldn't be so popular based on this guy's explanation.. . Anyway, they returned the tacos and brought the new ones out after probably another 30 minutes.  I can't understand how it can take that long to make 3 tacos??  . . Now to the really bad stuff.  My girlfriend ordered a drink off the happy hour menu.  Remember those flies I was telling you about?  Well, she had the pleasure of almost drinking one.  She returned the drink and had them make something else.  Now this you will not believe... ANOTHER FLY in her drink!!  This time, it was a huge one that was actually frozen inside one of the ice cubes!!  WTF?!!  DISGUSTING.. . They ended up comping most of our meal but that still doesn't excuse blatant health code violations.  This place is by far the dirtiest restaurant I have been to in LA.  It's a shame because the chef is actually pretty good.  The front of the house staff doesn't know what the hell they're doing and you can end up sitting there for 2 hours for what should have been 30 minutes.  So please, have some respect for yourself and clean the damn place.  I would also strongly consider firing most of your waiters.  One guy was nice but still a bit slow....
