ReviewID: -HluISaYKuADhycnx2LP9w
ReviewerID: 4rTYoRQlKggUqmP_fe905A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
I had a free day from work during the week. I had heard about Square One for so long that it was bookmarked for a visit. It was stuck in my mind that I would treat myself to a brunch there on the condition that IF I found a parking space within 5 minutes, it would mean destiny has spoken.. . I barely turned onto Fountain when I saw a space right in front. It would make for a better story if I heard angels singing but it was my stomach. I would be dining with L. Ron Hubbards, hungover hipsters, and hospital scrubs.. . My arrival came about 1115. I wanted to avoid the breakfast and lunch crowd. It was nice to see the place was clean and bright. People were still eating. The place was active and busy. . . Let me get this out of the way, because the rest of the review will be glowing. I appreciated how nice and friendly the servers were. I honor that they are busy. It seemed like all three servers I saw came by and asked if I needed anything throughout the meal... and yet... they never followed up? WTF? It seemed like they were covering all the tables rather than an assigned area. I found it odd. I had to ask for things a few times. I even had to get my own tabasco after the guy said SURE!. . Back to the good stuff.... It was hard decide what I wanted. I really wanted some eggs. When I asked the server what I should try, she practically cut me off (in a good way) and said, YOU MUST TRY THE FRENCH TOAST. I had to order it because this dish was one of the ones I had so many good things about. Mind you, I rarely order french toast because at other places I rarely find it to be done well or to my likely. Always mushy or meh.. . I also ordered some eggs, because I had to try the bacon.. Also because I thought the fatty protein would balance out the carbo loading I would be doing. (Shut up). . I'll chime in with everyone: The bacon is fantastic. WOW. Shove a stick in it and I'd be happy having it as a pork popsicle.. . The french toast came out. Dear God what have I ordered? I think as I am aging my palate for sweets is morphing. I used to have such a sweet tooth. My dental work ached when I saw the dish in front of me.. . But again... destiny spoke (my stomach). I hungered and feasted.. the pecans were delicious. the syrup divine. the texture of the french toast truly is one of the best I have ever had. It made me remember how good french toast can be. the vanilla cream  seemed a bit indulgent, but it worked. It went so well with the toast. its sounds cliche (to me) saying that everything on a dish works together. The cool and creaminess of the real whipped cream helped round out the flavors.. . I enjoyed the meal so much. I'm very interested in going back to try some of the other things. However, it may not happen soon. The $ of the menu seems a little high. The parking situation could be helped too. I would still return.
