ReviewID: -HWioa2RGW-8ZF3TzdX2Sg
ReviewerID: Z-6Hpto5G0RVc2k3LJ-rRw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
I love this place, really, really love it.  Any place that has grilled bread automatically starts out in my favor.  Of course, it goes beyond that.... Fresh squeezed juice for inventive handmade and muddled cocktails and the small menu consisting of comfort yet classy dishes.. . I've been here for brunch, drinks and dinner and drinks, all experiences great, however my last visit was the best.  We sat at the bar and had the best bartender, Danielle.  Although she was also serving a fairly packed restaurant, she treated us as though we were the only people in the joint.  We watched her tirelessly muddle fresh raspberries for raspberry margaritas, their nightly drink special as well as lug buckets of fresh grapefruits to the bar for squeezing the perfect grey hound inspired drinks.  She even told us how to candy grapefruit and gave us a sampling!  In addition to cocktails, they also have a great wine list and if you're in the mood for something extra classy, try the PBR tall boy can served complete with paper bag!. . Now onto the food!  We had 3 items, the yellowtail sashimi served with stone fruit and a light chili oil.  I could taste the fruity-lime flavors on the fish and the chili was a nice kick in each bite.  Fried oysters were something new for me, so i didn't know what to expect, but i was definitely pleased.  They were fried in cornmeal with a perfectly crisp and flaky coating, while the oysters were almost creamy on the inside.  The spicy cocktail sauce was the perfect complement in each bite.  We next shared the clams and chorizo entree.  This was the epitome of comfort food.  The broth was light and the chorizo and clam flavors and aromatics ruled the bowl. This was served with my favorite grilled bread and a yummy aoili.. . Now that i am a complete fan, it will be pretty easy for me to find an excuse to drop in after the Sunday Hollywood Farmer's Market.
