ReviewID: -k5VkczdEMPYuu0gKAIuEQ
ReviewerID: MZ0d_IJR4LWat1ppO1B3QQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I ate lunch here with my ex-girlfriend in early February.  She dumped me the next day.   This is the last meal I'll ever remember...for now, my mouth is filled with the bitter taste of rejection.  I'm currently force feeding myself Campbell's Chunky split pea...seasoned with my own tears.  Every bite that enters my mouth turns to ash.. . I started with their coffee, it was fragrant and delicious.  I had it black...the same color as my shriveled broken heart.  She had the iced tea.  She offered me a sip...I declined....a decision I'll regret for the rest of my life.  Maybe if I'd accepted we'd still be together, maybe all she wanted was somebody to share an iced tea...but alas, my non-iced tea drinking self is doomed to be forever alone.. . For an entrée, she had the caprese omelet.  It was bland.  Just like she found me...bland and not worth finishing...inedible scraps fit for the garbage.  Maybe she was looking for a big buff Italian.  A caprese kind of guy full of flavor and life...but all she found was me...bland and insipid.. . I had the special...babyback ribs.  Ahhhh the rib.  At the time I considered it a symbol of our bond.  I used to think we were made for each other.  Just like Eve was made from Adam.  But now my dreams are shattered.. . The meat fell off the bone as soon as I put the fork to it.  No need for a knife...except to cut myself.  Pain is the only thing I can feel.  The ribs were moist and tender.  Just like her lips used to be when they'd gently kiss my check.  I'll never eat another rib for as long as I live.  Their deliciousness would destroy me.   . . The ribs came with sweet potato fries and an apple slaw.  The sweetness of the fries and the apple slaw paired perfectly with the meat.  I thought we were the perfect pair.  Obviously, my thoughts were one sided.  Now the only perfect pair I envision is a bridge and me jumping. . . We didn't have dessert, although they looked luscious.  Just like she looks in my dreams at night after I cry myself to sleep.. . The Alcove is good.  I'll give it four stars.  I wanna die.
