ReviewID: -pD9QSavXkEXvQGipTYOpQ
ReviewerID: 6pCoyMewhL2QAMaVnnSCOA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Breakfast served all day is my idea of a fantastic time.  . . Parking is a biooootch.  Welcome to Los Feliz....or actually....welcome to LA county, what the hell did you expect?  We parked so far, we might as well have walked from my house in Pasadena.. . Beautiful patio, very calming and cool.  It's sunny, but each table has it's own source of shade.  The staff outside is amazing, especially with how hectic things can get. . . If you looked at their menu, you would initially think that their food might be on the pricey side.  Don't believe it!  For the quality and portions, you are definitely getting your money's worth.  It's seriously so good, one of the best places for breakfast.. . Ordering is the only part I have an issue with.  It's sooo chaotic, and if you are a newcomer, it might take a little bit to grasp their "concept", or lack there of.  It's comparable to Carl's Jr.  You're supposed to stand in line and order and they give you a number to put on your table.  But there are so many people in front of the counter trying to see the drinks on the chalk board, reading the menu, reading the specials, talking to one another, checking out the glass baked good display, and looking at the imaginative chocolate bar collection they have; it becomes more of a mass of people just standing around.  Several people could be ordering at once, there are two registers I believe, but I was ordering with 4 other people, and depending on how simple your drink order is, even if you ordered food with it, they prepare it right then and there and just put it on the counter, basically letting you guess what it is and if it's yours.  I almost shanked some hippie for trying to swipe my freshly squeezed orange juice.  I take breakfast the same as my frozen yogurt, very, very seriously.  . . So they give you a number to put on your table....if you're lucky enough to get one!  There's plenty of people coming and going...but there's always the singer/songwriter/dancer/actor/choreographer who insists on taking the best tables with their Mac and "work" for hours at a time.  They usually have  a hectic floor manager seating people and making sure your number is visible to the food runners.  Who, by the way, are very prompt and experts at squeezing through the tight spaces with numerous plates full of food.. . Alcove has a really great concept and amazing atmosphere.  You get the occasional scene-ster and H-Wood douchebag, but overall, it's really cute.  It's always packed because they do breakfast right.  Fresh, delicious, and generously portioned.  They do not try to "fancy" or present their food as more then it is.  Everything is delicious and presented as it should be; without the fluff.  . . I had huevos ranchero, DELICIOUS.  The guac was fresh and had a slight kick.  Sour cream came separate.  Black beans and eggs were cooked to perfection.. My friend had french toast.  I ate half of hers.  Fluffy, fat slices of thick egg bread perfectly and not overly battered.  Powdered sugar was not over done, and their syrup was pure maple and warm; just as God intended.  Their fruit tasted like it was fresh from the orchard, washed, and cut with love.. . The employees are friendly, alert, polite, and thorough.  The food runners/bussers are really polite and fast, especially because of how packed it gets.  . . And last, but certainly not least.. . Um...chocolate bar with bacon bits, anyone?  I know, I know...gluttony at it's best.  . . Or perhaps...chocolate with chipotle chili?
