ReviewID: -rUGSWHaAr4e8hrhDdqDYw
ReviewerID: LQ_woP6Lt0vOj3BBGgp1Ow
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Gingergrass
Category: Vietnamese
In the room the hipsterati come and go,. speaking of Michelangelo.. And Beck's latest endeavor.. And how cool they are for living in Silverlake (because from what I've seen Silverlakians are the most self-congratulatory bunch on earth, or at least in L.A, maybe with good reason, maybe not.). . Gingergrass is a land far, far away from my much maligned hood of FairHo. Actually it's only 6.7 miles per Nigel, my navigator.  But since my car is coming to the end of its lease period, Nigel has been leading me mysteriously astray (as in "go around the block three times, if possible"), so that it's more like a 20 mile trip.  In any case, I was about 10 minutes late getting to Gingergrass, leaving my dinner companion waiting (I hate to do that). So I'm all flustered and apologetic, and the room is loud and boisterous, and I'm kind of on edge.  And the nice waiter who lookes like a skate punk from South Boston (he was wicked cute) comes right away and takes our order.  I'll have the basil lemonade and Miss C. will have the iced tea, if you please.  The drinks come promptly.  We peruse the short but thorough pseudo-Viet menu (my Vietnamese friends pooh-pooh this place) and decide on matching dishes: the tilapia wrapped in banana leaves, with shitaake musrooms.  It comes quickly enough, with a nice fresh little side salad and sticky rice. It's very tasty, and fresh, and spicy.  And hey, other things I've had here have been good, too. The chicken pho (good on a chilly winter night), the beef salad (crispy and not-too-greasey). Nothing's super-fantastic, but nothing's bad, either.  What gives it the three stars is the drastically slowed-down service after we'd ordered, and the somewhat chaotic atmosphere of the restaurant.  I dunno, there's just something unsettling about the place.  The Red Lion up the street might not be so hip, but there's something comforting about it. Gingergrass is good but I feel like I'm in a big fishbowl full of people who wouldn't be caught dead catching your eye, because that might mean they're interested, and being interested isn't what their scene is about, honeybuns.. . We didn't stay for dessert because the Thursday night wine tasting at Silverlake Wine across the street was beckoning.  Now *that* was fun, although I have two words of warning for the gals considering going there for some action: short men. Scads of 'em.  But luckily Soul Patch, GWCSSWO, and Playah-Man were there, thus obviating the risk of having to make small talk. Har har.  The three afore-mentioned regulars regaled us with their usual trash-talk, while we demurely sipped our flight of reds and egged them on.  God, men are so malleable!. . In any case, do by all means give Gingergrass a try before the wine tastings. It's clean, not too expensive, and solid food. Don't hope to have a warm relationship with your wait staff: they're busy and can't be bothered my the mid-town likes of you. Got that?
