ReviewID: -Sgppj5yThLBJkM7JCp1yA
ReviewerID: bo6a2MQ6e5btUtrAH4V7ww
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I actually created my yelp account last year so I could review this restaurant... but never got around to writing it.  Well, I had a bad customer service experience at another restaurant today and wrote about it, so I figured I should finally write the review for Mastro's.. . My boyfriend and I dined here last Halloween for our anniversary (funny date for an anniversay, I know).  We had reservations and arrived about 10-15 minutes before our reservation time.  The host said our table would be ready shortly and, in the mean time, suggested we wait to the side.  While waiting, I noticed an older white couple check in about 10 minutes after us and stand to the side for a minute before they were quickly escorted to their table.  Excuse me for playing the racist card but.... the RACIST CARD is out on the table!  Does getting there on time (early, actually) with reservations mean nothing to these people?  We were there waiting patiently, I think we should've been seated first.  We actually didn't get seated until 5-7 minutes after that couple did.  Believe me, I was beyond pissed.  However, it was our anniversary so I sucked it up and stayed quiet.  We were brought to our table and seated.  Then the 2nd round of waiting began... we waited and waited for someone to approach us.  We eventually had to flag down a server and ask if we could at least get menus while we continued to wait.  The guy seemed apologetic that we were waiting so long that he said he would just take care of us (even though I don't think we were even in his section of responsibility).  He is also the reason why I gave 3 stars instead of 2.. . The food itself was good.  I ordered the ribeye, medium... and Mastro's "medium" was perfect.  Good sized piece of meat, too.  Couldn't complain there.. . If I ever decide to eat at Mastro's again, I think I'll try the Costa Mesa location.
