ReviewID: -Sy6uvxzTQibGl16MWo1BA
ReviewerID: nE-LFoO83dIYCaP6hRk8IQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
So this is how the better half live huh? du-du-du-du-DAMN!. . I knew we weren't at the Azusa Sizzler as I pulled into the valet, behind a Mercedes SLK and in front of a freakin' Lamborghini Murcielago! And they didn't seem annoyed when Dimples and I hopped out of my luxurious Honda truck, so that was a good sign. Ready to celebrate Dimples' 30th birthday, we stepped through the towering aqua-blue glass doors that the host held open for us - Dimples dressed to the 9's, me dressed to the 5's haha... and they sat us promptly in a cozy first floor booth with a basket smorgasbord of bread as we listened to ivory keys being tickled from the upstairs piano bar.. . We ordered filets - mine cooked medium, hers cooked medium-rare; plus a side of garlic mashed potatoes to share and two glasses of red. They accidentally gave me her med-rare, and she got my med., but we didn't realize this until halfway through the meal! . . Here's where Mastro's earned their 5 Stars: Our waitress Sophia was awesome. She brought Dimples a new med-rare filet ($40 comp'd filet!), plus a free Butter Cake for the mistake ($20 comp'd dessert!), ON TOP OF the already free slice of chocolate birthday cake!. . And everything was ridiculously amazingly delicious. The medium-rare filet practically melted in my mouth, it was so damn tender! The chocolate cake was rich and soft, and don't even get me started on the Butter Cake. Caramelly-crisp on the outside, buttery moist on the inside, and smothered with a giant scoop of vanilla ice cream on top. Ambrosia of the gods, I tell you!. . This may very well have been the best meal to ever touch my lips. Thanks to Mastro's' "mix-up", i will never eat a steak cooked any higher than medium rare again. Needless to say, we tipped Sophia phat!. . Long story short: med-rare filet: Amazing. Butter Cream Cake: Mind-Blowingly Decadent. Mastro's Staff: Impeccable Service, Sophia deserves a raise.. . Geez louize, it's gonna be hard to go back to the Azusa Sizzler after this experience...
