ReviewID: -TYMk-rZQ8gh9N29_AfnqQ
ReviewerID: qY-kPqSzSw-RJbhREbeinQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Upon making reservations 3 weeks in advance, it was with much anticipation that we went to Cut this past Saturday.. . I am giving it 4 stars (and not 5) for a couple of reasons, which i will lay out for you now.. . First, let me explain that Cut is a fantastic restaurant. The beauty of the restaurant's design is an unexpected surprise. The pics on the web site do NOT do it justice as the lighting is MUCH darker when you get there (if you eat after sundown of course).. . The wait was 45 minutes for our table. Not exactly a plus, but hey, whattya gonna do? Had to ask a couple of times but the one of the assistants to the Maitre D kept us posted after that soon escorted us to our table.. . The chairs were incredibly comfortable as they were either Herman Miller chairs or fantastic knockoffs.. . We went with 3 appetizers: the Fois Gras (awesome), the Veal Tongue (the surprising favorite at our table) and the asparagus with poached egg, slice of bacon and warm bacon vinaigrette (it was fine, but not spectacular. I think though, it was just too breakfast'y for me. So it could come down to a "taste thing."). . For dinner we splurged. Two Rib-eyes (bone in) and the New York Nebraska fed. . . And then....there was the Japanese Wagyu. Herein lies the splurge:. We ordered a shared 6 oz serving of the Wagyu filet mignon as a complement along with our steaks. . . How do I rightly put this: out of this world!. It was lightly salt crusted, and the soft, cut it with a spoon, density was just amazing. It was the highlight of the evening (that, the dessert, and Dana, the sommelier).. . Dana the sommelier then came by our table and suggested this $130 bottle of wine (who our friend was kind enough to pay for all on his own even though it was HIS birthday, dangit!) that was tart, peppery and really well received. I was extremely happy with the wine and frankly just enamored with how cool Dana is. She is extremely down to earth.. . Then the steaks came.. . The steaks were good.. . Caveat and back story:. I recently bought a new grill. Nothing incredibly fancy, but it's decent and has a really high BTU so I can get it to a very high temp. I've experimented with this high temp on two steaks from Huntington Meats (Farmer's Market) and by the 2nd one I think I had perfected something I didn't know I was capable of: making a fantastic steak.. . Since I knew I was going to Cut, I became afraid. . "What if my steak is nearly as good as theirs?" This would leave me a little bummed; not because I can now make a great steak (certainly no  problem with that) but that the expensive restaurant might not necessarily soar to the great heights of its inestimable pedigree.. . Well, this is seriously no attempt to gloat, but a simple spotlight on the fact that Cut's steaks were great, but not any better than the ones I made on a $300 home grill at 600 degrees with just a little salt, pepper and love. I frankly was surprised. . . ***Talk amongst yourselves: . As a foodie, both restaurant and home cook, is there a plateau that gets reached? ***. . By no means do I want you to think the steak wasn't good. It was REALLY good. It just wasn't necessarily the best steak I've ever had in my life.. . The sides:. I found the Potato Tarte Tartin extremely bland. I was very surprised at this, enough to mention it to the waiter.. . However, the Turnips (yes, fricking turnips) were unbelievable. They were cooked/pan roasted in this honey &amp; thyme glaze (very light and not really a sauce). Fantastic. . Waiter review: . Friendly, very informed, but perhaps a tad on the "rushing us" side of things. He came back three times before we finally just started ordering (we weren't ready and didn't feel like we were delaying things.) But that aside, he was pleasant.. . The dessert was this pear/huckleberry crumble with almond gelato that was FRICKING AMAZING. I can't put it more eloquently or refined than that.. . Ambiance note: the music they play is this down tempo trip, metropolis on KCRW vibe and it's a perfect complement to the feel of this restaurant. A BIG plus.. . ***In summary:***. fantastic appetizers. fantastic ambiance. fantastic (no, out of this world) true 100% Japanese Wagyu. fantastic sommelier and wine selection (almost worth the return trip once I sell my OTHER kidney to pay for the bill). Very good steaks, but not necessarily the best in the world.. Inconsistent sides (one great, one not). The side sauces were definitely nothing to write home about. The fact they charge you $2 per sauce can, to someone less agreeable than me, be taken as somewhat insulting.. Very respectable service, but could have been more intuitive to the pace of our meal.. . Ultimately too, the price is a bit far reaching for what you get, but Cut comes recommended from me because the positives certainly outweigh any of the negatives.
