ReviewID: -uTpf6HWqVzgoOlNNYLRRA
ReviewerID: uJK8Krc9j5XtdqfoIKdivw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Long wooden tables, beer, sausages, loud tall men.. where have we seen zis before? We haven't although it feels as if we have. . . Across the street from where Al's Bar used to be, we have Wurstkuche. The food is simple as it is exotic. I am a huge fan of beer and sausage, but I tend to stray away from places where the people's teeth are too white and exoticism is sampled for its own sake. That said, I'm going to have to give this joint another sample because maybe the exotic is just what I need. . . You see I got a bockwurst with onions and peppers and a Curiosity Cola, and the cola was by far the better experience. Maybe next time I'll get the duck &amp; bacon with jalapeno. Part of the fault of this was mine, having left my reading glasses in the car I parked *four blocks away*, I had to rely on looking at what I could see in the case, rather than eyeballing everything on the small paper menu. Sure I could see Rattlesnake &amp; Rabbit in the case, but not the italics on the menu wich would tell me 'buttery but mildly spicy'.  That being the case, I would have seen no adjectives whatsoever after the Bockwurst which would have indicated the lack of pride they proprietors take in their 'classics'. I've had better wursts from hotdog stands. The other part of my fault was my anti-foo foo attitude which was probably initiated by seeing the guy walking out of the joint with his underwear on the outside. Not shocked mind you, nor particularly disturbed, just rolling my eyes. It would have helped if they had better music playing, alas it didn't. So either Bockwurst is completely boring (I've never had it before, and the pale whiteness of it stood out) or their's is. Even though I'm writing about it, it's nothing to write home about.. . Since I'm still in a lather about  Galco's Soda Pop Stop, as should every restaurateur in Los Angeles, I savored my two bottles of Curiosity Cola and said later for the beer. And I did so despite the warm and chummy extraordinary service given by Wayne who took the time to set us up with some fine samples. I liked the Christmas Ale best.. . So this is a joint that's definitely up for a re-run. Maybe next time if I drink the beer, all will seem better.
