ReviewID: -UUd_i5iwchQ0tw7DWNlaA
ReviewerID: 9jI3LK8R7tuP3zpmMbUhHQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
Hungry Cat is one of those places that I like to go to when I'm thinking - I could really use a damn good drink right now, and maybe a bite to eat....not the other way around. . . Don't get me wrong - the food here is good. Some dishes excel while some plates fizzle. The mussels are delicious, as are the steamed clams with garlic sauce. Peel and eat shrimp here are a standout - but really - how can you F*up peel and eat shrimp? The crab legs were okay - a bit salty - but decent. . . Sidenote: Restaurants should take note of the way that Katsuya and Koi serve king crab legs. I'm not necessarily saying it is the best crab ever, but it is served with the intent of easy consumption. Maybe I'm just a lazy ass, but I like when my food is not too difficult to get too. Sometimes, its hard getting all those little flecks of crab, and well, I'm far too gluttonous to let it go to waste. Let's just say - cracking crab legs and sucking flesh from shell is not the sexiest of activities. Okay, I've digressed far too long - back to the commentary. . . One dish that I was REALLY looking forward to was the squid and chorizo. The description was so enchanting - I love squid, I love chorizo and I love chickpeas, where can you go wrong? Well, the dish was ber salty - the flavor profiles were so all over the place - and everything was just one big mashup. I left bloated from about 7 glasses of water and later that night, I had heartburn Damn that dish. That alone subtracts a star from this review - which says a lot. . . So, the food is decent - stay away from chorizo - and drink a lot. Those were the lessons I learned from Hungry Cat. Oh, and the drinks - amazing. The secret is fresh squeezed juices - and fresh squeezed means fresh squeezed. The Dark and Stormy is delicious - it is a mix of ginger beer and rum - perfect amount of sweetness. The Pimlico is also great - it is boozy and light and refreshing. Three things I enjoy in a beverage. The selection of drinks rotates - so that delicious Strawberry Sour (I still have dreams about that one) might not be there next week....so drink up! . . Service is good - although I think that my dinner date and I kept blending into the bush behind us, because our waitress missed us a few times. The ambience is okay - the seating arrangements are a bit off in the main inside dining area, and the bar is a bit uncomfortable. I just always choose to sit outside - so that I can fill my liver with booze, my stomach with shrimp and my lungs with nicotine - freely.
