ReviewID: -vtqzipX0QTMmeti1Q-pmA
ReviewerID: euSarYynpRSc9dCtDwbLag
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Osteria Mozza really has it all together.  My wife and I dined at Osteria Mozza Saturday night for her birthday, and we walked away truly impressed.  The menu is unique and reads like a bit like a foreign newspaper, but our waitress was terrific and guided us through our Antipastis, Primis, and Secondis with skill and experience.. . We started with two appetizers from the Mozzarella Bar.  We loved concept and definitely wanted to check it out.  We chose the Burricotti with braised artichokes, pine nuts, currants &amp; mint pesto and a sheep's milk ricotta with garlic and roasted hazelnuts.  Both were terrific.  I found the Burricotti a bit more complex and interesting, but both were an interesting and satisfying melange of flavors and textures.. . The Fresh Ricotta &amp; Egg Raviolo with browned butter was amazing.  My wife and I tend to avoid egg yolks, but this was well worth the exception.  The Grilled Whole Orata wrapped in radicchio with olio nuovo was great as well.  Simple, straightforward preparation, but fresh and delicious.  I especially liked the touch of serving the fish with olive oil and sea salt as condiments.  Worked together beautifully.. . We finished with the perfect bittersweet chocolate torte.  It was...well...bitter, and sweet, and perfect.. . I didn't spend a lot of time with the wine list, but I watched the Sommelier help the couple at the next table find the perfect bottle.  They seemed quite satisfied.  I was content with a simple Aglianico by the glass.. . I love good service, and this staff was well trained and professional.  Dishes disappeared and silverware was replaced without my even noticing, just as it should be done at a restaurant of this caliber.  Of course, food and service of this quality comes at a price, and in the case of Osteria Mozza, the price is steep.   But it was less money than going to Italy, and for a few hours I could fool myself into believing that I was really there.
