ReviewID: -WBg5oPa3P_rCeRZI8B3KA
ReviewerID: kiIbl8e0k8GR0ZElH1jJ_A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
i come to tender greens quite a bit when i go to one of my clients located in culver city and i'm never disappointed in the freshness of the veggies.  i've only gotten one thing here though, so my opinion may be a bit skewed, but that's the happy vegan plate.  and i'm not at all a vegetarian or a vegan, i eat meat all the time (not a huge portion though, i'm a  bigger fan of seafood in general).   . . i think this is well worth the $10 as i usually can split the meat into a light lunch and a late afternoon snack / early dinner.  the happy vegan comes with tabbouleh, hummus (watch out it's light green colored, not sure what else is in it to make it that color), pasta pearls, farro wheat, young kale, and some greens.  it's really a good combination of a lot of fresh vegan ingredients and i always feel good after this lunch.  also, it comes with a piece of their crispy seasoned bread which brings a little bit of oil into the otherwise light meal.  . . i love the setting of this place.  it's located in a good lunchtime spot facing the street (is that culver?) where you can sit outside and enjoy the sun like i did last friday when it was beginning to get hotter.  i also enjoy standing in line watching them prepare the salads.. . the only complaints i have so far are:. 1.  the wait is still kind of long.  went there around 11:45 last friday and the line was out the door.  but then again one can argue that it was a holiday and people were out and about but there are a lot of work people in that area (read: sony) so i don't see what difference this would really make on the volume of lunchtime people. . 2.  the hummus was really good the first time i had it but last friday it was only okay.  i think they need to work on their consistency with that.  the rest of my salad was great and just like the first time i had it.. . oh i also ordered the chicken soup.  it has nice chunks of tender chicken and the broth was just right, not too salty (lots of places tend to do that with their chicken noodle).  it's not quite as light as souplantation chicken noodle soup but it's comparable, with just a tad more flavor to it.
