ReviewID: -wStJ9KQpAiUgvZrbXjUng
ReviewerID: C0RkWAPYK58ms-BLBrFCVA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mirai
Category: Sushi Bars
I think I overhyped myself for my dinner at Mirai after reading so many wonderful reviews and though I found the food was fresh, it wasn't as amazing as I thought it would be.  I wanted it to be a 5 star but it's only going to be a 4 star for me.... . If anything, avoid the maki and come here for their fresh sashimi selection.  At $16 for a specialty roll, it's a bit of a rip off.. . My husband and I started with the tuna tar tar which was no more than a tablespoon in size for $9.  It was mushy and frankly, not very exciting.  I was much like tuna tartare (in the style that is scraped with a knife rather then cubed) and then ponzu sauce poured into it and a fancy quail egg on top to offer some color.  We should have ordered the Tuna Tuna Salmon appetizer dish instead.. . Then we had the mono maki - highly recommended by our waiter.  The maki itself was fun and tasty but highly disappointed that the rice fell off as I tried to pick up the roll with my chopsticks. (I'm an expert chopstick user!). . I did love the Monk Fish Foie Gras - it was highly inventive - pieces of bright orange foie gras nested in sliced octopus and nori. Very tasty!. . Finally to polish off the evening, we ordered a nice variety of sashimi - . I really liked their sashimi selection because there are a number of fish that you don't see in conventional Chicago Japanese restaurants:. Blue fin akami tuna (lean); Blue fin otoro (really fatty); kona kompachi - all the fish were traditionally sliced (I can tell that behind the bar is a real sushi chef just from the way the fish was prepared).  Also had Uni - which sometimes can be a hit or miss for me but my husband and I both agreed that it was delicious here!. . After $160 spent (no dessert, but we had 3 bottles of hot sake and some cocktails) - I was till hungry. Luckily there are plenty of places in the neighborhood to scope out the last course needed to complete me.. . I'm a huge fan of Japonais and think I will definitely go to Japonais first before considering this sister restaurant.
