ReviewID: -wukj6gFM0fEzMg9gVRz6w
ReviewerID: mQr4popcpi9E_hIIJ8Wumg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Great NY Noodle Town
Category: Chinese
It was by no means a coincidence that led me to the fine establishment of Great NY Noodletown.  . . For starters, a handful of my Yelp companions had ventured here for sustenance during an event outing a few months back.  Not to mention the word of mouth going around my fellow Chinese compatriots that consistently battle whether the food at Big Wong is actually better than that of Great NY Noodletown.  Still, the curiosity of one's persistent consumption endeavors must need to achieve both a level of curiosity, not to mention satiety.. . Not to mention the quest for the perfect Wonton in NYC was another main contributory factor for this visit.... . With that in mind, I ventured to Great NY Noodletown.. . The setting of the restaurant is expected of that of a Noodle House.  Upon first entering the restaurant, patrons will discover that the furniture and layout of the resembles that of a more modernized version of the counterparts that reside in Chinatown.  The furniture of the restaurant was largely  displayed with sturdy wooden chairs and glass covered tables, not to mention that the level of cleanliness of the establishment was above average standards.  Like most Noodle Houses in Chinatown, the front section of the establishment is dedicated solely to the preparation of Roasted members of the Animalia Kingdom (i.e.: Duck, Pork, Soy Sauce Chicken, etc...) and of course, the infamous Noodle Bowls.  Patrons will find that Great NY Noodletown provides more of a relaxed feel as the turnover rate of the restaurant is minimal compared to other restaurants denoted in the same region.. . The Food...  The Roast Pork w/ Shrimp Wontons over Egg Noodles is my most preferred Noodle Bowl of any other varietals.  The saltiness and rough texture of the Roast Pork that's combined with the subtleness of the luscious Shrimp mingle comparably despite it's inherent counteractive nature.  Upon receipt of my order, I was delighted to see that the portion sizes weren't overwhelming but rather that of modest consistency.  The flavor that's generated from the application is anything but!  . . The Roast Pork...  Boasting with a proper balance of fat and lean, the Roast Pork provided a hint of sweetness from the charred exterior that's well balanced by the saltiness of the interior.  These two contrasting flavors helped pave way to the subtle firmness of the Roast Pork.  Diners will find that the Roast Pork at Great NY Noodletown offers a subtle balance of flavors that's well consumed on it's own and without the hindrance of foreign agents (i.e.: Hot Broth, Soy Sauce, etc...).  What's more important, the Roast Pork that's presented did not produce the excess grease that's commonly found with other restaurant.  This denotes a key element in the preparation of the Roast Pork @ Great NY Noodletown...  The taste of the Pork is generated through the quality of the meat as well as the seasoning used in the application rather than that of the coated excess fat of numerous other establishments.. . The Wontons...  The Wontons used in the application of the dish was comparable by non, such invigorating flavors can only be mirrored by such notable cities as Toronto, Vancouver, Shanghai, and of course Hong Kong.  Consumers of the Wontons @ this establishment will find that the restaurant's execution in preparing the wontons is that of generosity.  With each bite, patrons will find that the abundance of Shrimp used in the creation of the Wonton is a heartier portion than that of other establishments.  The juiciness / mild firmness of the Shrimp is well enhanced in these wontons that's complemented by the Pork meat (rather than vice versa).  There is very little distain or negative criticism that can be applied to their execution of the Wonton.  If anything, the vice versa contradiction that can be argued about Great NY Noodletown's Wonton is that they can be deemed with the label of Best Wonton in NY.  . . The Egg Noodles...  Last but not least, the final element of the entree is that of the Egg Noodle.  What ultimately makes the dish is the fact that the noodles did not possess an overwhelming egg taste that's commonly found with other applications.  Consumers will discover that the noodles are purposely undercooked by approximately one minute, thus taking into account of the gap between time of presentation and consumption.   This single additional step taken by the restaurant boasts the proper texture for which the noodles should be consumed.. . Although the visitation to Great NY Noodletown was derived from that of curiosity, the overall conclusion generated from this visit is that I've discovered a new go to Noodle House when craving such a course.  Although there will be a major part of me that shall desire the consumables at Big Wong, Great NY Noodletown has established itself as the new go to Noodle establishment, while living up to it's highly recognized reputation.
