ReviewID: -YCQhBNP4iaoEZEVTqvdlQ
ReviewerID: lGj7s42BJx_Xg7ZgaO_dmA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
I finally tried it.   . . I got there early, but because there's no street parking allowed before 6, I went for the pricey valet.  Next time I'll go a little later. . . I was immediately seated.  There were only a few other parties eating at the time.  The staff was exceptional the whole time.. . The Warm cheese bread 'muffins' were excellent. I ate them all!  . . I looked at the salad bar, and didn't see anything, except maybe some of the sliced bread they had that was worth trying. . Soda's don't have free refills, and run close to $3 a pop, so they get you there.. . Once I flipped the card to green, the meat started coming super fast!  I got 3 in a row.  This is the first place I had to turn it to red to stop them so I could eat what was on my plate. . . Some did ask how you want them cooked, and went back to the kitchen to get rare, or medium rare when they had medium.   Some times they didn't say how it was cooked and  I just ate it, but some were overcooked for my preference.. . Everything I tried was good.  Seasoned to some extent. The meat that was cooked on the rarer side was tender. . . I liked the lamb chops, ribeye, and filet mignon best.. . The lamb chops were quite tender, and seasoned well.  The ribeye was very good, flavorful, and seasoned great.  It was the best ribeye I've ever had! The filet was quite good as well.  The other meats were also good. I didn't try them all, but at least half of them.. . I know from past experience if I eat too much at one of these places I will feel sick. I stopped after I felt I got my money's worth.  I was in and out of this place in about 45 minutes.  If I skipped dessert, and was aggressive with asking for the bill, I could cut it down to 25 minutes.  This could be a great place for a QUICK gourmet meal.  It's not too far from LAX either.. hint hint.  . . Save room for dessert. They have creme brulee, molton chocolate cake, ice cream, and more.. . I had the creme brulee, and it was good!. . Now how would I compare to Agora? I would say the lamb chops were more tender.  The filet mignon I remember being better at Agora, it was better seasoned, and very tender.   EDIT 2/4/09: Agora went downhill on my most recent visit, and fogo beats them in both categories now. Fogo has Ribeye, where Agora does not have it.  Fogo also has a much better dessert menu.    Overall, the filet, and lamb are quite good at Agora, and the price is noticeably cheaper.  Agora has FREE parking..and is located much closer to me.. So I would say Agora has an edge here, and will be my preference.  The ribeye though makes this a close call.. It was the best ribeye I've ever had!  I prefer the cheese muffins here, though. They are BIG, and YUMMY! . . Bring your appetite, and bring your wallet. I spent just over $100 just for myself here with everything.
