ReviewID: 0-RTtwKvPjuIn-EK8SbE0w
ReviewerID: qqTuU_869ASz2tYNkVHlhg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Hands down my favorite Southern California restaurant! I just wish it was closer to where I live. On the other hand, maybe it is better it is in LA, it will make my trips there more special.. . I love Bottega Louie for several reasons: decor, service, food, dessert, price.  I appreciate the simple and clean design of the restaurant with white walls, plenty of windows, and high ceilings.  There is a good amount of natural light, so you don't have to eat your dinner in the dark.  The restaurant is a bit noisy, but I think that adds to the character of the place. I absolutely love the display of baked goods at the entrance, and how guests can see the chefs in the open kitchen.  Also, my friends and I were fortunate to be seated right next to the pizza dough making station.  The service was great.  We arrived at 7:30 on a Saturday night, and we didn't have to wait long for a table for eight.  There is also a bar to keep you occupied before you are seated for dinner.  The waiters are very courteous and constantly fill your glass with water.. . The food, was delicious!  The Trenne pasta, is mouth watering.  The meat is very tender and the pasta was crunchy because it was baked I think (something I have never had before, but I liked it)  I also liked how the sauce wasn't heavy, but still very flavorful.  I also tried the Bianco pizza, which was nothing fabulous but still enjoyable because the crust was nice and light.  I would suggest ordering your pizza half and half if you want to try different things.  I didn't even think of doing that until we had already ordered, and then I saw a couple with a half and half pizza.  My friend really enjoyed the pasta with shrimp dish  and said she was planning when she could come back to Bottega Louie just to order that dish.  To end our dinner, the eight of us split two chocolate souffles.  Omg, this was heaven in my mouth.  Warm, soft, delicate chocolate with a vanilla cream.  I am salivating just thinking about it.  Eight girls ordered two pizzas, three pasta dishes, a salad, and two souffles for only $17 each.  Not too shabby for a trendy LA restaurant.  I also got some macaroons to go.  Lemon, Raspberry and Chocolate Salted Caramel.  The display of macaroons is so colorful but at $1.75 each they are pricey.  I guess that is the price you gotta pay for a good macaroon. . . I can't wait to go back to Bottega Louie and make more people fans of this great restaurant.
