ReviewID: 03me8eblnRQN_1zXpOt4FA
ReviewerID: e6h4kKcCsOjPdgeMcLOWqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Sometimes when people hype up a movie too much, I end up being disappointed. This was kind of the case with Pizzeria Mozza in the sense that I expected the most delicious heaven-on-earth pizza. Is that fair? Not necessarily. Here's my review:. . Pizza: pouring over the hundreds of reviews on yelp, I tried to plan a strategy in advance to avoid decision paralysis on the spot. Everybody seemed to have a different opinion on what the "best" pizza was...so it was a pretty difficult choice. I went with the fennel sausage (waiter said it was the most ordered pizza there) and the Finnochiona (salami) with fresno chiles. The salami was the one I was most excited about, but it turned out to the lesser of the 2 pizzas in my opinion. It has a slight kick to it, but i was hoping for less grease and more bold flavors. Instead, the chiles looked and tasted like red bell peppers and everything seemed like an ordinary pizza to me. The fennel sausage on the other hand was special at least because it was light, slightly sweet, and the sausage was good. . . Dessert: promptly after our plates were cleared, we were presented with dessert menus as if "of course you would want dessert, why would I even bother asking if you want to see our menu?" I had already planned on ordering this infamous butterscotch budino anyway, so I guess that was fine. I was extremely hesitant about the desert because a) i'm not a fan of butterscotch and b) salt?? I was pleasantly surprised because if you dip your spoon deep enough down, you get the whole range of flavors: the rich butterscotch, the cream on top, and the speckles of crunchy salt. All in all, I was surprised that I enjoyed it, but I'm not going to lie and say it's my favorite dessert in the world. . . Service-fine. Not bad, not over the top. Service was scarce, which was fine because we didn't need much else. . . Overall: i had a pleasant experience, and I'm glad I finally tried Pizzeria Mozza. Would I say they have the best pizzas I have ever had? No. But, that being said, I do think they have very unique pizza ingredients and flavor combinations, which makes it unique from most pizza places. I would definitely be willing to go back and try some of the other types of pizzas there.
