ReviewID: 044nDcf1o2Cgd_A3kKstwg
ReviewerID: kWVaJ1X8ty0co3_LOWR3BQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Varasano&#39;s Pizzeria
Category: Pizza
I've eaten at Varasano's twice since opening night last week, and managed to sample many of the pies on the menu.  The pizza far surpasses anything else that's available in Atlanta.. . Appetizers are strong.  The classic Caprese salad was well-executed.  Each individual slice of tomato had been perfectly seasoned prior to serving, so they had begun to release their juices and meld with the mozzarella.  Dipped in fruity olive oil and their syrupy balsamic, individual bites of salad really sang.  We also enjoyed a salumi plate; the proscuitto, bresaola, and coppa (I think?) tasted like they'd been recently sliced to the best thickness.  The proscuitto, in particular, just about melted onto my tongue.. . Now, onto the pizzas.  After sampling many of them, I think that the best aspect of the Varasano's pie is a precise balance between the crust and toppings.  These are thin-crust pizzas, and too much on top would overpower the dough in terms of both taste and structure.  But in a pie like the Nucci, flavors of delicate char and pillowy interior stand up to the arugola and proscuitto on top.  I'd definitely recommend the Nucci.. . A red-clam pie showed off the underlying sweetness of the tomato sauce married to the briny freshness of the sea.  The Margherita -- a classic -- was well-executed here, the classic sauce-mozzarella-basil combination boosted by that perfect crust.  Nana's pie was also good, if a little bit bland.. . My overall favorite, though, is the Dolce pie.  It's sweet, almost a dessert pizza, with Medjool dates, walnuts, rosemary, and honey highlighed with an almost nutty Fontina cheese.  It's a combination unlike any that I've had before, and one that I will be certain to enjoy many times in the future.. . If you still have room at the end of your meal, I'd recommend the chocolate cake.  It's fudgy and amazing, with a toffee-like brittle candy providing crunch.  Some friends enjoyed the fried doughnuts, but I didn't have a chance to try them.. . Service was friendly and knowledgeable, offering recommendations and staggering the arrivals of our pies (savory before the Dolce) for maximum enjoyment.  No complaints here.. . I'll definitely be a regular at Varasano's for the best pizza in Atlanta.
