ReviewID: 07VbHlnU7mzhXXSnH5UlIg
ReviewerID: 3-t_uaPKVQQmOUAIu7C-PA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
pork...Pork....PORK PIZZA PARTY PARADISE!!! . . Happy 21st birthday to my not so lil' sis anymore and thanks for picking the perfect pizzeria for your bday lunch! . . Mozza is the spot and its packed even for a midday weekday lunch stop. However, we get seated quickly at the counter where we can observe the delicate hand tossed pizzas being borne with love. . . Start with the Pane bianco with olio nuovo ($4) thick chunks of quality Italian bread generously drizzled with rich garlicky olive oil. The veggie bday girl opts for the Pizza Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage ($18). Then, I, in an attempt to keep the universe in balance from her meatless ways....order the meatiest, porkiest, tastiest thing on the menu....Pizza with BACON, salami, fennel sausage, guanciale(its a cured italian pork cheek or jowl) , tomato &amp; mozzarella ($18) . . The pane bianco is warm and crispy yet soft and a bit oily but tasty. The veggie pizza arrives and is in desperate need of some form of dead animal on top of it . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  ...but my sister enjoys it nonetheless....I'll admit I had a taste and it was pretty damn good. My pizza arrives in all its glory . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  I am momentarily tempted to lick up the little pools of pig grease that have accumulated on the cheese of the pizza....but I exhibit restraint...and simply take a bite. Warm, crunchy, crust...fresh tomato and mozzarella...offset by marvelous meatiness on every inch of the pie....thick, tasty sausage...delicious guanciale, thin salami and fantabulous salty BACON to make this the ULTIMATE pork lovers pizza. . . With that...I leave you with a quote from one of me and my sisters favorite cartoons of all time... . . Homer: Are you saying you're never going to eat any animal again? What about bacon? . Lisa: No. . Homer: Ham? . Lisa: No. . Homer: Pork chops? . Lisa: Dad, those all come from the same animal. . Homer: Heh heh heh. Ooh, yeah, right, Lisa. A wonderful, magical animal!
