ReviewID: 08O6nQfAzfCsyLR__nSD8w
ReviewerID: hAgaqzL_BsZvKe6DLMsMUg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Don't get me wrong, I love Din Tai Fung and would opt to come here about once a week if I could, but nevertheless I have to deduct two stars for a couple of reasons (just bear with me here).. . First of all, you HAVE to try the vegetable dumplings. Whawhuwha--VEGETABLE dumplings??!! . . Yes. The VEGETABLE dumplings. . . Hey, I'm as much of a meat-tearing carnivore as the next Yelper, but trust me on this: the mixture of vermicelli, chopped mushrooms, scallions and lord knows what else is an absolute winner. The mushrooms give the dumplings a certain pungent flavour that's similar to meat... but tastier.. . Next, get the chicken soup. They're made from scratch and loaded with chunks of chicken and spices. Reminds me of grandma. *nostalgic sigh*. . Okay, now for the -2 stars.. . First and foremost, PARKING IS TERRIBLE!!! And the WAIT!! Except for that one time that I came here at 9pm on a weeknight, I've had to drive around the lot for 30 minutes AT LEAST, and THEN wait another 45 minutes for my number to be called. This is mainly why I don't chose to come here that often. Sometimes, even warm vegetable dumps can't make up for all of that time wasted.. . So anyways, Din Tai Fung is famous for their Shanghai xiao long bao, and I guess they're ooooookay... but if you've tried any of Crystal Jade's xiao long baos, you'll find that Din Tai Fung's pork dumps are just a sorry excuse for the real thing. My parents, having been to Shanghai, agree with me on this point. Actually, they absolutely refuse to order the xiao long baos at Din Tai Fung because they think it's such a waste of gut space. Yeah, I know, we're being total pork dump snobs, but I can't help it!! It's like... it's like... comparing the moon! To a frog! Or something.. . So there you go, 3 stars overall, but really, go if you have the chance. And maybe you'll get lucky and find a parking space *snicker*
