ReviewID: 0jdhWozyrz46sKdwYLiWgw
ReviewerID: tXqVduTJHLbrrwVEO8JX6w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
Had dinner here the other night. It's almost guaranteed that Palm's food is going to be good and satisfying but for some reason I'm not a regular here. I still opt out to choose the smaller, unknown Thai restaurants in Thai Town, Hollywood. . . Valet parking behind the restaurant is $2.50. These guys drive like maniacs. I wonder if the restaurant would cover damages done by them if something was to happen? There are some shady places where they have valet service but "it's not their responsibility &amp; they're not liable for damages" done by the valet guys. I think that's horse sh!t to be honest.. . The food - For two people we got the duck curry (red curry). I asked for some spicy but it wasn't at all. We also ordered the Fried trout with mango/cashew nut sauce. They give you some nice hefty filets and the sauce is good (sweet). Both of those items were very good. I'm actually going to eat the rest for lunch today because we were not able to finish it. Since I eat Thai food practically everyday, I try to order something I don't see everyday which were those two items. With rice and non-alki drinks, it was about $40 with tip. Not too bad.. . The service - Since most of the patrons that come here are not Thai, the employees here speak decent English, so for the non-Thai speakers that eat here, you guys should be alright. We had no issues getting a table, it was about 6:30pm. It got really packed around 7:30ish. . . Since this place is popular, I think the service seems a bit pushy. I barely sat down and I was asked to order. My friend went to the restroom and I was waiting on her to go over the menu. I think we were asked 3 times if we were ready before we actually were. If I wanted to, I could order the first time I was asked but my friend is sort of new to Thai food so I wanted to make sure she was going to be happy with the food so we took our time.. . Throughout the course of the dinner, I appreciated the "Is everything okay?" But after some time, I started to hear it a bit excessively. I was full before my friend because I eat fast so she was still picking at the food. We were asked right away, "Want to box it?" I was like uh?. . When we finally got the check and boxed up the food (which the waitress did for us), I hear her get on her walkie talkie, "table such and such is checking out, come get the plates." I understand you want to clean up the table and get the people out, but talk about rushing your customers out the door.. . I like Palms and the food here but I don't like to go to a sit down restaurant where I feel like I'm cattle be herded out the door. This place isn't small either, there's plenty of tables so I don't feel the need to eat like a starving raccoon. If you have a big party, this place can cater to it. This is also a great place to bring people for their first experience with Thai food. . . I guess I'm not a regular here because they don't really build a relationship with their customers unlike some of the smaller Thai restaurants in Hollywood. Palms know they get good business and they will be busy, so maybe that's one thing that isn't high on their priority list.. . BTW, much props to the Thai Elvis. He's been doing his thing for a good time now, so kudos to him.
