ReviewID: 0JYf0YAVuBaOUrZ_U1-QaQ
ReviewerID: 5AOCaS4veNqTBv1VoD6fcg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Andrew W. described Oster Mozza as the following: "This is Restoration Hardware decor with incredibly officious service, pompous attitudes and... a view of not one, but two gas stations (!) and an EZ Lube. At night, the harsh fluorescent lights of the gas station across Melrose casts an eerie glow all over the dining room, blinding any diners facing it. But the staff is pretending they don't notice any of it. Come on! Pull up the shades and spare us the neon signs." He is absolutely right. You pay a lot of money here not only for the food but also for the atmosphere and its certainly not very appealing. They could easily hide those eye-sores but for whatever reason they choose not to. The staff is also quite unfriendly in general. They are not especially helpful with menu questions and the sommelier gave us some attitude about our apparent lack of wine knowledge - isn't it his job to help us with that?! Isn't he obviously supposed to know more about wine than us?! The music was also unbelievably loud and annoying. It totally didn't go along with the atmosphere - well actually, maybe it did match the neon lights from across the street. When we asked our waiter about it he proudly explained that it was coming from Mario's ipod. Well, Mario does not have the best taste in music and why the f didn't Mario take his ipod with him wherever he went? The food was all just okay and certainly not worth about $100 per person. The mozzarella selection was pretty great, but the pasta dishes were all extremely small and the entrees were equally unimpressive. None of us felt like we'd eaten anything exceptional. The desserts were actually very good - and the olive oil gelato had a unique and interesting flavor - but again, these were all very small as well. I would definitely go back if somebody else was paying, not on my own dime. Also, days later, my friend noticed that Osteria Mozza double charged his credit card for our meal. They gave him a lot of attitude when he asked for his charge to be adjusted. They completely gave him the run-around and wouldn't respond to his calls and emails and took weeks to finally fix the problem. That is unacceptable customer service in my opinion.
