ReviewID: 0kMs7sDPcYxsdFa_osOI5w
ReviewerID: kASam1pBYbh1AEX_tRbd3Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Gingergrass
Category: Vietnamese
This is a cool little joint that serves refreshing takes on Vietnamese dishes.  I was brought here by a friend who lives in the neighborhood and when she described the "noodle bowl" served here, I was already convinced that I would like it.  I had recently seen an Anthony Bourdain show where he visited Singapore and the cold noodles he was slurping looked too good.  While this probably isn't close to the same thing, it looked pretty similar and tasted damn good.. . We started with a round of their specialty drinks - fresh ginger limeade, a basil-lime elixir and a gingergrass gingerale.  I had the first and it was slightly tart and OK.  My two lunch companions had the other two - they both liked the gingerale so I ordered another gingerale for them.  Pass on the basil-lime elixir... it looked like a fish aquarium where the waters been stagnant and algae is growing... like Finding Nemo.. . Then came two spring rolls - (1) the gingergrass which has crab and avocado and is served with a creamy aioli and (2) the summer roll which has shrimp and roasted pork and is served with a peanut sauce.  Both were fresh but not stand-outs.. . I ordered a noodle bowl which is a brothless bowl of cold rice noodles with small portions of different vegetables, seasoned meat of your choice (I chose beef) and a sweet sauce where I only poured 1/3 into my bowl.  I had to squeeze in some hot chili sauce, stirred and devoured.  Perfect dish with great flavor that hits the spot when you don't want to eat too much and/or don't want something too heavy.. . One of my friends ordered pho that looked amazingly fresh with tons of vegetables and had generous slices of red chili.  She still remembered our experience at Cobras and Matadors and obviously still hadn't forgiven me so tossed a chili slice to me to try.  I took the piece, chewed and smiled.  Yes it had heat... amazing.  So I asked for another... she looked annoyed that i wasn't cringing at the heat as she did then busted out laughing.  If you like heat, ask them to provide a small plate of these.  Really hot but not to the point where you can't taste anything.. . Sure this place isn't that authentic but they serve great food.  I look forward to my next visit.
