ReviewID: 0kxsV4147Pz-ts7zrRDWtw
ReviewerID: Wr9nP6B2Ch9TX6ZqFqw7dQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Uncommon Ground
Category: Bars
For my 100th Yelp review, I really agonized over what it should be. In my mind, I set up rules - nothing overreviewed; has to be cool &amp; original; perhaps west loop-ish; something avant garde, tres chic, fanciful, blah, blah, blah. But who am I trying to impress, anyway? . . Suddenly, I realized I needed to review a restaurant that truly meant something to me, that:. - has never failed me. - has consistenly tittilated my tastebuds with innovative fare. - offers a wide variety of dishes, including organic items. - is a place I love to impress the uninitiated. - provides friendly, knowledgeable service. - in essence, is a place on which I can always rely. . And Uncommon Ground fits the bill. My beloved and I frequent the Devon Ave. location the most but our recent Sunday afternoon visit at the Clark location sealed it for me, so there it is. (Sundays are also $5 Bloody Mary day and in my opinion one of the best Bloodys I have ever had.) I have never been disappointed in one thing I have eaten at Uncommon Ground from the sunshine salad to the prairie pure macaroni &amp; cheese (prairie pure butterkase, aged white cheddar, gruyere, tart apple slaw) to the open faced meatloaf sandwich (bacon wrapped meatloaf, yukon gold mashed potatoes, caramelized onions, sautéed spinach, demi-glace) to the lemon ginger cheesecake.. . Also, the following two appetizers are winners of the Deborah E Death Row Food Award: the sweet potato fries with goat cheese fondue and the baked artichoke/goat cheese/pesto dip w/extra virgin olive oil &amp; crostini. One of each is ordered at every visit - and often, one order is not enough.. . Kudos to Helen and Michael Cameron for your community dedication, informative email newsletters and website, for your organic roof top garden (Devon Ave.), your nightly musical offerings, ever-changing artwork and your Green Room Sessions.. . Yes, Uncommon Ground, some day I will miss you. As Chicago continues to tax its residents out the ass and I question how I can afford to live here, you will truly be one of the things I will miss the most. . Carry on!
