ReviewID: 0L0uEk-vF6rYILNgl-0S1w
ReviewerID: NaDwZsvtHQkdN_V3ULlsHg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
A must eat for any LA natives and visitors! If you love authentic and exotic meats, this place definitely lives up to its reviews! . . I recently tried Wurstkuche for the first time with my brother and my parents and we instantly fell in love. When you first arrive, it reminds me of maybe San Francisco or maybe New York, definitely not LA.. which I loved! You walk in and there is a small counter to your left where your order is taken. As you look around, you think, darn - no place to eat! o well! However, once you make your way down the long hall, you enter a room that takes you into another world. Seriously, so NOT LA and i fell in love with the place even more! Yes, there was plenty of seating but the best part was that instead of ordering your beer in front, you can do it here too! . . My dad and I sat down and checked out the crowd. Loved it! Got a few waters and tasted the cucumber in it and loved the place even more! While waiting for our food to arrive, we ordered 3 beers.. . 1. Floris Apple Ale - witbier fermented with apples 3.5% ABV 8oz. Pretty sweet beer, probably wouldn't recommend it but it was different, and actually pretty good. But definitely not for most people.. . 2. Franziskaner - hefe weisse 5% ABV 500ml. This was pretty good! My favorite of the three we ordered!. . 3. Koestritzer Schwarzbier - black, sweet malty 4.8%ABV 16oz. My mom's favorite!. . We waited for a good 15 min and finally our big tray of food arrived! We ordered:. . 1. 3 Bratwurst - fine cuts of pork, coriander &amp; nutmeg.. . 2. Bockwurst - veal, pork &amp; spices. . 3. Kielbasa - polish style, pork &amp; beef, onions and spices. . 4. Duck &amp; Bacon with Jalapeño Peppers - juicy and packed with flavor. . And because we ordered so many hot dogs for the 4 of us, they brought out our choice of sauerkraut, sweet peppers and grilled onions on a platter. . . All very good and definitely well worth the drive for a real hot dog! We also ordered the pomme frites, one regular and one with truffle oil. We ordered 4 sauces: . . 1. Chipotle Aioli  - tasted like bbq chips! . . 2. Curry Ketchup . . 3. Pesto Mayo. . 4. Bleu Cheese Walnut and Bacon ~~~~ YESSSSS!! . . The pomme frites were so GOOD! BUT i am still loyal to NYC'S Pomme Frites - a hole in the wall that i crave every day of my lame LA life. . . And to tell you the truth, if it weren't for the selection of amazing beers, I would've given it 4 stars. The beer put it all together.. like the chocolate sauce on top of a sundae. So thank you, Wurstkuche!
