ReviewID: 0m5Gh4h6au4kTpPT6HE_pw
ReviewerID: 5MCBLBxr10NLUKZ4AboAMg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kopi Travelers Cafe
Category: Coffee & Tea
Wait a minute...why is this place so awesome and yet in all my years wandering the north side, I've never been? Travesty, I tell ya... . The whole place buzzes with a sort of energy only derived from natural substances, the thrill of something unknown. Jolly? IN the 2 hours or so I enjoyed an early dinner I saw TWO couples nuzzle sweetly (not in an overly gross way), people discussing world politics in a civilized fashion (despite disagreeing), and a group sitting in the front window emitting laughter and jovial vibes despite the rain....hmmm, I like this place. Good energy is hard to come by. . . Black Chai Shake: heaven. OMG. serious. $4.25 for a small, but worth it...gone in approximately 4 minutes. . . Falafel plate (holy falafel kick lately, eh?): $9.95 with lots of warm pita, toasty falafel, roasted peppers and eggplant, chopped tomatoes and onion, tahini and hummus. STUFFED with veggies. Love. . . Coffee: on par. Splenda and real cream at the ready. . . Dessert: rich chocolate cake, I was feeling indulgent. It was worth it...tasted like it was frosted in uncooked brownie batter. YUM. . . Service: fabulouso...even mid-shift change. Very nice. . . A 5-star experience with a few hiccups that notched it down a bit.... . 1. The breastfeeding mother in the seat RIGHT next to me. I'm all for being ya know...comfortable in public. But, I don't know, right next to me while I am drinking a chai milkshake? Yeah, no. Sorry, I'm as pro-woman, pro-everything as it gets, but I need a little breathing room. Boobs don't gross me out, but yeah...ok, I've made my point. . . 2. The jackhammering/construction going on near the bathroom. Loud banging noises is not "chill." Can we wait and do this after hours peeps!? Holy cow. . . 3. The guy that sat down NEXT to the breastfeeding lady...and proceeded to shake out all of his greasy, stringy hair and then kind of like play with it for about 10 minutes. Ugh. It's not a good combo when trying to eat...trust. . . Really though, this place rocks my socks off, and I'll be back time and again...the food is fantastic and fast/fresh/healthy, people are sweet, crowd is legit and I pretty much just had to stay away from the gift shop in the back for fear of not being able to control myself.... . well done.
