ReviewID: 0m5wfuSFr_5GWPnJV6qb3w
ReviewerID: riZl2wkiHE1X0eonc41Xgg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
NAME: Canter's (What? Yet ANOTHER review of Canter's???!!). . TYPE OF CUISINE: Traditional Jewish comfort food. . ADDRESS: 419 North Fairfax Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90036. . PHONE: 323-651-2030. . RESERVATIONS: If you need 'em. . GENERAL LOCATION: The Fairfax district, NW corner Fairfax and Rosewood. . HOURS: 24/7. . DELIVERY SERVICE: Yep, catering too. . WEBSITE: . http://www.cantersdeli.... /. . AMBIANCE: It's fun to be at Canter's, where you can still be waited on by friendly/hostile Jewish aunts! However -- times have changed.. . I'm so old I remember when Canter's was still in Boyle Heights! I remember sitting -- with my parents, my grandparents and uncle -- in a kiddie chair with suction cups on the bottom! I remember the original brown-painted screen doors on spring-loaded hinges that banged like hell when you walked through. I remember that heavenly smell going past the deli counter, and wondering what it came from, because no matter what we ate at Canter's, no matter how much I hoped that this would be the day -- it was never what that smell came from! It wasn't until some thirty or more years later that somehow or other I found out: it's sour cream pickled herring! That was the Quintissential Canter's Smell! If you've never tried it, you owe yourself! And then they moved to Fairfax Avenue.. . During the 60s, Fairfax Avenue was totally mellow: head shops selling bongs, sandal shops (I wore a pair of tailor-made sandals that lasted for YEARS), the Free Press Bookstore, hippies and flower children and beatniks strolling the avenue on a warm summer night, shaking tambourines, strumming guitars, laughing raucously and smoking joints -- and they all ended up at Canter's in the wee hours for food and wild heated political talk. And the friendly/hostile aunt waitresses would talk them into going back home so their parents would stop frantically worrying about them.. . I lived near the corner of Fairfax and Willougby in those days, and one night we heard an explosion that rattled the windows and scared the hell out of us: some  right-wing malcontent had set off a bomb that blew in the front door of Art Kunkin's Free Press newspaper office. But I digress.... . FOOD: Every Jewish deli in town has it's own way of doing things: Langer's, Junior's, Nate 'n' Al -- they all have their own take on Jewish deli, and Canter's is no exception. I had some legal business to take care of in the area, so while there I went to Canter's deli, and came out with a quart of matzoball soup, hummus, potato salad, cole slaw, and a pastrami (WOW was that good! And, yes, although I am a vegetarian, there are a couple of things that will blow me off the rails: really good BBQ, and, every great once in a while, good pastrami) on rye, all to go. (Strange, isn't it, how corn beef -- Irish -- and pastrami -- Italian -- have long been established standards on every Jewish deli menu...). . This stuff is GOOD! Their recipes have long ago been perfected, and they know what they're doing. You can line up at the deli section or the bakery at Canter's with absolutely no fear. . . VEGGIE FACTOR: It's possible, but it won't be as much fun!. . FOOD PRESENTATION: It comes on plates; you eat it.. . DRINKS: Everything you'd expect in a deli including bottled beer.. . SERVICE: It's fine. When it's crowded, be patient and enjoy the ambiance and the characters -- both the customers and the staff!. . PRICE RANGE: The stuff I took out of the deli ran around forty bucks, which I consider fair price for fair value.. . PAYMENT: Cash, CC. . PARKING SITUATION: Free parking in their lot; be sure to get your parking stub stamped when you pay for your food!
