ReviewID: 0MO1BAqcF68QG42BEr3inw
ReviewerID: 5h8bbeFzAWU-yxOxCh-7XQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Social
Category: Wine Bars
Well here we are again.  Another new restaurant opening in suddenly chic downtown Atlanta.  As y'all may know, I am an unabashed and totally biased downtowner.  Shawn and I move to Twelve Centennial Park in February.  Part of our commitment was to live downtown and not look longingly north to Midtown and beyond.  Well, I will have to tell you that it has been no problem.. I noticed this quaint new spot during one of my frequent walks.  It is situated behind FAB and the Southern Company building on Ivan Allen.  The street, West Peachtree Place, is a narrow tree lined road.  Social is situated in the middle of the block and, should you not know where it is, you will miss it.  The space is small, intimate, minimalist and beautiful.  . We visited on the first or second night and have been back steadily since.  The brothers, Jay and Ray,  that own Social also own Fina in College Park.  The influences are Spanish, French, Italian and Moroccan.   We love the simple yet complex flavors.  Virtually every thing that we have tried has been extremely tasty with one exception,, the steak frites.  It's not bad just a bit bland.  I love the cucumbers, mint, and dried cherries, the vegetable lasagna, and the mushrooms.  . We also find the wine list to be comparably inexpensive, interesting, and delightful.  . They offer daily specials such as half price pasta on Mondays and half price carafes of wine on Saturdays.  . We haven't yet visited for a cheese and meat plate with wine.  We must!. In short, this is just the kind of place that downtown needed.  You can have an outstanding dinner with wine and not be out a mortgage payment.  . The staff is great.  They love the food and the wine and seem to adore the owners.  Their passion merely adds to the entire experience.  . We love the brothers.  They are intent on building a local gathering spot as they have done in College Park.  . Please, go, try, enjoy and support these fine folks.. I hope that my buddy Deanne goes soon.
