ReviewID: 0op6D2cRuzEtxIWf3sZy3w
ReviewerID: 2G7Lb0X2XsSlIZfryUu20A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Lawry's has quite possibly the worst background music found in elevators west of the Mississippi. I don't expect them to put on tunes of Barry Manilow or Frank Sinatra, but a hired pianist would fit in well into a place like this...NOT the mellow Jazz sounds of the 1980's.. . Moving on to visual ambiance, it's kinda kitschy with the lodge-like theme  hitting you once you walk through the door. It's elegant decor that might strike some as overdone but I felt it was definitely a mood maker (as opposed to the Muzak mood breaker) and I felt all important when they seated my sister and me by pulling out the table (even though my butt had already made it half way around the seat).. . Service is very good. Our server was very nice and accommodating, our glasses were always filled and dirty plates were immediately removed...due to the team effort set forth by the water-guy, the bus guy and our server. It was really crowded and we always felt like they were attending just to us.. . And the food...it was delicious. Or at least my prime rib was (I ordered the California cut rare-medium rare). It was juicy and flavorful. It almost pulled my pescatarian sister out of retirement (back into the arms of red meat). She held off and had the salmon which was a bit of a let down. It was nearly tasteless and the couscous was a bit lacking in the flavor department as well.. . My meal was far superior with the excellent prime rib, creamed corn (thank you yelp for recommending that one!), tasty (and visually impressive) spun salad, yorkshire pudding and mashed potatoes. Honestly, I didn't even touch the mashed potatoes. The potatoes create a neat swimming pool of gravy, but I've made mashed potatoes better than this (or maybe with just more butter and cream than can be healthily possible). The creamed corn was excellent. My sister scooped most of the creamed corn off of my plate onto hers. Very classy.. . Drinks are also pretty good. I ordered two gin tonics which tasted very ginny on the first sip then tasted quite delightful the rest of the way down the glass.  My sister said my breath smelled like a fire hazard by the end of the night.. . Lovely evening and extremely crowded due to the holidays, but I'd say it's worth the visit if you live in LA.
