ReviewID: 0p6PqJFiKuXey8M9OWnbwQ
ReviewerID: YWFbTcVnun8i03XnEU7kVg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Deliciously SLOW. . That's the best way to describe Alcove café. Everything my girl and I tried while we were at Alcove, from the smoothies, coffees, cakes, baked goods and our entrees, tasted fantastic. The only problem I had with Alcove was that it took forever to get receive our food once it was ordered.. . My girl and I arrived at Alcove at about 4:15pm, on a beautiful Saturday afternoon. To our surprise, even though it was such a beautiful day, Alcove was fairly deserted. For those of you who have not been there, the majority of the tables are located outdoors. The outdoor dining area is beautiful. All the tables are shaded by big tress and umbrellas. There are also plants and flowers everywhere. They do have a few tables indoors, but not many. The inside of Alcove is tiny. Right when you walk in, you come face to face with a huge display case that is filled with the most amazing looking desserts. Everything from cakes, pies, to cookies and cupcakes. This is also where you place your food order, and that is my biggest problem with Alcove. We wanted to start with an appetizer and smoothies, so we placed our order and found a table outside. After about fifteen minutes, we got our appetizer. Once we ate that, I had to go back into the little room, wait in a line, and place our dinner order while my girl stayed outside to hold our table. Once our dinner order was placed, it took about twenty five minutes to get our entrees. Then once we were finished with dinner, I had to go back inside to order our desserts. As I said above, we got to Alcove at 4:15pm and did not leave until around 6:30pm. Don't get me wrong, I loved Alcove. The scenery, the food, the people, and even the employees were all great; it just took way too long to get our food. I really wish this place had waiter/waitress service. Normally, since the atmosphere is so relaxing, I would not have minded hanging out there for over two hours. That particular evening though, we had to be somewhere by 6:45pm, which by the time we finished with our meal, put us in a rush.. . Now that I got my one and only complaint out of the way, it's time for the food.. . To start we shared a basket of their sweet potato and Yukon gold fries. Both of these were amazing. They were served piping hot and all the fries were extremely crunchy. To dip the fries I got a side of their pineapple tartar sauce, which was delicious. With our appetizer we both also got a smoothie. I got their pineapple and banana smoothie, which was made with OJ, and my girl got a blueberry smoothie, which was made with apple juice. Both of these smoothies were tasty and refreshing.. . For dinner I got their open faced steak sandwich and my GF got their buffalo chicken wrap. My steak sandwich was delicious. The steak was big, flavorful and tender and was placed on some amazing, fluffy bread and topped with mushrooms and onion rings. They also give you a side of Madagascar green peppercorn au jus sauce for dipping, which tasted great. The sandwich also came with a side of onion rings. My steak sandwich was delicious but what really stood out about my meal were the O rings. They were as big as donuts and about as sweet as them too. Each ring was layered with sweet fried dough and two pieces of onions. I could have eaten a hundred of their fantastic rings. My girl's buffalo chicken wrap was also spectacular. This wrap contained lots of juicy, tender chicken, loads of mozzarella and blue cheese and the one of the tastiest buffalo sauces I have ever tried. This wrap also came with a side salad.. . For dessert, we were felling fruity, so we shared a slice of strawberry cake and a slice of triple berry cake. We also ordered a red velvet cookie and a white chocolate mocha. Both pieces of cake were huge, moist, and packed full of fruit. The RV cookie was amazing, too. The cream cheese filling was great. Their white chocolate mocha was also great.. . The prices here weren't bad. Our entire bill was about sixty dollars, which was not bad considering all the stuff we ordered.. . If you're ever in the Los Feliz area and feel like some phenomenal food and desserts, then check out Alcove. I know you will love everything about this place, especially the scenery. Just make sure you have plenty of time free time, because you may be there a while.
