ReviewID: 0pm75bBTYHaGu53VIr3MsA
ReviewerID: nQU0kOO7KKU1HR1CvaKC4w
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
(Edit 10/8/07:  Haha, Tom Colicchio, you douchebag.  Gee what a surprise:  . . One NY chef loses Michelin star, another gains two By Jennifer Ablan . . NEW YORK (Reuters) - Tom Colicchio of "Top Chef" fame lost a Michelin star at his New York restaurant Craft, while British celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay gained a rare two stars for his first U.S. venture here.). . ------------------------------------. . Impressions on looking at Craft:  It's very sleek inside.  It's unbelievably overpriced.  It's an attempt to revert to the American steakhouses and fine dining establishments of the 1970s, with an updated attitude.  The menu is intentionally and pretentiously unpretentious (moving away from the last decade's trend of describing every dish as "X with Y and Z, topped with A and B, in a C sauce" in favor of the terse "Steamed Broccoli:  $10."). . It's also yet another entree into the already crowded arena of full fat, All-American comfort food, but of the high end variety.  This trend cannot last, and when it does end, Craft will be ill-suited to adapt.. . Disclaimer:  I have not had the food.  I have had drinks there, however.  The waitress was ill-informed as to what drinks were on the menu.  When she delivered our party's drinks, she first dropped off all the beers and wines and rocks drinks, then eventually dropped off my martini.  Unfortunately, my martini was sitting there in its shaker, diluting in its melting ice, instead of being poured.  A major faux pas in the bartending biz.  It ended up predictably watery.  No good.. . Craft's menu is so ridiculously expensive I would never eat there, and I am not one to shy away from an expensive menu, as my upcoming review of Robuchon will confirm.  But you cannot justify charging $96 for a 6 oz. wagyu sirloin steak on any planet.  Especially when all your veggies are a la carte.. . Oh, and by the way, Craft advertises the above steak as a "sirloin steak."  I HAVE to think that they meant "tenderloin" (aka filet mignon).  Sirloin is what they make hamburgers out of.  I'm SURE they must have meant "tenderloin."  Which makes one question who the hell is running the show there.. . N.B., You really need to have a wagyu tenderloin?  Go to . http://www.snakeriverf....  and order a whole tenderloin roast (7-8 pounds) for $300.  Slice it into 6 ounce steaks if you must, wrap them well, and deep freeze them.  After trimming, that works out to less than $20 a steak, plus you can use the trimmings in other dishes.  This gives you a pretty good idea of just how much Craft is ripping off its customers.
