ReviewID: 0pXpdOvHZDZGSL25RyjA-w
ReviewerID: ZOPLjrmR1qjc0fk6hFPM5w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
I sort of smell quite delicious after walking out of this fantastic place... well my clothes and hair I think have appreciated it most as they both absorbed and hoarded every fume of fantastic that went on in here. Ambiance wise, I prefer Chosun for an upscale Kbbq experience (smitten w/ their patio), but the service and food quality here was absolutely outstanding. It is only because of KBBQ that I need to come to terms w/ the fact that I'll never turn vegetarian. . . We were served a fantastic house salad (I want the recipe to that insane dressing), then some terrific banchans (reminded me of how much I've frequented way too many mediocre kbbq places on the westside as of late... why even bother!) The banchan selections were absolutely impressive, as we were thrown down an abundance of  freshly prepared, superbly seasoned and flavored... like the sort of nonsense I have dreams about level of tastiness. Highlights were the cucumber kimchee, which I got seconds for and the veggie pajeon. And the caramelized sweet potato cubes. And the bean sprout salad. And the marinated broccoli. Wow did I pig out and the entrees hadn't even arrived. . . We ordered the Kalbi special as well as the marinated chicken. So much food for 2 people! Next time I'll be sure to order one meat, then one grilled veggie platter if dining for two. In addition, we ordered the gosul bibimpap which was excellent. Our waitresses were entirely pleasant, attentive, were constantly checking on us, were really proactive on watching our meats being prepared and providing us with constant banchan replenishment. Highly important.  And just when you thought this couldn't get any better...  Rice wrappers were involved for your wrapping pleasure.     . . Washed down with a few glasses of Hite - I think I could use a nap and hibernate for the next 6 months.  And have real happy dreams.
