ReviewID: 0q2gZl6GBCP5-4ayQ-4TEQ
ReviewerID: cWLSaEabp-BJq6XmovsZIQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
A lot has already been said about Alinea so I'll just add some highlights of the 5 star meal:. . * I had a lot of trouble getting a Friday night table for the weekend that my wife and I were going to be in Chicago but finally was able to secure a table the day before.  My recommendation to get a table:  get on the waiting list for your desired time and call 24 hours before to see if there have been any cancellations.  Worked for me.. . *  Food was fun, fantastic, and beautiful.  There are only 2 menus, the 12 course Tasting ($125) and the 24 course Tour ($175).  Very expensive, yes, but worth it (in my mind) for a truly unique dining experience.  . . If you're in from out of town like we were, I recommend springing for the Tour.  If you get the Tasting, you may see some great looking dishes being brought to other tables that you won't get on the Tasting.. . *  If you're on the Tour, don't eat any bread.  You will barely be able to finish all the food in the Tour itself.  Trust me on this.. . * The Sommelier poured us some great wine to drink with our meal but it was *extremely* expensive so be careful if you're trying to keep your meal cost out of the stratosphere.  I'm talking $22 a glass!. . * Service is some of the best I've ever experienced.. . * As you can read in the other reviews, the food here comes in very novel and strange presentations with unusual combinations of tastes - but it's all great.  Make sure to come with an open mind and you'll really be in for a treat.. . * Very cool entryway and door to the restaurant - but sort of unmarked so don't be confused.  Cool interior.. . * They give you a printed menu to take home with you after the meal, which is helpful for remembering what you ate (24 courses is a lot).  You can also take pictures with your camera or camera phone if you want to.. . In summary:  I hope you enjoy this place as much as we did!
