ReviewID: 0q7iCNo0848dBMIeNqy0LQ
ReviewerID: y6hQpJU3-uOlsGeWZuL5Vw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
A couple of my friends had claimed that the burgers at  Umami Burger are way better than the revered Father's Office burger. Oh man, a shit storm just went down when I heard that. Previously, I've found FO's burger to be the best burger I've had this side of LA. And so of course, with fighting words, I had to see what the hype was all about by checking this place out. I even called up my 2 buddies to help provide some additional weigh-in support to settle this once and for all.. . The place itself isn't very big and you would have to glance around twice to find it on the street. But the decors are simple, cozy yet contemporary. And simplicity is where Umami shines. Their menu items of a half dozen or so choice gourmet burgers are tantalizing. As it's our first time and not sure what to expect, we all decided to each order the signature Umami Burger ($9). We also ordered a side of fries and "tempura" onion rings (total $5). . . The Umami Burger arrived neat and stacked with a thick cut of the good stuff. The fries were thick cut...looked more like french toast sticks you get at BK. And the onion rings look like wearable fried bracelets. Along with the sides, you also get your choice of sauce served in Asian soup spoons.. . The verdict? The Umami Burger came out very juicy and delicious in every bite. Quite impressive, but still - we all agreed the FO burger still reigns supreme. We admit though, the Umami burger patty was definitely juicier and tenderer than FO's, but for overall taste and satisfaction, the FO burger still came out on top. How could this be? One thing about the Umami burger was that while tasty, the savoryness of the tomato-ish sauce(?) completely drowned out the taste of the beef. I thought I was eating a savory meatball marinara sub at one point - not a bad thing though, just where's the burger? The fries are good but a little on the dry side cause of how tightly packed the potatoes are. You're seriously biting into a candy bar chunk of potato. Soft and good but you'll want to dip it in some sauce. We tried the "Umami" ketchup which is tangy and sweeter than traditional ketchup. But they don't give you a whole lot in that spoon (and they're quite stingy on it too if you ask for more). The tempura onions were good though.. . Overall, a great place to try something fresh and familiar...with a slight Japanese twist. The food is delicious and light compared to the competition. Don't forget, they also serve the authentic Mexican Coke (the ones with real sugarcane added). Check it out. While my female friends may argue Umami is better than FO, the guys think otherwise. But we all agree both serve excellent burgers in their own special way.
