ReviewID: 0rHORO_qitobOM66tt4NlQ
ReviewerID: pAqJ2BZDAb9jWRUh6ISgxg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Minus one star because the tables are so darned close together and there's always a wait. But what a way to make the most out of a small space! Also minus 1 because 1 out of the 4 pizzas I've tried here was not yummy (although I love broccoli raab I did not enjoy the spicy broccoli raab pizza with cherry tomatoes - not enough roasted tomatoes and it was not SPICY at all. Super bland, yech). . . But outside of that, amazing pizza and salads! I don't find the prices to be steep for the quality - you pay about the same amount for a crappy CPK  pizza and salad (they may be bigger portions but not nearly as tasty), so why not wait a little longer for some Mozza goodness? Besides, the ambiance here is wonderful. It's not difficult to find street parking near the restaurant. I love the warm color scheme here and the fact that you can see the wood burning oven and happy chefs making your food as you wait. The bartender we had was very charming and attentive and made some awesome recommendations. . . Outside of the broccoli raab I've tried the fennel sausage, spicy clam (which was indeed spicy and delicious!), and Egg, guanciale, radicchio, escarole &amp; bagna cauda pizza. My favorite had to have been the latter. A very interesting and delicious combination of egg and bitter greens - I only wish there was more eggy goodness to spread around. I love the pizza crust here and I am a fan of the "bubble" that they seem to have on every pizza I've tried. I love that sensation of all crust in one bite with slightly more cooked cheese and hot air that comes out when you break "the bubble." . . I've also tried the squash blossoms, hunka bread with olive oil, arugala salad and chicken livers. The squash blossoms are delicious and I was motivated to make them myself at home. Easy and delish. The olive oil for the hunka bread was rich and tasty. Fans of arugala MUST try this salad! A light, lemony dressing with cheese shavings on gorgeous greens, mmmm. Perfectly complimented the chicken livers, which were the best preparation of the liver I've ever tasted. . . I will take my pizza lovin dad next time he comes down to LA for sure :)
