ReviewID: 0rL24DTbi319d5td39psbw
ReviewerID: oaYm-xPfTjRmzSKQ0N8C3g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
There's just something horribly wrong and f*cked up about a vegetarian writing a review of Roscoe's House of Chicken and Waffles.  But I'm going to anyway.. . FOOD: Actually, there are a number of vegetarian selections, even if they are all side dishes.  The cornbread here is as good as I've had in the deep and dirty South.  The mac n' cheese is very yummy and flavorful, albeit a bit on a drier side - just don't expect huge drippings of creamy sauce from your fork.  Ah yes so by this time the butter is coagulating in my arteries, but I eat on.  And while I couldn't eat the chicken, I did have Roscoe's famous waffles, which, unlike the ones at the Pasadena location that I had tried last time, were actually very good and everything that a waffle should be - soft and fluffy with just a hint of cinnamon.  The red beans and rice are good as well, surprisingly vegetarian, but frankly I think I could make them at home for better.  Will pass on that one next time. Wish they had a veg version for collard greens.  But all in all, YES, it IS possible for a vegetarian to be satiated in the House of Chicken and Waffles!. . AMBIENCE: We waited 45 minutes to be seated. Being a vegetarian, that would have made me leave immediately AND demand my valet money back if it weren't for that fact that my out-of-town guest really wanted to go there. However, once we were seated I liked the restaurant quite a bit - a homey feel, well-packed but not cramped (hence the long-ass wait that everyone seemed to be willing to put up with) and still quiet enough to have table conversation between stuffing our faces with heart-attack inducing joys.  Our server was nice, and very knowledgable of which foods were and weren't vegetarian (i.e. she warned me that the mashed potatoes and collard greens weren't veggie... darn!).  On top of that, she looked like a pleasant-looking, matronly Latina version of Queen Latifah.  Definitely added to the home-style cookin' ambience.. . PRICES: Pretty good for the amount of food they pile on.  Brunch/Lunch for the 4 of us was about $67, but all of us had enough leftovers for at least two more meals .  Not a bad value for better than decent food, even for the vegheads.. . PARKING: Ok this is worth taking a star off for.  There's valet service for $6.50, which, although I hate paying for parking more than I actually hate looking for parking... it's worth it for this neck of the woods.  If you live close enough to walk to Roscoe's, all the more power to you.. . I can see why the original House of Chicken and Waffles has been around for as long as it has... now to try to get them to add perhaps a vegan chicken option...
