ReviewID: 0suVCNyjFo_yp90P_bblbw
ReviewerID: yOeXbMhHzn-bCzNFphm5WA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
THE GREAT. . THE CHEAP. AND THE GHETTO LAME SCAM. . This could be a truly 5 star place if not for all the crap that you have to go through here.. . THE CHEAP. . Note this place is CASH ONLY which is pretty stupid because it shows you how inconsiderate the owners and how  inconvenient this can be to their  customers.  The owners always use the excuse that it is expensive to have a credit card machine, to that i say look at how much more revenue that could be generate.  The reality is that since its a cash only business these location not only screw with the customers but screw with paying their taxes (which isn't necessarily a bad thing.). . THE GHETTO LAME SCAM. . The other annoying thing was the fact that they tell customers the water in the city is bad so order (pay for) a drink instead.  We ate at four different places in the city that day and no one else told us that.  the fact was at the other places we ate the servers  were happy to offer free water.  TOTAL CHEAPNESS.   Bring your own water hell bring your own soda if they do this to you.  Or even better since the water is so bad the owners  should give you free drinks for your inconvenience.  And if the water is truly that bad buy some bottle water or a few 5 gallon jugs for the customers.. . THE GREAT. . SO why does this place still get 5 stars when most other places like this would get a one or two star from me.  Well its is because the food is extraordinary.  Its one of those few jewels in the city that serves just a few dishes but  what an amazing few they are.. . At most places in SG the rice is just rice.  Medium to long grain generic carb filler.  Here it's different! . . Hainan chicken "Hainanese chicken rice is a dish of Chinese origin most commonly associated with Malaysian cuisine or Singaporean cuisine, although it is also commonly sold in neighbouring Thailand, and found in Hainan, China itself. So-called due to its roots in Hainan cuisine and its adoption by the Hainanese overseas Chinese population in the Nanyang area, the version found in Malaysia/Singapore combines elements of Hainanese and Cantonese cuisines along with culinary preferences in the Southeast Asian region.." (wiki). . If you are a fan of Anthony Bourdain then you will remember his Singapore show here is a clip- (2:50 mark). . . http://www.youtube.com.... . . Its about chicken and rice and I've always wanted to try it, and savoy kitchen has what i think is this quintessential dish,  I think every culture has a chicken and rice dish but this one is the best.  The chicken is delicate without being too dry the skin is not too gelatinous and the the texture is not mealy or over or under cooked.  The rice is fluffy and flavourful with just the right amount of stock and seasoning.   The accompany sauces are ginger oil, dark soy, and chili and how you combine them is up to you, but try them all because they add so much zest and zing to the dish.  My robot friend doesn't like ginger and i felt so sorry for him because he was missing out on the UMAMI that the sauces add to and already extraordinary dish!  I could eat this dish everyday hell five times a day.. . They also have curry which is pretty good and also snails not bad not bad. (edit but i've had better). . Ive been looking for a true interpretation of this dish since i first saw it on TV, and i believe that I've found it.  This dish is worth the inconvenience if you live 100 miles from this place it is still worth the drive.. . It is so nice to eat such a simple but extraordinary dish that made me so happy....Why can't all places have good food like this.  I CRAVE IT AGAIN ALREADY DAMMMMMMM!!
