ReviewID: 0ty_YvSmjVwZs8RfqTGLYQ
ReviewerID: nnXSwqVi16E4iOYzA72SbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Wow, 304 other reviews at the time of this writing. I'm guessing I won't need to write about the decor, the presentation of the food, or any of the other basics. I will, however, write about the crawfish and carbs.. . Crawfish - recommended to us by both the hostess and the server as a "definite must order" since they don't always have them. We order 2 pounds of crawfish (also 2 pounds of shrimp, extra corn, and fried oysters). Personally, I think the crawfish is more of a "consider carefully before you order." . . In the south, the crawfish is known as the poor man's lobster. It's a lot of work for a little meat, and the majority of the crawfish is actually discarded. The disproportionately large head is usually snapped off and thrown away (even if you eat the gold, fatty bit from inside the head section, there's not much to get from it). The proper way to eat the crawfish is to pinch the tail (which will eject the meat) and then chomping down with your teeth to pull the meat out.  Easier than trying to peel the shell away bit by bit. Still, even knowing this trick, I would definitely opt to go for a different item next time I go back.. . As for carbs, prior to getting there, a friend who is a regular mentioned that rice was something he wishes this place offered, and has in fact seen families bring their own tupperwares of rice. We all had a good laugh, but mid-way through the eating, boy, was I craving for some carbs! Unfortunately, they don't offer rice, bread, or anything of the sort here. A table nearby brought their own loaf of french bread from home. Obviously regulars. Just imagine how flavorful it will be to break off a piece of that bread and dip it into that plastic bag of boiled goodness. I wonder why the restaurant doesn't capitalize on this. Someone should operate a push cart outside seeing bowls of rice. . . This place is pretty good and fun with a group of friends. Just remember to skip the crawfish and bring your own carb of choice. Oh, and there's also the long wait...but i'm sure you knew that already from the 304 other reviews that have been made. Have a finger lickin' time!
