ReviewID: 0ub6wA5afOME6owBnR8nww
ReviewerID: FleKL7VuzfB9-oLT7YjxUg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Based on the reviews so far, it seems one thing consistent about Fred 62 is its inconsistency. Fortunately, I've not been unfortunate enough to experience this consistent inconsistency. All in all, I'm glad Fred 62 exists. Not only does it fulfill the function Denny's had filled when I was a wee teenager, it does it - food and decor certainly - better, far better. To evaluate Fred 62 by any other criteria seems a bit unfair.. . My first time at Fred 62 was as a party of four at lunch time mid-week. It did take a while to seat us, but that's to be expected. Once seated, it took a bit of time for the food to arrive. The waitress's get-up, however, functioned as previews that kept us entertained until the food arrived. And the food was fine. Not mind-blowing but certainly not mediocre (or even inedible as I now find many diner fares to be).. . That was the first time. I went again last night at 3am after ditching the Beauty Bar and its oggling middle-aged boors, after having a faboo time at the Burgundy Room, and after walking for an hour - half of it in pin-up heels and half of it barefoot - around Hollywood trying despite our drunken stupor to remember where we'd parked the car.. . Unlike so many who had had less than gracious service at Fred 62, my friend and I found ourselves seated quickly, orders taken promptly, and food brought out faster than I'd ever expect anywhere. That did mean that my friend's mac-and-cheese balls were not warmed through, but my omelet was so delish! The waiter - with more than adequate empathy - offered to take back "the balls" without even being prompted and returned "the balls" hot and ready to melt in her mouth. And, why do I repeatedly put "the balls" in quotes? Because our waiter - yes, a hipster - was having a geek out moment, deriving an embarrassing - and by hipster standards, mortifyingly embarrassing - amount of pleasure in uttering "the balls" or occasionally substituting "your balls" for "the balls." So, yes, all in all, we had a good time with our waiter who did his job and more in ensuring that his inebriated patrons with sore feet left at least a little bit more re-energized with sated taste buds and tummies.
