ReviewID: 0UZ2VcMeDfuX8MGZDhOUuA
ReviewerID: jAiGoRmj3eAkeH_3KfudXg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Eleven City Diner
Category: Diners
Food 4 1/2 stars. Service 5 stars. Wait 1 star. . I came here with the Yelp Komen for the Cure team for some after-walk brunchin'. We had a party of 7 and expected a wait, since there aren't a ton of brunch options in the area. We were told 20 minutes, but waited over an hour. What bothered us was: (1) couldn't they give us a more realistic wait time and (2) they kept seating parties of 4 when tables opened up instead of holding it and pushing 2 together. When we finally were seated upstairs we were a little shocked and perplexed to find the ENTIRE dining area up there had been empty the whole time.. . Aside from the wait it was a great dining experience for the following reasons:. (1) Our server. I don't remember his name, but he was fabulous. He was quick with the coffee, water and other caffeinated beverages.  He was very friendly, made a few helpful suggestions, and checked on us regularly to make sure we were doing good. Well done!. (2) Our food. The food was yummy, I think the only disappointment may have been the matzoh ball soup someone ordered.. (3) Challah French Toast. Two of us got this, I got mine with berries and whipped cream. It was fantastic! I'm not usually a huge french toast person, but devoured this. They give you 3-4 heaping slices, which I couldn't finish. The only critique is that it was nearly impossible to get a bite with any blueberries, those little suckers kept rolling off my fork.. (4) The atmosphere. The place is cute, there are stacks of Bazooka gum boxes and Green River bottles in the window. We sat upstairs and were a bit out of the mix, but got some lovely, straight out of 1976, mustard colored leather chairs on wheels. What they lacked in visual appeal they made up for in comfort.. . Bottom line: This is a great NYC-style deli joint, with real New York bagels and kosher pop to boot. The menu is huge, the portions are generous and it's right near the Roosevelt L stop. I can't wait to go back and try some other things off the menu. BTW they serve breakfast all day.
