ReviewID: 0w84YjH4hvAsD74KxfvcGA
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Crawfish Shack Seafood
Category: Seafood
Day 1. The place is in an Asian Strip Mall it's a bit hard  to notice  on the main road, but once you find it, its a sure place to keep coming on back!  Asian owned but a young Vietnamese Entrepreneur, bright eyed and very excited about his new establishment.  I went to this place back to back, one day after the next! First time I came, ordered the Catfish extra crispy w/ 4 boiled shrimp, corn on the Cobb. I wanted to get some oysters but a dozen wasn't exactly what I think I can handle so I had to sadly forgo this.. . The order came out nice and crispy, places on a bed of towels ( yeah a bit funky, but at least it soaked up the oil, but trust me for a fried fishy, it wasn't greasy at all). The shrimp was nicely boiled in a Cajun mix of spices. The shrimps were juicy and plump, and the spices were nicely marinated into the shrimp,  I was super delighted.. . I am not a huge fan of hush puppies in general, so my review might be bias, but I thought the batter was a bit on the solid side, not as airy and light as some pups I have tried. But it was solid golden brown and had a great crunch.. . Corn on the cobb was the bomb.. nicely marinated in the Cajun boil, but PLEASE drench them in real butter.. It's brush w/ margin, and maybe some folks like the marge, but I like the real deal, or nothing at all.  But the corn was so sweet and spicy/salty, it was a party in the mouth!. . Day 2.. Took my roommate's boyfriend, who was pretty much eager to explore Buford Hwy.  Well I wanted him to have a little appetizer before chowing down. First stop was here. I had to have the oysters that Hieu ( the owner) said was the Best in town. I mean he said they were shuck fresh, lightly battered and fried til golden.  I couldn't help it, and ordered 10 shrimps as well.. . Of course the shrimp was amazing just like the 1st time I tried it.  I liked dipping mine w/ cocktail sauce, I also tried the butter sauce but quickly realized it was margin. Was it bad? Nah..but I like my butter..gotta keep it real!. . The oysters came and it was terrific, lightly battered w/ a coating of cornmeal to add to the texture, and piping hot.  My roommate's boyfriend's face said it all when he bit into his first oyster a fat satisfied smile one his face, w/ glistened eyes, and I have to agree, it was juicy and fresh.  When I was sitting eating I could see a worker shucking oysters in the back room, that's how fresh the little pearls of yumminess!. . They were so nice to offer a sampling of the Crawfish. Now I am not a Crawfish fan, but it was tasty, but too much work for me. . . Oyster and Shrimp Poor Boys are in the Works.. that is next on the list when I come back to try this place!
