ReviewID: 0xLibQ3jL0F4yZ8yrot6ow
ReviewerID: mmRVIJYTNEhCDStGgirS2Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Loteria Grill
Category: Mexican
Friday night "Dinner and a movie."  How can you beat that?  Exactly.  You can't , so don't even try, or I'll Judo-chop you!  Last Friday evening, my friend and I decided to link up to go and see "The Ugly Truth" (fun movie by the way) and grab dinner at The Grove.  After meandering around for a while trying to figure out which restaurant to eat at, I suggested the Farmer's Market, considering that was my original intention when I suggested we go to The Grove.  My friend, surprisingly enough, had never before eaten in the Farmer's Market, and so it became imperative that I tap into my inner Buddha and enlighten her with the delectable wonderment that is The Farmer's Market.. . Upon entering the Market, it was as though my friend had become a kid in a candy store.  Her eyes lit up in amazement at the inner bustling and life within the Market, when just a few moments before we were walking along its much less dizzying outskirts.  I rattled off a list of potential food types she could indulge her taste buds with, upon which she cocked her head sideways, thought for a brief moment, then declared, "Mexican food!  I could definitely go for a burrito."  "Great", I said. "I know just the place!  Follow me."  And then, I led her to the pearly gates of deliciousness.. . Once at Loteria, we mused over the menu for a quick moment before stepping up to order.  I was dead set on ordering the chili rellenos plate, until the cashier said it would be $17.  I instantly pressed rewind on my previous order, and when I started over, this time I asked for a chicken burrito with their special chorizo sauce.  I was a little hesistant about the chorizo sauce, but it tasted great!  My friend ordered the beef burrito and after just two swallowed bites, she said with the lightness of a sudden empiphany, "This might be the best burrito I've ever had.". . Folks, I rest my case.  Go to Loteria and order anything on the menu. And I just know that you'll be happy you listened to me!  And if you aren't, remember, I'll Judo-chop you!  Now EAT!
