ReviewID: 1-g8_yCkR6xrH8upcnodMg
ReviewerID: ZzJrlRX0k5X2mMaMqPs-Ig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
If you like pancakes, then this is the place for you. I've gone a few times now, so I've had the pleasure of sampling at least half a dozen different pancakes.. . As others have noted, the restaurant is loud and bustling. I've gone early in the morning near opening hour, and have yet to experience the very long waits that people complain about.  It's a fun atmosphere, especially with a big group of guys who have all have a huge appetite.  The service is just okay. The servers I've encountered were not particularly friendly and mostly run around a lot trying to deal with the crowds.. . The portions are monstrous, and will provide you with several days of helpings.  If you don't want to take so much home, you can ask for a single pancake instead of the stack of three. This has become our preferred way of ordering - it's still enough to share and the plate doesn't overwhelm you. (And I'm not exaggerating about the overwhelming part. During our most recent trip we brought a cousin along. He just stared for a minute at his stack of pancakes and didn't know where to begin!). . First, you must try the coffee. This is not your usual watery sludge that most restaurants serve. The coffee is a nice strong dark roast and is served in french presses with unlimited refills. . . The good: . Banana Nana pancakes. Ask for walnuts. And don't be afraid to add a little maple syrup to them. This is the only flavor that we've had so far that actually improves with syrup. . Scotch on the Rocks: coconut, pecans, oats, butterscotch chips. Mmmmm.. . Wholey Moley: whole wheat and brown sugar batter. Probably the most 'traditional' flavor we've tried. If you're looking for something that's not too sweet, this is a good option.. . Barry Yellow: buttermilk pancakes with raspberry and lemon. These were a little disappointing. I've become a big fan of lemon pancakes in the past year, and so I had high expectations that the added raspberry would be sublime. Unfortunately, while very tasty, the flavor is unbalanced. The pancakes are very tart and need to be mellowed a bit. Adding some syrup helped, but I wonder if folding in some ricotta cheese would provide the mellowness I desired. . . Side of bacon: although a little pricey, they provide you with nice thick cuts of bacon. None of that paper-thin, frozen Sysco slices that too many diners serve nowadays!. . The Great: . Yellow Brick Road: caramel, walnuts, butterscotch.  This may induce a diabetic coma, but at least you'll die with a smile on your face!. . Addicted to Noisella Stuffed French Toast: a nice layer of nutella spread sandwiched between two old fashioned slices of french toast. The portion isn't nearly as huge as the pancakes, but this is so rich it's still hard to finish!. . The Not-so-good:. The Griddle Potatoes that are served with egg dishes.  They give you a big brick of potatoes that just don't have much flavor and are a little dry. You'll find yourself reaching for the catsup and/or hot sauce.. . Chicago Charlie's scramble: sausage, potatoes, bacon, bell peppers, onions, mozzarella, garlic and basil.  It sounded good on paper, but the end result just didn't quite work. I only tried a few bites, and thought it was heavy and lacking of any punch.
