ReviewID: 1-QSGRQtksWu4ebZLlkyuQ
ReviewerID: 3E-0Sv6Cy_i0YAj3SPg9Yw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Gino&#39;s East
Category: Pizza
I've been craving a deep dish pizza for a very long time.  The only place that I can get a deep dish/stuffed pizza that I trusted back when I lived in CA was Zachary's in Berkeley, and that was a STUFFED pizza, not deep dish.  I wanted the real thing and I knew that the best place to get it was in Chicago.  With that being said, however, I'd have to say that I was disappointed with my Gino's experience and began longing for when I could have Zachary's again.. . First of all, we did not like being what seemed to us like being poked and prodded by the employees.  "Don't stand there."  "Move as far down as possible."  This is a pizza joint not boot camp.  Then my son was not given any crayons, however, the obnoxious high schoolers next to us were given PLENTY of crayons to draw on their menu.. . As for the food, we ordered the appetizer sampler.  The spinach sticks were okay, but I didn't quite think that they were as good as people have said.  Calamari was rubbery, and mozzarella sticks were pretty good.  As for the pizza, the ingredients on their own tasted really good.  Fresh tomato sauce, delicious sausage, tasty cheese, and good crust, but for some reason the sum of all the parts didn't even equal its individual parts.  I don't know why, but for some reason the combination of it all didn't meld together... it's like they were each competing against each other rather than working together to make a tasty pizza.. . Oh, and about the size--there were 3 adults and one toddler in our party and we easily ate a large minus one slice.  I think that if you're used to think crust, NY style, or any other pizzas of those sizes then you'll be intimidated by the size of a deep dish.  But it's not even greasy.  I don't know... maybe we just eat too much.. . I'd try Gino's again one day... despite the fact that I wasn't satisfied and I couldn't believe how expensive it was.  There's gotta be something to it that has made it so popular.
