ReviewID: 10kzcUEbAQNXLLpxSf2-1A
ReviewerID: n5kvRbPZ_S2E2_DYNOEfyQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
well... firstly, i'm not one of those ringer reviewers called in to boost the ratings and given the vast range of opinions on this place, i'll try to be comprehensive so you can let the force guide you (why not continue with these han solo/star wars tidbits).. . foodie friend calls and wants to have a foodie blowout. we decide on ford's filling station before i read the yelp hullabaloo. confession: was slightly biased toward ford's because ben ford was on wino wednesday recently on indie 103.1. he sounded pleasant.. . make open table reservation for 6:45 on a wednesday. kinda not cool to eat that early, but what do i care. i'm hungry my 5:30 on any given day. restaurant calls the afternoon of to confirm. this pleases me.. . arrive at restaurant, no trouble finding street parking. restaurant is still pretty empty. host seemed indifferent but not mean. sat promptly.. . server arrives. we take a while to decide on a bottle, but he suggests we order our apps, so we get the shrimp flatbread and cured meats: lomo and bresaola. . . garlicky rolls come. they're a little like fancier, shinier versions of olive garden breadsticks and very tasty. not exactly the height of haute cuisine though.. . cured meats and flatbread arrive. the lomo doesn't taste very smokey at all. the bresaola is way better but still not... i dunno. maybe i'm just not good at loving the smoked meat (wow, that came out in a way i had not intended). came with half a loaf of french bread and some olives.. . shrimp flatbread was yums. bread could have been cooked a smidgen more but i thought it was great. the paper thin slices of lemon baked on to it made the dish snap.. . with some sustenance in our bellies, we try to decide between the vouray and the sancerre. server says to go with the sancerre. excellent choice. crisp and clean. . . we continue munching... it takes a while for the server to check back with us. we had told him we'd just be ordering a variety of apps instead of entrees but needed some time to decide. he could have definitely come back sooner to check on our status. i finally had to grab his arm to get his attention just to order more food. i hate touching people to get their attention. this was the most significant serving misstep and as it goes, i didn't find it offensive. it paced our meal well. i was just surprised that there wasn't a little, "hey, how we doin' here.". . we then ordered the fried clams and oyster shooters. as a top chef devotee (i think i've mentioned that show way too much in my recent reviews. can't help myself!) i had to laugh when i saw that the oysters would be served with a tomato mignionette. . . fried clams: abundant serving. well breaded and fried. served over an insignificant amount of shoestring fries that were a little too crisp. they were hardly noticeable and probably unnecessary. . . oysters: petite and sweet. not briny like those big honking oysters at most raw bars. mignionette had a nice little kick. i really enjoyed these babies.. . next round was steak tartare and roasted beets with burrata (side dish not an app).. . steak tartare: wow-y wow wow. unbelievable texture and flavor. i defy you to take a taste test and believe you're eating beef. smooth and silky without a hint of chewy. a balsamic tartness that was well balanced, but the fennel in the dish didn't really come through. truffle chips were perfect little tartare scoopers. the poached egg made for nice presentation but was actually a bit rubbery. i was completely able to overlook this.. . roasted beets with burrata. i'm glad we went with this over the beet/prosciutto salad thing (i think that's what it was). this was a great dish to go with the tartare. i was inspired to make this at home. . . dinner ended with the chocolate malt creme brulee and coffee. the brulee was fantastic but lacking in malt flavor. if that expectation hadn't been put out there, i would have thought it was just a spectacular brulee dish on it's own. had a silken, denser, fudgy base with lovely chocolate (non-malt) cream crisped on top. total winner.. . could have lived without the fried clams and smoked meats, otherwise, i felt like the experience was worth the hefty price i paid. . . that's my two dollar review. choose wisely.
