ReviewID: 124Os_HlyS9YeTRbNTnLlQ
ReviewerID: 2KDlNQ7zLBKKMTR2xgnwDQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Butterfly Sushi Bar &amp; Thai Cuisine
Category: Japanese
I'm always a skeptic when restaurants try a multi-cuisine approach, but I think it might work at Butterfly and I wonder why it took so long to "discover".  This place is CHEAP!  Mostly $2 or $2.50 nigiri pieces, sub $10 Thai entrees, what's not to like?  (Though it's very likely this is made possible by being located in a not-so-nice part of town and the cheap rent and some empty/abandoned storefront space along W Grand).. . First impressions. . This place is quite happening on Fri nite, despite not being in a well-trafficked part of town.  What we thought was funny as soon as we walked in was that there were NINE people behind the sushi bar, NINE! I mean, I know it's a weekend, but for a place that probably seated 60 people, it was rather excessive - I've never seen sushi chefs so cramped and bumping elbows in my life, even at AYCE establishments.  (Sidenote: No Japanese sushi chefs here) That said, the sushi came out blazing fast, but that wasn't w/o negative consequence.  The decor was easy on the eyes and I'm a big fan of the high square sofa look.  I also noticed the pull-out seats looked rather comfy, though there were 2 variations of mismatching black chairs.  Another thing was that the place was cramped - from walking from the door past the sushi bar to getting seated, there was not an inch of space where it was easy to walk past (and we're not big people).  There was always someone or something in our way; I didn't like that...Butterfly definitely sacrificed some of the experience for super high density.. . The Food. . Did I mention it was cheap?  $2 nigiri!  The chicken katsu was only $9 too as it should be, much less than the exorbitant $14 or $16 lots of places in Chicago charge.  The chirashi and sushi combo sets were typical going rate, around $20 though, and compared to the nigiri, the rolls were definitely priced at a premium.  What we ordered:. . Tom yum soup - spicy, authentic, but huge chunks of chicken (good if you're hungry, not so aesthetically pleasing). Chicken pad see ewe - tasty, flat noodles were done right without being overcooked and mushy, but same complaint about the chicken applied here. Black Dragon - shrimp tempura was nicely dominant and blended well with the unagi; black tobiko looked different and attractive. Americano - I'm always a fan of lobster-based maki, but thought some of the tuna/white tuna was a bit frozen, making me question fish quality. 1 pc white tuna, salmon, amaebi, scallop - My concerns of quality were put at ease (isolated event?), the nigiri slices were fresh and large, my scallop was delicious, and my amaebi was served with fried shrimp head (+!).  Good proportion of rice, though would have been nice to have wasabi already on rice. . The Service. . Overall, it was decent.  Warm welcome, steady water refills, and the free brownie with the "Thanks" message was a nice touch.  However, I felt like we were being herded out a little.  The blazing fast delivery is good if you are starving, but doesn't really let you enjoy the food and your company so much.  Also, before we sat down, it was almost demanded of us that we finish before a certain time, as a reservation was coming in - not so cool, either have us wait or seat us without prequalifications.  Also, as I mentioned the close proximity of the tables was a bit bothersome and made it  difficult to get in/out.  There is no space wasted here, and logistically it's set up purely to ensure max capacity and high turnover - not terrible, but something to think about if you're going on a date.. . Overall, my first Butterfly sushi experience was positive, like the food and the prices, but some "restaurant" qualities could be improved.
