ReviewID: 13JSiENAGtR2hxPG59qn_A
ReviewerID: EM4FdCx0-fr2-rrIgxeVXw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
I was referred to this place my sister who works around the area.. . Sausage galore! . I was excited to see what this place had to offer. I came with my husband, friend and my son (in a stroller) on a Wed. this month during the early afternoon. It was perfect timing- as it wasnt too crowded and parking was easy to find.  Right when you walk in your welcomed by a huge glass case of sausages! We were overwhelmed by the selection and we went all out in ordering. For 3 adults, we ordered 5 dogs- the alligator, duck, original brat, filipino (i'd call it the loganisa dog), and rattlesnake. I personally ate just the brat, but from a summary from my hubby and friend, basically the one to get is the rattlesnake for a tasty savory dog, and the filipino dog if you want a sweeter flavor. These 2 they can say were distinct flavors. As for the brat i had- it was pretty good, but nothing that would make me crave to come back for it. Next time, maybe ill try the rattlesnake! As for drinks, we ordered 2 of the strawberry beers (YUM), and 1 bottled lemonade (eh- ok). The fries were good. They were pretty thick in consistency, and could have been a little hotter in temperature. Overall though, they were good and worth a try.. . It was definitely pricey (about 7.50/dog and 8-9/beer) and we spent 65.00+(5 dogs, 1 Order of Fries, 2 beers, 1 lemonade) for what we got, and sadly I was a lil hungry still when i left. . . In terms of ambiance, theres a bar in the dining room. You seat yourself and there's ketchup, and mustard available at each table. Cucumber? water is free and you serve yourself. Currently no TV monitors, but it would be cool if they added some. . . Definitely come for the "options" of sausages. I'd still go back to try a different sausage, and when im not starving. . . On an allergy note: Currently im supposed to limit my intake of soy and dairy due to my child's allergies and the staff was very happy to tell me what options I had available. Basically all the sausages he can say were soy and diary free, except the vegetarian ones- i guess cause they add soy to those for flavoring. The bun was also dairy and soy free- BUT they do grill the veggies, dogs, and french fries, and maybe bun? in VEGETABLE OIL - which does contain soy in it. So for those who have strong allergies to these- please double check. They also mentioned that they're looking into gluten free buns.
