ReviewID: 1_l_bSyt5ItmhyNrKyRWDQ
ReviewerID: kRLkHf0lJWNOoJrxA5HA3A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Taco Mac
Category: American (Traditional)
AAAHHHH!!!! T-Mac - Let me start by saying that you are a chain and usually I would only give you 1 star. No more. No less. But as you will read, this Taco Mac earned extra stars for a few......particulars. (wink). .    There's not much more you I or any one else can say for a Taco Mac that hasn't already been said. Besides, they are scattered all over the metro Atlanta area and to me, their food is just so so. . But the midtown T-Mac is actually a really great location. Now I will admit, when I heard that Taco Mac was going in this old Stool Pigeons venue, I was a bit frustrated simply for the fact that this corner space is a primo lo-cal. But ya did good Taco Mac. Ya did real good. . . I came here last night to catch the SEC football season home opener and of course the place was a bit busy, which is to be expected seeing as how they have amazingly beautiful flat screen TV's in almost every corner of the room or on every open spot they could hang one. Awesome! plus (+) one star for that alone.. . The cool part was that we wound up working out getting this awesome spot in the middle of the room at an 8 or 10 top table that was suppose to be "reserved" but with a little helpful advice from a fellow patron, we were able to score the big one. Thanks nice girl in the pink skirt!. . So Chrissy was our waitress last night and she is/was great! Always there with a drink, or clearing dirty plates, or bringing me samples of beers to taste. Yeah, T-Mac lets you sample any of their vast array of beers on tap so plus(+) one star for that and plus (+) one more for having really good service here. Other T-Mac's should learn from this. . . As we sat and ate our food and watched our games our table filled in a little more with the likes of Kyle S and Ashley D and Kristine M. Which brings me to extra star # 4. Maybe it was just this night, but this was a really great crowd. The people here were so friendly and nice and not at all bad looking. Just the type of crowd you would see at a swank mid town city night spot. So, plus (+) one more and my final extra star for attracting the beautiful people T-Mac daddy. . . In the end, my team (the Gamecocks) WON!!!! but I'm not sure about Randy G.'s beavers. . ha! You know I had to work beaver in there some where! GO BEAVERS! (he, he, he, - snicker, snicker!)
