ReviewID: 1aHCphQQgmP8WFFxhDeCxw
ReviewerID: iAmEQO5k1QTR9wRuga2Gpg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Over Easy Café
Category: American (Traditional)
With so many reviews for Over Easy, it seems silly to add one more, but dang if they didn't rock my world! I've been visiting Chicago for a month and have been to OE four times. Twice I went on my own so I could be sure to get in, as they have a bar where singletons can sit and have intimate moments with their delightful minx of a menu. . . Service: tops! Everyone who works there is busting their tail to keep you hydrated and the food comes out lickety-split. I developed a total girl-crush on one lass with a Southern accent who also speaks Spanish. The accent may be played up for us Yankees, but whatever, it works. I met the owner on my last trip. I've seen other reviews that comment on his mannerism with the staff, but in context, I could see he was trying to run a tight ship. The staff seemed to take it all in style, "tranquilo" as one guy advised another. . . Food: As I wrote on another site (that I've since thrown over for Yelp!): brioche french toast was so amazing i didn't bother with syrup. The combo of blackberries, orange cream, blood OJ reduction, and whipped cream was such a delicate ecosystem I didn't want to upset it with syrup. Nor did I want to waste time getting it all down my gullet!. . The Strawberry Sublime French toast lived up to it's name": brioche french toast with strawberry compote, marscapone cheese, &amp; dusted with powdered sugar. I thought the mascapone would be too much, but it was all perfectly balanced.. . I had the Damen omlette (eggs, sauteed portobellos, spinach &amp; goat cheese, served with red potato hash &amp; toast) and, while it was tasty, it didn't wow me. The hash at Tre Kronor is better. . . My last meal for this visit was the Rio Grande Breakfast Sandwich. It included eggs scrambled with chorizo, red onion, tomatoes, &amp; cilantro, topped with pepper jack cheese &amp; served on a toasted telera with red potato hash. I don't think I've ever had telera bread and didn't need to know it exists because it's now on my list of must-haves. . . In summary, have a purely selfish moment and go on your own if you want to be sure to try this place on the weekend. Otherwise, weekday waits aren't too bad. I think they've just instituted a new rule about a last seating at 2.45pm.
