ReviewID: 1bFpR3Rzi6cU45snl4kH4w
ReviewerID: RjBDWtqhgK6ux-8OWHgJKA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
What a let down. 402 reviews and 4.5 stars for this place? Way over hyped.  . . Came here last night and was surprised to see so many people standing outside waiting for their tables. You may think that's a good sign, but in my head, there was a loud "warning" siren blasting off. In my LA Sushi experiences, the "crowded" "popular" places never turned out to be decent. It's always the one that's small, hidden, not so crowded that offers great Sushi.. . And my initial thought was confirmed right away. . . Sushi rice. Way too warm. The contrast between warm rice and cold fish was much greater than what could possibly be a harmonized fusion. It was especially bad with extra cold Uni on top. Also, the rice wasn't squeezed firmly enough, so it was quite a challenge to not make rice fall apart when I picked it up.. . Selections/Line-ups. It was just like any other mediocre LA Sushi joints. Meaning, very "standard" and nothing special. Several of my requests were turned down with "oh we don't have that" and I was very sad. It wasn't like I asked for something so unique and so unusual. In fact, any of those would have been offered at several of the good Sushi joints in South Bay. The chef didn't even talk about what they had that's in season or what they had that's the freshest of the day.  All he kept recommending was salmon, tuna, albacore, giant clam, halibut... you know, the "usual." Oh god, can you be more boring than that?. . For a moment they made me happy when they said they had sardines, but it instantly became a disappointment as their sardine was vinegared. And it wasn't the good vinegared version, but it was "the fish got old so I tossed it in vinegar for a while" version. No delicate nice flavoring what so ever.. . Garnish. Garnish is one of the important contribution to the Sushi. You can't just put Wasabi, ginger, Momiji Oroshi (grated Daikon and red pepper), or green onion on top of the fish and be done with it. The combination as well as amount has to be right for it to be good. Their garnishing was nothing but sloppy and not only it didn't help their sushi tastes better, but in fact, it made it worse. . . For example, we had oysters on the shells. Each oyster was quite small, which was fine as the size and flavor differ depending on where it was produced.  What was appalling to me was that they came with ton of Momiji Oroshi and chopped green onions on top. Oysters, especially smaller oysters, are known for their very creamy flavor and soft texture. Ton of Momiji Oroshi first killed off the flavor of nice mild creamy flavor, then the rough and hard stems of green onions just completely killed the beauty of the soft and smooth oyster texture. If the chef really cared about each ingredient's character and quality, he would have never chosen to put ton of Momiji Oroshi and chopped green onions. Chives would have gone much better as they are smaller and got less texture than green onions. Shame.. . At this point, I was pretty disappointed with what they had to offer, and the bill made it even worse. Long wait, ok service, boring selections, and poor cooking for the steep price.. . No thank you, really.
