ReviewID: 1cjdvMNaW5KnA2QFJJav3Q
ReviewerID: shVyD312LNnLUvQEPdzo7g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
After numerous tries (the wait and parking situation were my largest turn-offs), I finally got to try the infamous Boiling crab. We only had to wait an hour on a weekend, which I heard isn't too horrible. Wow, was it delicious. The whole she-bang flavoring was soooo good. We ended up getting 2 pounds of the crawfish for eight bucks per pound. Just a note - they are hard to eat. You really have to work for your food. I'd never had crawfish before. So I just ate the tail and some meat from the claws if those were big enough. Is that right? We also got it mild and it was a little bit too spicy for me even though that's basically the lowest level of spiciness. It came with a free piece of corm in the bag. And we got a side of sweet potato fries. Oh so good - crispy and just the right amount of filling (not shoe-stringy or like steak fries). They were a bit pricey at $4 for a basket. The drinks are alright. Beer is less than three dollars. The soda with unlimited refills is two and water does cost a quarter, which is kinda the only bummer. . . The whole atmosphere of the restaurant is pretty awesome. You can write on the walls - the wooden, unpainted parts at least. The waitresses serve everything from giant tin buckets. There's someone walking around making balloon animals for the kiddies. Someone puts an embarrassing plastic lobster big on you as soon as you sit down. There's even a bar for takeout and just to chill while you're waiting for your table. And the only thing they give you is a roll of paper towels. No utensils or plates or anything. Most of the time, the service is fast. They definitely try to make things easy. I mean, like they have shiny paper tablecloths and you eat off the table with your hands, throwing the shells into the middle. And then they just wrap everything up at the end and throw it away. No need to clean. There was a little bit of time right after we got our food, where we couldn't find our waitress for 15 minutes to get some drink refills. Other than that, great food and ambiance for a good price. Gotto go back to try the shrimp and clams and everything else.
