ReviewID: 1d6_YNvxWw4vnPcaXFlE3g
ReviewerID: cD_hpkvErXCyQHBQzv8KYQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Al Di La Trattoria
Category: Italian
"It isn't the little pleasures of the country that make life worth living there. It is rather the big assurances. The little pleasures are for the casual visitor...To see a hillside white with dogwood bloom is to know a particular ecstasy of beauty; but to walk the gray winter woods and find the buds which will resurrect the beauty in another May is to partake of continuity.". . The Brooklyn dining scene is certainly in the age of Renaissance (grudging acknowledgment from an avowed Manhattanite), but there is no better standard bearer for fine dining than the consistently magnificent Al Di La, now in its eleventh year of operations. I would run out of superlatives to define the dining experience, other than to say that it was so transcendent that I actually contemplated a move from the culturally rich, culinary poor, and otherwise challenged U.E.S. to Park Slope, Brooklyn.. . But, there was magic in the air that night with the first snowfall of the season. Reminiscent of the allure and romance of Paris in the spring time, this particular stretch of Park Slope glistened with freshly fallen snow and the quiet on the streets allowed one to introspect on the pristine beauty and charm of the surroundings. It didn't hurt that the Northern Italian food was spectacular, the wine heartwarming, and the service precise.. . We started with the acclaimed oxtail and cuttlefish appetizer with soft, creamy polenta. This would not be a visually arresting sight, by any stretch of imagination. My dining companion, who has a discerning palate otherwise, could not fathom the rationale for its popularity. Conditioned, perhaps, that sight dominates the other senses (sarcasm reflective of my distaste for the American Idol phenomenon), I had to coax her to appreciate the textural flourishes and the taste nuances by eating with her eyes closed. That prompted an immediate spike in her grading to 4 stars (from 2.5 initially).. . Al Di La has a much deserved reputation for pastas, cooked to perfection. Of the versions I've tried in my many visits my preference has been for the homemade ravioli with winter squash, brown butter and sage sauce; while others have liked the Tagliatelle Al Ragu. My favorite dish, however, remains the Galletto Alla Diavola: charcoal grilled young chicken, fennel salad and mashed yukons. It's the best chicken dish I've had in New York - even better than the version at Dell'anima.. . Desserts, superficially, appear to be the weak link given a limited selection. My companion ordered the pear chocolate cake (bittersweet chocolate chips) with fresh whipped cream, and while I would have preferred gelato instead of the cream, she remained contented with her selection. I have been fairly consistent in ordering their gelati platter, getting three different flavors each accompanied by a peanut brittle chip. Most of the flavors have been true and pure (burnt caramel orange, fig ricotta, honey, pistachio, etc.), however the odd (black pepper) has been far too subtle.  . . Now the odds of you securing a table at prime time on a Saturday evening may be similar to those of Andy H winning RoTD (i.e. it CAN happen, but after 950 reviews!!), given the democratic nature of the first come first served seating process, aka no reservations. I believe the way around that problem would be to find the answer to the right question: So, what are the rents like in this neighborhood?
