ReviewID: 1gRxO83W41KiWFVgmrEpzw
ReviewerID: ECgMZXel9F3nK3vU1NAd8w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Fresh in my mind and most importantly fresh in my stomach: as I drove home after a belly full of Pizzeria Mozza's best dishes (thank you Yelpers), I couldn't help but lose focus as my mind wandered into a different state.  What was this that I was experiencing? Was it food coma? If it was, I'd never been in this particular state of food coma.  I wanted a clear way to sum it up my experience because after multiple attempts to get reservations (those 8pm ones are tough!) and then having to wait a month for the day to arrive, I wanted to remember it clearly.  . . Before:. After reading through many of the Yelp reviews, I was anxious to see what the best-sellers were.  If you had to sum it up into one dish per category, here are the winners that ranked out on top: grilled blossoms (antipasti), mozza caprese (insalate), Bacon, salami, fennel sausage, guanciale, tomato &amp; mozzarella (pizza), and the butterscotch budhino.  . . When you get there for your reservations, everyone must be present in your party to be seated so trick your friends into thinking it's actually 15-30 minutes earlier..haha!. . During:. We were a decent group of 7 and our server was pretty attentive to our presence making sure that we had everything we needed.  As far as what we ordered, here's the breakdown:. . antipasti. 2 fried squash blossoms w/ricotta. 1 bone marrow al forno. . insalate. 2 mozza caprese w/grilled garlic bread. . pizza. 1 Bacon, salami, fennel sausage, guanciale, tomato &amp; mozzarella. 1 Prosciutto di Parma, rucola, tomato &amp; mozzarella. 1 Coach farm goat cheese, leeks, scallions, garlic &amp; bacon. 1 Funghi misti, fontina, taleggio &amp; thyme. 1 Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage. . dolci. 1 Espresso granita with espresso gelato &amp; chocolate dipped honeycomb. 2 Butterscotch budino, Maldon sea salt &amp; rosemary pine nut cookies. . vino.  2 bottles of Cesanese di Olevano Romano "Corte alla Luna," Proietti {Lazio}. . So when I think of PM, I think of a great light flavor that's there and present.  Not too much and not too little, well done!  It's like if you were to walk down a hall and there was a smell wafting through that made your mouth salivate unconsciously.
