ReviewID: 1hcGcjWmw0l5lNWqYx4HSA
ReviewerID: 6pCoyMewhL2QAMaVnnSCOA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: SinBala Restaurant
Category: Taiwanese
I can't believe I haven't written something for this place, I pine for it so.. . One of the last truly Taiwanese places around, even in Arcasia.  The owner is mostly always there..I've been coming here so long, I swear I've seen her through 3 pregnancies.  She is a true sweetheart, and is always nice to me; I love how interminably Taiwanese she is.  . . The sausage is the star of the show.  I'm a, absolute garlic whore, I like it so much, I prefer it raw.  Their wide array of sausage counterparts range from mango, to chocolate or green onion.  All of which are delicious.  The sausage is not of this world; it's slightly sweet, but definitely not enough to be a dessert.  I always get their sausage plate with raw garlic; all their rice plates come with traditional Taiwanese sides..eggs sauteed with tomato and steamed broccoli.  Delicious.. . Their fried chicken leg is soooooo good; their bread crumbs are out of this world; the batter is not too thick or too greasy.  . . Their appetizers are really, really delicious as well; and they portion the sizes out so that you can order a couple as well as entrees...or maybe that's just me and my crew.  . . Green onion pancake: almost as good as my grandma's. . . Spicy dumplings with green onion/chili oil/peanuts: food-gasm in my mouf'. . Fried chicken roll: yuuuummm...haven't had anything close in the san gangsta valley. . Beef noodle soup: Decadent; I'm biased because I LOVE salt, but it's pretty damn salty.  It also has red pepper flakes, so it's got a kick.  The kind that after awhile, will make your nose run kinda spicy.  . . Shaved ice: I've only had their 8 topping one, but I'm not a fan of brown sugar topping on top, so I would stick with Old Country Cafe's; and also because they don't have the large red beans, which are my FAVORITE topping for shaved ice.  . . Green Milk Tea w/ almond jello: soooo effffing good. . SOOOOO CHEAP.  the last time I went...we had...2 full entrees, 2 appetizers, and 2 drinks for 32 dollars. I heart Taiwanese street food.. . Sidenote: CASH only, and they are CLOSED on Wednesdays.  Learn and know this well..I've actually had several occasions where I've wanted to cry outside this closed restaurant.
