ReviewID: 1hsSPZOm9E7TECuQAIcNxA
ReviewerID: i07Z2Fu9fZ9opMLKsXWutQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Reza&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Middle Eastern
So...from a LONG day that was supposed to be full of meetings in Schaumburg, by the hands of a higher power, I ended up with a flat, and never made it to Suburbia!  Yes, the flat kinda stunk, but that means no boring meetings, and the flat got fixed at the shop in a jiffy.. . Which brings me to staying in the city to enjoy this lovely fall weather.  And then I got hungry.  So I decided to venture into Andersonville to get some grub, and lo and behold...I saw a sign for Lunch Buffet at Reza's.... . Again, I am not usually a huge fan of buffets (read my review for the Jolly Inn); however, I was STARVING and it was yet another sign from above (regardless of religion!).  . . So I strolled into Reza's...and surprisingly for a Monday 1 pm-ish timeframe, it was actually somewhat busy.  After being seated, I proceeded to see what $9.95 would buy me at this buffet.. . For starters, I tried the hummus and pita bread.  Creamy, smooth and extremely good.  I also had a falafel and it was crispy and delicious!  And to top it off, I tried the chicken barley soup - which was tasty and very warming for these chilly fall days in the windy city.. . Onto entrees.  They had three different kind of rice dishes:  a vegetarian, a dill rice and a simple white rice.  I tried them all (the curse of being Chinese!).  They were all good, but the dill rice was exceptionally good!. . And for meat to accompany my rice, I tried the Chicken kababs (both regular and spicy), along with all three different types of koubidehs (chicken, beef and lamb).  WOW...it was all outstanding.  And yes, I went back for seconds.. . As far as desserts is concerned...I usually skip at buffets because I am too full.  Not this time.  They had these sweetly soaked doughnut like pastries.  WOW...and they went soo well with my coffee.. . Now...I don't live too far from Reza's, but let me tell you what...I will make an extra effort to go there for dinner.  I forget how much I love their Persian Middle Eastern cuisine!
