ReviewID: 1Ll55Y_6KoS2u8Ry_4nt1w
ReviewerID: Br7_jlV7VUhsECo8FNHWDQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Casa Bianca Pizza Pie
Category: Pizza
I came here for the 2nd time yesterday after picking up a friend for a surprise birthday meal. I asked where he wanted to go, and without hesitation he said "Pizza Pie on Colorado!" . . It was only 4:00, and they hadn't opened, but there were already about 5 tables worth of folks waiting outside -I notice there's ALWAYS a line for this place, so I was eager to try it the 1st time. After sharing a pizza and some pesto fettuccine, I couldn't really grasp the allure. This time we had an antipasto salad and a sausage pizza (and a carafe of Chianti, shhh) . . My birthday boy boasted that they make their own sausage as he ordered for us, and although I'm not a big fan of sausage (insert foul joke here) I was looking forward to having the homemade kind. . . The server was a sweet girl, and she immediately brought us our wine, and a little loaf of bread that was crispy on the outside, soft in the center, piping hot with a sprinkling of sesame seeds. . The salad, I thought, was really lovely. It was a "small" and was enough for the two of us, with plenty left for my hunny to have a plate when he later showed up to join us. It had green and black olives, peppercinnis and different meats, but what made it special was the fresh mozzarella and ricotta where that cheap, rubbery, mass produced "mozzarella" we have been tricked into eating usually sits. . The pizza was OK: thin crust....not really crispy though. The sausage, well, I guess it tasted fresh, but it wasn't really spicy like I expect Italian sausage to be (another opportunity for a naughty pun, but I'll behave myself). . After we had already been there almost an hour, I ended up ordering a spaghetti carbonara for my boyfriend who was gallantly fighting traffic to join us, and the waitress didn't show a hint of attitude for what I know can be a bit annoying. . . The carbonara was very disappointing however. Dry. Bland. I'm sorry, it was. I tried one bite and apologized to my boyfriend. I think it was just spaghetti with pancceta. . . The verdict? I think this place is popular with locals -the people who can walk there, drink lots of wine, and have a hearty, simple meal in a charming, red gingham covered environment with Dean Martin crooning in the background. Its sweet. I get it. As for me, I'll get my Italian Sausage elsewhere.
