ReviewID: 1Lq4yp0PQ2gpEMZ7HcKP3A
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Hallelujah for those sweet, sweet words, "Breakfast Served All Day". Especially so when it's Griddle Cafe's brekkie we're talkin' about!! . . I literally can not think of any other breakfast serving establishment - and I mean anywhere in the country - that has a breakfast menu so robust, so craveworthy, so pancakelicious that it would warrant me yearning to eat their dishes morning, noon AND night. . . Get in line (yes, there is guaranteed to be one), put your name in, and then prepare for breakfast blast off. You'll quickly notice the plethora of pancake options... do not ignore them, these are the pinnacle of pancakery and the fundamental building block of Griddle's existence. Even as a lukewarm pancake enthusiast (I'm more of an eggs gal, m'self), I've been converted and positively adore these specialty gargantuan cakes. . . Oh yeah, no short stacks here... every order of pancakes is piled 3 high and hella wide. Like half the table wide. Ideal for sharing? Perhaps. But as mentioned earlier, you'll be craving these puppies all day long... take home your leftovers and indulge in the most indulgent reheats for lunch, dinner and midnight snack!! My personal favorite is the "Banana Nana" with brown sugar baked bananas cooked right into the light, fluffy batter. Oh Mama!! With Pumpkin Pie Pancakes, everyday can be a Holiday at the Griddle... or satiate your ultimate sweet tooth with the likes of Nutella stuffed cakes, Oreo topped cakes or even the Chocolate and Coconut filled 'Mounds of Pleasure' cakes. How d'ya like those sugar lumps? . . Fabulously sinful and good any time of the day, the Griddle Cafe gets my super seal of approval. Oh, and whaddya know, even a spot that specializes in pancakes serves up the best breakfast tacos, too. Try the 'kicking and screaming' variety... filled with eggs, jack cheese, chipotle cream sauce and topped with avocado and refried beans, it's the ideal savory accompaniment to your pancake pandemonium.
