ReviewID: 1oeHDd7cTJP_wIkR7wyccA
ReviewerID: 2wEk4aupLBXiNX1TK8TeFg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Las Tablas Colombian Steakhouse
Category: Latin American
The food was great- unfortunately the service left MUCh to be desired.. . We got there and it was fairly empty(half full) it took about 20 minutes for 1 of the guys to get his beer.. . The waiter was friendly but had no idea what Restaurant week was;. . 1- He told us that 1 of the appetizers had to be for 2 people - although that was not the case on their advertised RW menu. - this was not a big deal at all.. . 2- Turns out the RW deal was not a saver and pretty much the same as ordering a la carte. - not their fault either. . 3 - The waiter left us alone for 30 minutes after we had finished our entrees - we could not for the life of us find him or anyone to help us - it was full by that point.. . 4- Upon arriving to the table we asked if we could pay a la carte since not all of us wanted desserts - he told us no stating that the bill was already rung up.. . When we mentioned that we had been isolated for 30 minutes he got defensive and told us that he had made sure that the bus boys filled out waters and took care of us - this was a flat out lie - no one ever came to fill our water and we didnt need much water as we were all drinking.. . He then proceeded to tell us we didnt have to tip him and that we could just leave it at that. That is when I spoke up and said I would never leave a restaurant without a tip. . . So he left saying he was going to speak to the manager and then he came back with the bill. . . VERDICT: Cocky young waiter didn't want to be gracious and admit fault - instead he was defensive a made up a lie about sending bussers over which was untrue. He had a strained look on his face as if he was getting into a verbal fight and he should have known better.. . I tipped him 25% because at that point the only way to make him feel like a bigger ass is to tip him generously - he didn't deserve it but that's how I roll.. . UNFORTUNATE TRUTH: Will never go back, and I thought the food was great, it took too long to get drinks and there was no reason to be so flaky as we were guaranteeing a higher bill than those not participating in RW.. . MAJOR FAIL LAS TABLAS! I WANTED TO LIKE YOU SO BAD AND I DO BUT YOUR WAITER MESSED UP!
