ReviewID: 1oOnZszPPsjms47xf0t71g
ReviewerID: HwlpkOpidkZWvyjrxFk6Ag
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Definitely another OVERRATED place. I've heard so many people ranting and raving about this place so we had to try it out. Of course, being that it was L.A. we had to pay for parking and walk a good distance from the lot to the restaurant. There was a big crowd outside the restaurant and we thought, "Whoa, this place MUST be DAMN GOOD" to have that many people standing outside in the cold. The sidewalk was pretty crowded so we decided to walk across the street to a nearby plaza since they told us the wait time could be up to an hour. Usually, we'd just leave but we were already there, paid for parking, nothing to do, nowhere to go anyway, and the massive crowd intrigued us even more to try this place at least once. There were 32 names ahead of us. We were #33. Thank god there was a mini shopping plaza where we were able to kill time at because I honestly don't think we would have made it as long as we did out there in the cold...standing around on the sidewalk with lots of staring eyes, loud and nosy people, and bums approaching us for chump change. . . We finally got in after what seemed like 2 whole hours and the host/server (tall hapa looking guy sporting a long pony tail and bald top with a funny voice) got to us immediately. He was awesome but I have to admit... he got us giggling off our cold butts (you'll know what I'm talking about if you eat there - very nice guy, though). Anyway, I had their "famous" ramen and fried rice combo and my partner had their pork bowl combo. I have to say, I loved the pork bowl more than the ramen and fried rice. Once again, so OVERRATED! In fact, the Japanese side salad that came with the meal was the best tasting item of the night! I was disappointed with the ramen and fried rice. The pork bowl was pretty good and we would probably get that again if we don't have to wait in line. By the way, they don't do "take-out". Isn't that some sh**?! Well, that's fine because we'd rather drive all the way down to Costa Mesa and eat at their other chain restaurant where there is absolutely NO wait / NO long lines / Plenty of FREE parking space / Plenty of places to sit inside their CLEAN lit food court  which is inside the Marukai supermarket / Free Korean cold tea. . . I can honestly just order their salad and eat it alone as it is with nothing else. Their salad is BOMB! I gave this place 2 stars on OVERALL experience. Otherwise, on food alone....I'd give it a STRONG 3 stars and some change. Food and service together minus the SUPER long wait and inconvenience.... 4 stars.
