ReviewID: 1POku839lYWbTK3-DF6AbQ
ReviewerID: 0Dq3T5EId_WRUtic7wZzBg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamato Restaurant
Category: Japanese
I have had really good sushi. I have had really cheap sushi. And as with so many things in this world, generally, you get what you pay for. Yamato has managed to find a good balance between the two. Is the sushi great? No. Is it good? Yes. Will you pay an arm and a leg for it? No. Can you get extremely full for less than $20-$30? Yes. With a happy hour that runs from 5pm to 10pm, Yamato offers half price sushi that ranges from classic nigiri to specialty rolls. I decided to check this place out tonight along with a fellow yelper to see if it was any good. We were lucky enough to find street parking which ended up costing us only a few quarters. If you cannot find street parking, there are several lots in Westwood that will run you anywhere from $3.00 to $15.00. The restaurant is actually quite large with upstairs and downstairs seating. They also have a full sushi bar as well. We were greeted very quickly by two friendly hosts. We were seated right away. We took a look at the menu and selected several dishes to share. . . We started with an appetizer sampler which gave us a range of dishes. Some were definitely better than others. Next we got the spicy tuna on crispy rice. These were delicious. The rice was just a tad bit overdone though. Next up we had two types of sashimi. I personally really enjoyed the albacore as the fish had a nice texture. Next up we had two of the specialty rolls. The Pink Roll was actually very good. Even after all of that I was still hungry so I ordered a salad which was just ok. Everything else was good, we did not leave anything left on our plates. . . There seems to be a horrible after dinner effect for me when I go out to eat sushi. I have a tendency to get nervous... I am afraid, very afraid.... of the BILL. But not this time. We got our bill and the grand total... Less than $50. What??? All that food... oh yeah, its Happy Hour! This place is a great value if you want some decent sushi at a good price. The only thing I will say, the service is less than stellar so be prepared to flag someone down every time you want more water or you would like to pay your check. . . Overall, I will be returning here next time I just want to grab some okay sushi without breaking the bank.
