ReviewID: 1rkAYU3KHXeSFCKWa_TPjg
ReviewerID: XtKwxbdNIHjEM3ajUoX9OQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: La Crêperie
Category: French
Is there a box I can check to review just the other patrons and not the restaurant itself? No? Ok well then I'm just going to grumble a lot and hope my enjoyment of La Creperie shines through somewhere down there.... . The restaurant itself is a very cozy, quaint,  Europeanesque spot with low lighting, comfortable seats, and French art deco on the walls. The wait staff is super nice and attentive, never had to wait long to see our waitress zip by, even though the place was starting to fill up faster than Starbucks at 8 a.m. They also have a very beautiful patio that I would love to enjoy if it were ever a warm day in Chicago.. .  They have a small menu with savory and sweet crepes and a few appetizers. The cheese plate our horrifically ill-mannered neighbors to the right ordered looked really tasty. I had the poulet au curry and my date had the fruits de mer . Both were alright, but I found the sauce in the seafood crepe was overly heavy and a touch under salted. The curry chicken tasted as though it had been sitting there a while, but I did enjoy the flavors. The chutney on the side was delicious with the rice. I believe we should have ordered said cheese plate beforehand because we were both famished again within a few hours. . . Now on to what will probably keep me away. People, if you are unable to control your mouth-breathing and wild children long enough to hush and eat their dinner, leave them at home with a microwave and a Kids Cuisine. This is not TGI Friday's or Chipotle. Half the tables in the dining room contained children that could not be contained. Also, if you are unable to enjoy your soup like a civilized adult, or can't be bothered to chew with your mouth closed, stay home. The jerk next to us slurped his soup so loudly I couldn't hear my own conversation. (Yep, close quarters in this place.) And the food flying out of his mouth while he chewed was just disgusting. I know this isn't La Creperie's fault, and I feel bad for that. But man it really ruined the experience. . . If I were to come back it would have to be late in the evening, after my first dinner, and when all the kiddies have *hopefully* been put to bed.
