ReviewID: 1rxM-urYhhmOmuNPHjMM5g
ReviewerID: UR5I5oboRkjVwNjUwFdZPg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
I feel especially entitled to write this review, because I was born and raised on corned beef and pastrami from New York City.  Canter's isn't the real kosher deli deal, though they come close at times.  I have had better (and don't even ask my parents because they were really down on Canter's, and they've had more kosher deli than me simply due to age, so I'm giving them 2 stars).. . I was there for a private party.  We were seated in the back room.  The first thing I noticed was the old-school '60s-style ambiance.  Loved it.  The light fixtures, the refrigerated cases, the bakery counter, the pink banquettes - it was all so retro.  Very cool.  We had a spread of deli sandwiches along with the classics - pickles (salty as ever), cole slaw and potato salad.  There was a greek salad in the mix, too.  Weirdly enough, we also had a fish/dairy plate for those who wanted a bagel with cream cheese and lox.  Now, I have no issue with these two being served, but together on the same table seemed weird to this Long Island girl.  A real kosher deli would have no cheese or dariy whatsoever.  I know I know, this isn't a big deal to most, but it just seemed weird (no I'm not kosher).  . . I had corned beef (with russian of course) and enjoyed it (though what gives - why would it be on white bread - ew - removed that and just ate the meat).  Potato salad was great.  Cole slaw needed a little bit more mayo.  Pickles were delish.  Service was mediocre.  I can't judge a normal table's service, since I was at a party, but you'd think that we would've gotten more attention than we did for drink service.  Two thumbs up for having Dr. Brown's Black Cherry and Cel-Ray available.. . I'd definitely go back just to chill out in a pink banquette and look at the pretty pastries (good or not, I didn't try them)...rugalach, humantaschen, etc.  Canter's is a classic, that's for sure.  Also - open 24 hours - how's that for late-night munchies!  Sure beats pizza.
