ReviewID: 1t-M8EYvIBCYSNgrzA0ZYQ
ReviewerID: PZJAyC00hTZ5zUgIqUEDmg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Twist A Tapas Cafe
Category: Tapas Bars
A girlfriend and I came by Twist tonight (a Saturday) around 7 pm for some girl talk and sangria.  We were told the wait for a table would be about an hour but that we could be immediately seated at the bar.  We were starving so,  though it wasn't our preference, we opted for the bar.  As it turned out, sitting at the bar was actually really interesting because we got to see all the food prepped right in front of us - kind of the tapas version of Benihana.  I also think at the bar were less crowded and more out of the way than many of the people at tables.. . We started with guava sangria that I wasn't all that impressed with, especially at $6.95 a glass.  I'd been to Twist this summer and had peach sangria that was far better.  Fortunately, the food was so amazing it completely wiped the memory of the less than stellar drinks from my mind.  We had the jalapeno gnocci, macaroni and cheese, bacon wrapped dates, and chorizo and chicken casserole.  I'd had the mac and cheese before so I knew that was a good choice and my friend couldn't stop talking about how tasty it was.  The bacon wrapped dates were literally the best I've ever had - they were somehow carmelized and just out of this world.  The gnocci was also good and my friend and I made sure to get every last bit of the sauce with the (not so great) bread. The surprise of the meal was the chorizo chicken casserole, though.  I wasn't terribly enthused about that dish (I don't like chorizo) but went ahead and gave it a shot because my friend wanted it.  It was fabulous!  We left stuffed - I'm glad we got to try four items, but, really we could have done okay with three.  . . Best of all, Twist just started accepting . http://restaurant.com.  coupons.  So after the gift certificate our meal came to about $32 with tax and tip for four tapas plates and two drinks.  That was a unbelievable value!
