ReviewID: 1UPkoe2-9eTXCvipOrimGw
ReviewerID: 59Zmdh7FJ3xTn68D6uc-HQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Last time I went to Pizzeria Mozza we had no reservation.  So waiting an hour plus for a seat at the bar seemed acceptable.  That's our bad, so no complaints.  . . This time, however, we booked a table a month in advance for J's birthday.  We were going to Disneyland first, so a late reservation (9:15) seemed appropriate.  As it turns out, the traffic gods decided to give us a pass on I-5 so we arrive half an hour early with 4 out of 5 of our group members.  We go to check in, and the hipster hostess tells us to come back when the fifth person is there, because they'll only check us in when she's there.  Regardless, we couldn't be seated until closer to our reservation time.  Okay, sounds fair enough.  Well, she shows up at 9:05 and we go to check in, as we see them setting up a table for 5.  Perfection.  Except ... not.  Instead they seat a table with 2 (yes, TWO) people there.  The hostess explains that they had a 9pm reservation.  Okay... but about 15 minutes later the other 3 members of their party show.  So let me get this straight - we needed our full party there, but they could be seated with only 40% of their group?  Not the biggest deal, except while that table was nestled away from the entry, we were seated right by the door/bar.  Epic fail, since we had the coldness from the door constantly opening, were being jostled by the bar group, and had waitstaff constantly passing us by.  And the hostess was not very friendly... seems like a trend at the Mozza places, unfortunately.. . The service was also really not great.  I think I have a higher tolerance for mediocre service at a bar, but our water bottles were not refilled regularly, and they weren't particularly attentive.. . The food is great.  I loved my caprese salad and the burrata/squash blossom pizza.  Everyone loved their food.  The only mis-step food-wise was that the lemon gelato pie was tasty but really hard and therefore difficult to eat.  Not a first-date food, but for J and I it was fine to share. . . Food = 5 stars. Everything Else = 1 star (especially at these prices). . I think I'll stick to Mozza2Go.
