ReviewID: 1Vm6pYC28HG898KUWzq1Hg
ReviewerID: FGperykVyoM81lDpGev1Dw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
I had heard good things about this place form several friends but it always seemed so far and out of reach in Eagle Rock since I live near Santa Monica.  As luck would have it, a friend's band was playing just west of the 2 in Glendale, the perfect excuse to hop over to the east side and check out some Eagle Rock bookmarks.  I had glorious plans of trying several restaurants and bars, along with a food truck or two, but sadly my stomach is not as big as it used to be.  I decided that one big, good meal was the right choice.. . At the Oinkster I tried the cheeseburger combo (comes with fries and a drink) and a chocolate milkshake.  When I ordered the shake, the woman at the counter immediately told me to try the chocolate.  It comes from a locally owned ice cream shop down the street and it's delicious.  It tastes like real chocolate, not that factory made stuff that's been shipped across the country.  The shake was a bit thick, but after a few minutes of warming it was very pleasant to drink.  Mix in some of the whipped cream and you have an incredibly deliciously refreshing shake.  Beware, it is very filling!  I couldn't finish it with my burger.  Had to bring it home to freeze and save for later.. . I was less impressed with the burger.  I don't know why, but I was expecting something really exciting.  It was fairly plain.  It wasn't altogether bad, it just wasn't, it was lacking in flavor and substance.  Adding the garlic aioli for the fries definitely added but after a while it became too much.. . The fries were delicious.  So good, in fact, that two friends simply ordered fries rather than any sandwich.  They went very well with the aioli, although I found that after a few plain bites they tasted, well, plain.  However, still better than the typical fast food fries.. . My other friends got different sandwiches - tuna salad (I believe), pulled pork, veggie burger.  All seemed satisfied although the veggie burger looked the least appetizing to me.. . In short, it was a decent meal but I don't think it's worth a special trip.  If I lived closer, perhaps in Silverlake, I could see myself coming back often.  However, I don't think Oinkster is a big enough reason for me to make a special trip.
