ReviewID: 1VokRqY7pgANtNwJXUcy3Q
ReviewerID: FA4RzyvtOWxluc-M0QXMSQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Flo
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I have been having breakfast at Flo every Saturday for the last 7 years.  Taking into consideration the occasional illness, out of town trips, and other numerous visits for dinner, I'll claim that I have eaten at Flo roughly 500 times.  No other restaurant can lay that kind of claim for me.  My Saturday morning routine consists of a half hour of cardio exercise; an hour of weight training; and, to reward myself for all that effort, a nice cold margarita at Flo and whatever breakfast dish strikes my fancy that morning.  . . With this kind of relationship with the restaurant, this review will be very biased.  However I will try to be as objective as possible.  Service is always very warm and friendly.  Hot coffee is on offer while you wait.  The customized Intelligentsia blend is strong and dark.  My usual favorite dishes are the following.  The Eggs Flo.  2 thick slices of brioche, topped with 2 almost equally thick slices of smoked turkey, topped by freshly poached eggs over a river of Hollandaise sauce.  All this goodness sits on a bed of raw spinach.  The Borracho Burger.  My hangover cure.  Thick patty cooked to temperature, on an eggy, buttery brioche bun, topped with a punchy salsa.  Wake me up!  The Flo Hash.  It is a tangle of diced turkey sautéed with onions, zucchini, peppers, and other veggies.  The other half of the dish is a 'hash' of diced fresh fruit.  The house-made Granola.  It is a giant bowl of crunchy goodness with a thick glob of yogurt.  Of all dishes, this is the one that I can never finish completely.  The Egg Sandwich.  Brioche toast filled with scrambled egg, and stacked perfectly with layers of raw spinach and roasted red peppers.  These are just my favorites.  . . A new item on the menu, the Guadalajara Scramble, is my current favorite.  It is basically skirt steak fajita with scrambled eggs, sided with black beans.  The steak is tender and well-seasoned, the veggies crunchy, and strips of fried tortillas round out the dish.  Yummy deliciousness.. . Why 5 stars?  It is a neighborhood gem, and a bustling place.  The staff is warm and friendly.  The manager is gracious and an excellent bartender.  The cocktails are strong.  The food is delicious.  It is a part of my daily life, and I just love, love, love Flo.  Goober says hey!
