ReviewID: 1W1aXpuMq6hkjL_5UsE6Vw
ReviewerID: WcuSCym5lSnuaJvvEcjHzA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
844 Reviews???  Holy crap!  Judging by how packed it was this afternoon, I can see how this place isn't lacking for patrons.  . . Anyways, we got to Mozza at 11:45 am and there was already a line forming at the door.  We kept our expectations open considering some of the negative Yelp reviews, but what the hey...opinions are like belly buttons...everyone's got one....so I take them with a grain of salt. . . We were about a dozen deep in the line and when the door opened up, everyone just started sitting down at random tables.  The 2 dudes working the front door seemed confused, but they sat us down immediately after we told them we had a reservation...  . . Now to the nitty gritty.  We ordered the fried potatoes and the Mozza caprese as appetizers and the Margherita and Bianca pizzas.  The fried potatoes came as a small bowl of fried potatoes and chick peas with sage and rosemary.  Potatoes were crispy on the outside, but perfectly cooked on the inside.  The combo of the fried potatoes and chickpeas made for an unusual combination that went really well with some kind of hollandaise/horseradish dipping sauce.  The caprese consisted of what looked like freshly made mozzarella, judging by the taste and consistency, roasted baby tomatoes still on the vine, fresh basil, and a nice pesto sauce.  Probably one of the best caprese dishes we've ever had. . . The pizzas were spot-on.  I'm from the East coast and I'm tellin ya this is some pretty damm good pizza.  The Margherita had a light tomato sauce base with fresh mozzarella and basil, while the Bianca is a white pie with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage.  The crust was on the thin side, but they build up the edges of the crust so it's crunchy yet chewy at the same time...so you can definitely do the East-coast fold.  Great flavors and everything seemed very fresh.  The only flaw I could find was that the Bianca was a bit on the greasy side...a napkin blot of the Bianca came away extra greasy...but it was still tasty.     . . Service was perfectly attentive without being overbearing, and we never had to ask for refills.  Suprisingly enough, we ate our meal without ever feeling rushed to make room for the folks waiting outside.    . . Just an observation, but the tables at Mozza are ridiculously close together...I'm talking about 6 inches or so apart...to where, if you're sitting on the bench side, you have to move the table over just to scooch out.  Also, it's a bit pricy for what you get...we spent around $88 for the two of us for 2 appetizers, 2 pizzas, sparkling water, iced tea and some gelato.  I guess it's to be expected for a popular LA joint...  . . By the time we left Mozza around 1:20 pm or so, the place was completely packed.  So, make sure you get there early or have a reservation...otherwise, you'll be in for a wait.  Also, skip the valet, there's tons of parking on the street around the building (metered on Melrose and 2 hour free on Highland - at least on the weekends).  . . Overall, we enjoyed our experience at Mozza and will probably go back at some point.  Don't listen to the negative reviews; go there yourself and make up your own mind.  Check out my pics...
