ReviewID: 1ZaD95yYAywcfucI6BrR6g
ReviewerID: B7GE5jBbWxlPQeWgDg_jGw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
A word from my soapbox to all the nay-sayers:   This is not a run of the mill coffee shop, it's very civilized.  It's expensive, they actually hired an interior designer instead of having some hippy-dippy half assed decorating scheme, and they hired a chef ( Michael Cimarusti) to create the menu.  Silverlake is growing more upscale everyday, so if you don't like it - move to Highland Park (that's where  I live).  . . Let me start by saying that this place is EXPENSIVE.  . . Tried to go after Daily Candy said they were open, only to be denied by a big fat closed sign.  I am working on chilling out instead of freaking out like I usually do......I like freaking out, my doctor on the other hand?  not so much.  So! for the sake of my blood pressure, I took a deep breath and came back a few days later.. . Glad I did!  I luv, luv, luv the design of this place.  Those teal croc embossed leather chairs are to die for.  I definitely appreciate the thoughtfulness that was put into the design, very chic, very comfortable.. . The coffee - I had a $5 (gulp) cafe Au lait.  This was one of the best cups of coffee I have ever tasted, and worth every penny.. . The Food-  The Caesar salad, although tiny, was Delicious. I'm trying to watch the old Lb's, so no more complaining about small food.  It had some sort of yuzu dressing, heavenly.  For a sweet treat after lunch, we shared a canele which was a little heaven cake......why can't I just be one of those naturally thin people and eat this stuff all the time?. . THEN!  They brought a chocolate truffle and a white chocolate heart as a special and freeeeeeeee! treat!  I ate it, ruined my diet for the day, but I had to, it was just all so very, very delicious.. . It will be interesting to see what makes it onto the menu after the soft opening. . . I have to say that I think it is fantastic to have a place in silverlake with a proper chef in the kitchen. Kudos.. . Oh, oh one more thing.  I selected "dressy" as the attire, because I am sick of looking at people in their tired old outfits running around Silverlake, lets class it up a little people.  The days of flip flops are over!
