ReviewID: 25a9Z-9FWzIqA6rOYcqXXQ
ReviewerID: 53-0CIUo-pd5ysfvHXb2yQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I have mixed feelings about this place.. . *Ambience: I loved it! They have really high ceilings, marble floors, and the place is HUGE and very clean. The lighting was just right too--slightly dimmed, and the whole place had a very trendy mod feel to it. The only down side was the noise level. We came on such a busy night that it was really crowded and loud. At times, I could barely hear myself!. . *Service: . - I called in literally a minute before I stepped in the door while I was in the parking lot to ask how long the wait was for two and the guy said only about 15 minutes. Yay! . - As soon as my boyfriend and I walked in, there was a lady at the door offering us complimentary tomato bruschetta. Light, fresh, and crispy--it was a nice little treat and I was pretty wowed at the service. Double yay!. -  Then, we walked up to the host but he said the wait would be about 40-50 minutes! "But I JUST called in and someone said the wait would only be about 15 minutes." "Yes, I'm sorry but we constantly have people coming in, blahblahblah..." Okay, really? You're telling me THAT many people walked in within the past 60 seconds? Since we already paid for parking, we just decided to wait the 40 minutes. Ugh! They really need to have better communication between the workers! . - Thankfully, our waitress, Taylor was GREAT! She was really friendly, answered all our questions, and was just overall a really awesome server! One of the best servers I've ever had!. . *Food:. 1. Sausage Pizza($14): They make the sausage themselves and it was very unique and flavorful. The pizza itself was very thin and was overall, pretty good. I usually like crust but I wasn't a big fan of this one. It was a little too hard and dry for my taste.. . 2. Penne Gamber ($8): The pasta came with jumbo shrimp, broccolini, roasted tomatoes in a garlic and olive oil broth. It was pretty plain, and nothing too special. We originally wanted the trenne pasta after Taylor had made it sound SO delicious, but she came back saying that they had run out of some of the ingredients and couldn't make it. Bummer. . . 3. Tuna Carpaccio ($8): This was my favorite of the night! It's one of the small plates you can order. It was basically really thinly sliced raw tuna and it melted in my mouth! MMM so goood! I would definitely get this again!. . 4. Macarons ($1.75 each). They have a bakery on the right side with lots of pastries! I got assorted macarons and it came in a super cute little pink box with a light blue ribbon around it. The macarons are pretty small and they have so many flavors like lavendar, lemon, chocolate, vanilla, and more. I liked the presentation better than the taste. . . We came on a reallyyy busy night so next time, I want to come during the day when it's less packed.
