ReviewID: 26McsStLM2Izik9G30Yxew
ReviewerID: DBFRgbWy_BkLecLB8ydeqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now present, for your consideration, my 100th review.. . Let me begin by saying how much I thoroughly enjoy eating with other yelpers. They have discriminating palates, they share food, and if someone suggests trying a new place, they're all for it. Such was the case when I wanted to go to Umami Burger and 4 other brave souls decided to make it a dinner outing on Friday night.. . This is a small restaurant, like, really small. But you know what they say, good things come in small packages. They initally told us it would take 2 hours for the 5 of us to be seated, and though the wait was long, it wasn't that long. . . Parking is a big problem. Their parking lot is small so you may have to double or triple park and then have to get up in the middle of dinner to move your car to let some poor soul out of the parking gridlock. Street parking is not really an option because it's all permit only. I was told there was some across the street on 9th, but I didn't see any. . . Now for the good stuff.... It's BYOB, so our resident alcohol connoisseur brought two bottles of zinfandel to accompany our meal. Corkage was only $5 and if you bring beer, I don't think you get charged...ask Ms. Mini Keg. They offer various other retro-type specialty beverages, but BYOB is better.. . They offer specials-of the day, and when we went, the specials were a scallop burger and yucca fries. The Yucca fries were delicious, especially with the housemade ketchup and garlic aioli. Sadly, no one was able to try the scallop burger, but our dining neighbors told us that it was delicious.. . I ordered the Umami burger, which was a medium rare burger with an oven roasted tomato, parmesan crisp, portabella mushrooms, and grilled onions on a soft, buttery bun. Perfection. All the makings of a perfect burger...it reminded me of an episode of "How I Met Your Mother.." where Marshall searches all around NYC for the perfect burger, and Regis Philbin is involved, and....you know what, just hulu it..   I heard from reliable sources that the Hatch Burger, So Cal Burger, and Pork Burger were incredible as well.. . The fries were great, thick cut and crispy on the outside while still being soft on the inside, the way I like 'em. The malt liquor beer battered onion rings were seasoned just right, but a bit too oily. If you ask for any of their housemade condiments, it will come in a tablespoon so ask for a few.. . The portions may look small, but they're actually the perfect size. You will definitely leave feeling full, but not overstuffed to where you will need to ask your dining companions to gently roll you out of the door.. . After two bottles of wine, yucca fries, french fries, and onion rings, we were too full to attempt the ice cream sandwiches or cake monkey desserts, but I see a second trip in the near future.. . The service was good, and they didn't make us feel rushed even though there was a line outside of poor saps salivating at our meals. The overall consensus at the table was a solid 4 stars.. . Will I return? Most definitely. Was it worth my 100th review? Absolutely.
