ReviewID: 27qWRM2nxIEml6pPsrcmkw
ReviewerID: xT-kqzQm8hcXJrWdKyrwpQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ru San&#39;s Buckhead At Tower Place
Category: Sushi Bars
This was my favorite place for sushi in college (the Athens location which, btw, the Piedmont location is the best in Atl... The Athens location surprisingly is the coolest).  After briefing over a few of the reviews other people wrote, I can relate with some of the bad reviews... Here is the deal:  Atlanta is a place that is very spread out with numeorus neighborhoods and, each neighborhood brings many great restaurants- Japanese and other styles alike.. . So yeah, Ru San's definitely does not have the best, most freshest sushi.  But that is not what makes Ru San's, Ru San's.  The atmosphere does.  There is no place in Atlanta like Ru San's.  It is a fun place that is typically designed decently, and it offers Sake Bombs and varying drinks galore.  The sushi is cheap and decent (and yes, I too was once grossed out by the buffet but I suppose with years I have become a little less finnicky with food on buffet lines).  I have eaten here probably over 100 times (been going there for like 6 years and used to be obsessed with it!) and never gotten sick or anything.. . So, to end this review, I say to all the people who reviewed poorly- you need to take into account atmosphere when reviewing (and, for their lack of taking that into account, I am giving it a 5 to hopefully skew bad reviews).  If you go here to get a quiet atmosphere, well, you may just be a little mental.  But, if you want to go somewhere and be loud and drink a few bombs and eat a little sushi, go here.  Hell, I just remembered I celebrated my 22nd b-day here twice- once with my friends on a Friday, the next with my family on Monday.. . So, yeah I like Ru-San's.  But, I will tell ya straight up, I am not going to go here for the best sushi.  No, that certainly is not Ru-San's style (and they would probably concur with that statement).  It is for the atmosphere and cheap sushi!  So, go there and have fun... And, ya know what, take a sake bomb for me, would ya?!  It has been a while...
