ReviewID: 27wUFcx17EFCwGSvy3m-Eg
ReviewerID: 1JLeCtVa2-i7aH5aC4bF2w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
So after passing this restaurant for the umpteenth time, my bf and I decided to try it.  To preface, she is preggers, and the best places to go are those with a more eclectic menu.  She calls ahead and discovers there are no available tables until 9pm (um, of course not it's Sat night at 7 pm, by the way).  But pregnancy knows no reservations, so she tells the hostess this and the lovely woman says if we get there quickly she can squeeze us in.  My friend drags me by the ear out of my house and we hightail it on over. (have you ever seen a hungry pregnant woman drive?  Frightening.)  . We are seated right away, which never happens in LA, unless your name is..well, not mine.. The waitress, Yohanna, (hopefully that's right) tells us the specials which all sound great and we peruse the menu.  Me, being quite persnickety and indecisive, of course can't figure out what I want.  My bf is not happy about this, since her future spawn is river dancing in her belly and if is not fed within the next 2 minutes will start gnawing on her lower intestine.  The very personable and I must emphasize, patient waitress goes over, literally ever item on the menu with me, giving me her faves and the best sellers.  I finally decide on the mac n cheese since, it is a yelp fave, but cannot seem to hone in on a main dish.  My bf has already ordered samosas and the Kobe burger.  The burger looks great, but I haven't eaten red meat in year and change.  Not by choice, had a bad experience at  a very popular steak restaurant and since then haven't been able to go near it, much less eat it.  But as the dishes go by me, I just can't resist.  I order it - OMG it was great.  I couldn't believe I was able to eat it, and I'm so glad I did.  I can eat red meat again - woo hoo!  . Ok, to recap-. Mac n cheese - unbelievably yummy - will go back just for that!. Samosas - delish!. Fries with the garlic - great, crispy . Kobe burger - you made a meat eater out of me... . Great food, awesome service, well-nourished preggie best friend 'priceless'
