ReviewID: 292e0AmUyKvR7l0CCiJueg
ReviewerID: hH0mqIsyk6WLfn7-wHX2NQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
"You can't take pictures of the restaurant or the food." the server belts out from across the tale. . . We put away the camera and motioned for the server to take our order.  I began by saying, "Hi, we'd like to start with a few things." Our server cuts me off immediately, "Oh, you'll have to put in your entire order at once." . . Ok...hum...man, lots of rules to obey before we even get a glass of water. . . I ordered quickly, for all of us to share, not wanting to get on our server's bad side.... . 1. squash blossom with ricotta cheese appetizer - nicely battered and fried, tasty and well seasoned, but $12 and five blossoms later, we didn't quite feel satisfied at all. 3 star. . 2. Nancy's chop salad - the flavor combination's good but we all felt the salad was overdressed and that the dressing was a bit too tangy. For $15, it's prob a 2 star. . . 3. Speck - delicious. I love speck and these are wonderful. $12 for our plate of 7 or 8 slices is fair, although on the expensive side. . . 4. 1 chicken liver / guanciale bruschetta - AMAZING! the liver is served on panini-grilled bread. SO good. Perfectly seasoned liver served on perfectly grilled bread. Solid 5 stars.. . 5. Sausage pizza - really really tasty. I loved it! The crust is amazing and absolutely the best pizza I've had. I love the saltiness of the sausage contrasted with the thin crust. Solid 5 stars.. . 6. Mussels - Delicious. I love that the mussels are not overly cooked so they are tender and not dry and chewy. I love the garlic, it's so tasty. Solid 4 stars. . . We finally had to stop ourselves from ordering more food...but then the dessert menu is delivered to us and we couldn't help ourselves...3 desserts followed... . . 1. Panna cotta - As my Yelp friends know, I love panna cotta and always order it whenever it is on the dessert menu. This was a big disappointment for me. It way too sour and I have no idea how the panna cotta goes with the strawberry jam pastry. NOT a fan...2 stars. . . 2. Crostata - sundae with freshly fried peanuts, butterscotch flavor ice cream on top of brittle. What a terrific combination. Really creative and new. 4 stars.. . 3. Affogato - espresso poured over ice cream served with two small pieces of biscotti. OMG, the biscotti is rock hard. Biscotti needs to be dense but that was almost un-breakable! Pretty hard on the teeth for sure. I love the flavor of the espresso and ice cream combo. It's 3 stars in my book. . . Considering the price points and the calibre of the food, the three desserts we had were a complete let-down. . . Next time I come back, I am definitely focusing on savory dishes and skipping desserts, unless there are changes. I'll prob also skip salad, and small appetizers and order another pizza to share.
