ReviewID: 2BVEELhA28ThiPEDNLWCrg
ReviewerID: i_jyzR3NhOldcHa2K1UqtQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
It took our family a long time to find a close match-up to Monkee's Seafood in Chinatown, and this is the closest we could find! The wait was about 45 minutes because it was a Saturday evening right around the dinner rush. I guess it's not too bad...gotta remember to go a bit earlier next time, though! . . So we usually like to order the salt and pepper squid/shrimp, and I would have to say the squid is melt-in-your-mouth delicious! We always always finish this dish. I guess it's like a Chinese version of calamari, but no sauce is needed since it's already seasoned.. . Now, this place is more known for their lobster, but we tried it last time and I think I prefer the crab. Maybe I just love the crab with black bean sauce...takes me back to our days at Monkee's. Sorry, that was the second time I've mentioned another Chinese seafood restaurant. Anyway...another black bean sauce dish that we order is the clam. I don't like clam so I didn't have any, but from the reaction from my family, it must have been really good. There was none left by the end of dinner.... . Out of all their vegetable dishes, I would say the peasprouts are the best. They are these almost alfalfa-like sprouts that are crunchy and refreshing-tasting, with a little bit of that vegetable bitterness that is totally complimented by the saltiness of the dish. I don't even know if I'm describing it correctly, but it's pretty dang delicious!. . We also ordered the seafood pan-friend noodle that came out in, oh, I want to say...2 minutes after we ordered it. I'm wondering if they just had it ready and then brought it out? Either way, it was still steaming hot and good.. . I have to say, the only thing is that they charged us for the steamed rice. I know that most places provide the rice for free...had I known, I would have had my fair share of rice...considering I paid for the tab. Oh well, I guess I know for next time. FYI it's 50 cents per person.. . ** Something that we like to do is flip over the main crab shell, mix in some rice and black bean sauce, some hot sauce, and scrape all the crab (insides?) together and eat it. OH MY GOODNESS SO DELICIOUS. Just wanted to add that as my own personal touch for this review. That's what reviewing is for, right? If you try it out and like it, let me know!
