ReviewID: 2dpsbFukBSdPRMalCIB0Xg
ReviewerID: bIsW255vsUMdZYk_IV7Xhw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Came here for the Sunday Brunch as part of my company's anniversary celebration.  Otherwise, I doubt I would have ever come in since you need to know someone, who knows someone (who has a pass) to get in.. . They have a formal dress code (jackets &amp; ties for the gents, dresses for the ladies) but the weekend brunch offers more of a relaxed dress code without the coats or neckpieces.  . . The Venue - 5 stars. . The place is huge.  The building was originally built in the early 1900's reflecting the popular Victorian style of the time.  The interior is kind of how I imagined it would be, dark ambiance, lots of exposed wood walls with a ton of pictures, artwork, and other magic themed paraphernalia.  Besides the main stage/room where our performance was to take place, the castle has a ton of other small rooms that have individual acts performing throughout the day.  The dining area on the upstairs level features a number of connected rooms filled with tables, which also feed into the buffet hall.   . . The Food - 3.5. . There were the usual brunch suspects: eggs, potatoes, bacon, fruit, omelet bar, french toast, and lox.  They also included a hot meat carving station (turkey &amp; beef) roasted veggies, enchiladas, penne w/ fettuccine, shrimp cocktail and a small tray of desserts.  The food was good, but for what I heard the price was, I doubt I would come back for the food as a paying customer.  Also comes with endless beverages, limited to water, coffee, sodas, juices and mimosas.. . The Magic - 3.5. . The afternoon show started at 12:45 and had three acts (can't remember their names) that spanned about 45 minutes.  It was a good mix of talent, as each act had something different to offer that was individually unique.  Crowd participation is encouraged, as 2 of 3 acts brought up "assistants" to join their show to partake in action.  . . Overall, it was a good experience worthy of maybe doing again, albeit you will spend some money here so do come prepared.  I'm not a magic aficionado at any length, though if you are, it is worthwhile to check out.
