ReviewID: 2e5dI2zhPo1W5ZG5bmIyHw
ReviewerID: yB6oBfaxLM0gY9lVWmlJBQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
This is the first 5 stars I have ever given on yelp!. . This restaurant has great tasting food, reasonable prices, great ambience, as well as some of the friendliest and best staff I've ever had at a restaurant.. . Food:  The food is a mixed bag of Italian fare.... the portion are great for sharing and the flavors are definetly unique and not the typical same ole dishes you order at other italian restaurants.  I ordered the meatball pizza, portabella fries, regular fries, some salad with goat cheese and candied pecans on it, and the club sandwich.  EVERYTHING was delicious.  Did not have that greasy huge portion feeling of some of the Italian chain restaurants out there like Maggianos.  Fresh Fresh ingredients are used in the dishes.... and the combination of flavors are very unique.  There are many different items on the menue for everyone of different tastes and cravings.. . Price:  Price is very reasonable for a nice restaurant like this.  Without alcohol, our meal for 5 people was under $100 before tip.... and we DID eat ALOT!!!!  Some of their dinner entrees go for $25-$30 an entree but that is what I would expect for the type of ribeye dishes or salmon dishes at any restaurant.  . . Ambience:   Though some people complain that its a little loud in here, I personally don't think its TOO loud, and the busy, energetic atmosphere actually makes the ambience seem sort of fun and good for people watching.  It didn't feel like a stuffy candle light and roses type restaurant.  It felt like a fun, vibrant restaurant.. . Service:  Every time I've eaten here the service has been top notch from the servers, to the hostesses, to the management.  I have a few friends who work here and it seems like they really emphasize service to their staff.  At almost any other restaurant I can think of I've run into the snooty, don't wanna be working type employees but here everyone is professional, well dressed, and gives excellent service.. . Negatives:  If I had to think of any negatives I would say that I don't like paying $6 dollars for parking next door, but hey... its downtown LA.  Yes it is a bit noisy, so if your here for a romantic dinner its not exactly the right mood.  Last but not least.... alot of the items on the menu are somewhat creative and maybe you've never heard of or tried something like that (for example.. portabella mushroom fries).... so I can see it happening where people order a few items thinking its gonna taste like one thing.... but after eating it tastes like something else.  I highly doubt any items on the menu taste "bad" but it might be something different from what you were expecting.. . All in all, this is now one of my favorite restaurants in LA.  Definetly try it!!!!!
