ReviewID: 2hFvaeeA-bQh_uYnmjYxxg
ReviewerID: zA54uMiNT1midVSFwIREZg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
This place is like a food orgy.  So amazing you might over-indulge and you always want to come back for more.  I actually got my first food hangover ever here..... And since Saturday night, i've been telling my friends, everyone at work, etc... about my experience at Comme Ca this weekend.  It's got such an amazing interior and ambience - kind of like a richly paneled library, but with a very hip, non-stuffy feel.  The crowd is very cool and ecclectic, so the energy of the place is great.  The service truly was awesome, from the maitre d all the way to the wait and bar staff.  Very friendly and accomodating, which you usually don't get in LA.  Honestly, I can't say enough good things about this place - and then on to the food, which I can say is hands down some of my favorite in LA.  The chef is unbelievable and makes some of the most decadent and scrumptous creations I've had anywhere.  Yet they're not so "exotic" that you don't want to eat them.  By the way, it's not your typical French restaurant in that it does NOT have small portions and overly high prices.  Very fair and reasonable on both accounts.  Two things that you absolutely cannot miss in my opinion - 1) The tarte flambe, which is a thin crisp bread with a bit of a sweet and oniony roumelade on the top, that includes small sauteed onions, amazing chunks of canadian bacon and light cheese...  It's ridiculous and I craved it for so long since the first time I went there, that this was all I had this second time.  2) Is the "Made in Mexico" margarita.  Oh my gosh, I wasn't two sips into this one when I ordered another.  It's not like any margarita you've ever tasted and has very subtle, nicely mixed flavors that let you drink it like a fancy summer lemonade.... my girl and I even commented that we could barely taste any alcohol but then followed that up with the observation that we were much more buzzed than ten minutes earlier, before having the drink.  So, overall, this is one of those places in LA that I would absolutely HAVE to take friends or family from out of town - It's just so cool.... and the fromagerie in it's own quaint section of the restaurant is too unique - something you don't find in too many places in LA - or the U.S. for that matter.  Just go and please remember to have the tarte flambe and the made in mexico margarita.  You will have a new favorite restaurant too!
