ReviewID: 2iZ5cw0SqT6pVFZk8nGVcw
ReviewerID: WEd_LPrAnsXlzm6S8WbwKw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
Ahh... Shabu Shabu in Little Tokyo will always have a place in my heart. It was my first experience trying shabu shabu for the first time here over a year ago, and I made it back to this wonderful restaurant two days ago with a close friend. She told me that she researched this place on Yelp and was really excited to try it, and from what I could remember during my first visit I told her that she would not be disappointed. I am so glad I was right.. . Thursday night, we arrived at 7:15. I was expecting a relatively small wait. Turned out we waited for about an hour or so because it was really busy on a weeknight. It goes to show you that this place is very popular and for good reason. Sitting enviously as the other groups at the table were enjoying their meals, the owner made sure to update us on our waiting time, even if he was busy running around doing other behind the scenes work. Finally, my friend and I were seated, ready to chow down. We both ordered the 15 beef slice meal, which was around $15-17 compared to the smaller order option. There are no gimmicks here, just two options to pick from. As we sat down, the water in front of us was simmering and we just helped ourselves to a wonderful meal. Advice: add the all the spices to the broth and dipping sauces to get the most flavor out of the meat. And let the meat soak in the dipping sauce once it is done cooking. The meat here was lean cut and high-quality, very little fat. The thing that makes shabu shabu stand out is the sauce. The ponzu sauce here is to die for. My friend told me that this was the best ponzu sauce she has tried, and she is a huge shabu fan.The vegetables, noodles, and tofu all complimented the meat wonderfully, and it was such a great dining experience for the both of us. We ordered a large Asahi beer to split, and we toasted to great food. Because the food at Shabu Shabu is not great, but in a world of its own.
