ReviewID: 2kOhbZh-3CjVC48ps_rCLA
ReviewerID: yaBIVHDxaUBN2YHQ8-YiuQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: De Cero Taqueria
Category: Mexican
De Cero = yummers.  that is all.. . JK, I did not get the "elite" badge in my profile for writing one-sentence reviews.. . We went to de cero to use our Groupon.  Made a reservation for a Saturday night, seated promptly at a table by the window.  I liked the rustic interior, the wooden chairs, wooden/copper sinks in the bathroom - it set a nice tone.  The music was a bit bizarro, with no consistent theme whatsoever.  It was like someone had all the music in the world on an iPod and put it on shuffle.. . Anyway, that's not what you care about.  You care about food and drink.  Well, I had the mango-chile margarita.  It was delicious, and stronger than it tastes, which are both excellent qualities in a drink.  The "chile" part is in the spicy salt around the rim, so if you drink it through a straw, then it's just a mango margarita.  but a tasty one!. . We split the duck nachos first - they took forever to come out, which made our hungry bellies sad, but when they did arrive they were DELICIOUS!  Very meaty and cheesy, and hot!  The plates are hot too, so the nachos don't get cold partway through.  Don't miss this appetizer.. . So the boy and I each had a taco plate of 3 tacos, plus rice and beans.  And WOW ya'll complain a lot about the size of the tacos.  Yes, they are small tacos, but they are filled with delicious fresh ingredients and are very flavorful.  I mean, ahi tuna costs more than cheap, industrially produced meat at your corner-taqueria, so yes the taco cost more at de cero.  But it was fresh and lovely!  The chorizo one was great, I loved the heat, and the pork al pastor taco had the perfect hint of pineapple salsa.  The rice and beans were awesome - get the pinto beans with bacon - and (key point here) I was full.  $15 for the taco plate, $5 for the nachos (if you split it with someone) and I was stuffed.  $20 and you're stuffed, at a cute restaurant with a nice atmosphere.  What is there to complain about?. . If it wasn't such a haul for us to get there, I'd go back and try all the tacos.  It was a really fun place to go for dinner, we were still talking about it the next day.  Don't be a hater, try De Cero now and not later.  Wow, I'm cool.
