ReviewID: 2Mg51ceA-2Id8VWrxiFzWA
ReviewerID: 3-t_uaPKVQQmOUAIu7C-PA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Elements Café
Category: American (New)
All this ridiculous swine flu hysteria is making me HAWNGRY.  Anytime someone mentions it, all I hear is swine and all I think about is bacon.  I think I have some variant of this bacon flu cuz lately I NEED BACON like Linus needs his blanket....or like Ron Jeremy needs his back waxed.. . Another half day off, another chance to explore my beloved city of angels and impress the wife. She had been craving mac n cheese and my obvious bacon craving begged the question...where can I combine the two!?  Elements Kitchen in Pasadena had my answer!  I call ahead and they happily take my order.  1 Mac n cheese ($9) with chicken ($3) for the wife and my mac n cheese ($9) with bacon ($3) of course!. . Fast forward through nearly an hour of misery on the  60, 605 and 210 fwys and I'm here!  . http://static.px.yelp.....  Cute place, small, clean, nice row of tables to eat outside if you like.  . http://static.px.yelp.....  Very friendly chick greets me with my order ready to go, swipes my plastic and I'm headed back home!  That wonderful aroma of cheesy, chickeny ,bacony goodness teases me all the way back to my humble abode. . http://static.px.yelp..... . . I do my best imitation of a good husband and patiently wait for the wife to get home so we can dine together...and sip a little Hefeweizen in the meanwhile.  She gets home and we dig in...here's how the meal went.... . me: Whaddaya think? How's it taste?. . the wife: MMmm mrrmmph mmm! This is the best macaroni and cheese I've ever had in my life!. . me: you dork it can't be that good....and say sumn original, everyone writes that in their reviews...here lemme taste and I'll tell ya how it really is..... . the wife: mmmm chomp mmmm nommmmm. . me:  gawdammit...this might be the best mac n cheese I've ever had in my life..... . The blend of fresh cheeses, the crispy little bread crumbs, the thick delicious bacon all come together beautifully in this little joygasm in a plastic bowl.  Man I hate it when the wife is right...and yes, that's ALL the time. =)
