ReviewID: 2MP81oZJ6R6jVFXL2ti4eQ
ReviewerID: 4LVDF-mk4EqPCaeamWXDHA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Chego
Category: Korean
I was a bit underwhelmed by Chego in comparison to it's food truck counterpart. I was invited by a friend to celebrate his girlfriend's birthday, starting with dinner at Chego. I was really excited to try this new creation of Chef Roy Choi, especially since I am in LOVE with his KOGI trucks! . . First off, parking. @_@ the parking situation is non-existent. It took 15-20 minutes to find a decent spot to squeeze into where I for sure knew I was not going to get a ticket from the popo. But I shouldn't complain, it IS West LA after-all.. . Now when you finally get inside (that's if you can get in), there's a long line... sometimes it goes out the door. I thought that it was the line to be seated, but alas, another bubble burst. You wait in line to order from the register and then they give you a number and you go fend for yourself by hunting down one of their few scarce tables. I guess you can call this a bit more of a cleaner, nicer taquería experience.. . While waiting for the servers to bring us our grub, I was checking out the room. Literally the room, I think the seated dining area was only a bit larger than my own bedroom. The decor had a very urban feel to it, the speakers were bumping old school hip-hop and around the perimeter of the room there were shelves that displayed photos, books, and other stuff... it really did look like a teenager's bedroom. One thing I might suggest to the management is that they could clear the trinkets from the shelves, lower it a few feet and create some open space around the perimeter. The logic behind that would be so people can stand at these shelf-counters and eat their food without having to hover around trying to steal the next available table. . . All together we tried about half of Chego's menu. While waiting in line, we were offered free samples of the 3pm Meatballs (ka-ching! 1 item knocked off the menu). The meatballs reminded me of a Vietnamese siu-mai coated in a spicy spicy pepper sauce. The polenta patty was interesting, I originally thought it was like a rice cake but reading up about it on Google showed that it was made from boiled cornmeal.. . So technically, the first appetizer ordered was the Charred Asparagus.  I didn't get a chance to try this but the girls mentioned that it was quite delicious. . . The second appetizer that we got was a heart attack on a plate, the Ooey Gooey Fries. It's described as "Cheesy ChiLi Sesame Fries w/ pickLed garLic, chiLLies, ciLantro and sour cream" on the EatChego Twitter, and it was indeed very rich and creamy. We all tried a few fries but it definitely was meant to be shared because everyone was a bit overwhelmed by all the cheesiness that was going on in that dish.. . A few of us ordered the Tiny's Prime Rib Rice Bowl... and boy did we wish we ordered something with pork belly instead. The prime rib was overcooked and a bit tough. Love the gooey sunnyside up egg over the rice, though. It was also a bit spicy and had a kick to it. We all got extra sriracha sauce in little cups, but I don't think any of us ended using any extra hot sauce. . . Now to the pork belly, I observed that my friends ordered two versions of the pork belly, and they were both delicious. . . The first variation was the official One Chubby Pork Belly Bowl. This bowl definitely looked like it had a lot more food than the Prime Rib bowl. Except it was DRENCHED in sauce and was extremely greasy. . . I believe the winner of the night goes to the Buttered Kimchi Chow with Pork Belly upgrade. Everything worked well together in this bowl and it was very tasty. It didn't have much sauce and wasn't as greasy as the previous dish. . . All drinks cost $1.50 and you can help yourself to the fridges in the back by the kitchen. They're going by the honor system, because you go grab the drinks after you pay, so PLEASE don't screw it up for others by taking drinks that you didn't pay for!. . I probably won't go out of my way to eat at Chego in the future, but if I am in the area again, I definitely would try some of the other dishes offered on the menu.
