ReviewID: 2OmnH991Hj3KrQxAeeq1ew
ReviewerID: 2jp40xPekth3TAL6oVlq3w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I came to Mastros around 7:30 on a Sunday night and after talking with Megan, the hostess, chose to sit at a table in the bar since it was near the piano and I was dining by myself.  Ashley was my server and she was really great about helping choose a wine, bringing a few to sample.  She also was immensely helpful when choosing what to order.  I had never had oysters before (being a Midwest girl I just don't trust 'em in Missouri) so Ashley recommended the Blue Point and also told me about another type which was not even on the menu.  She also kindly explained how to eat them without making me feel like novice I am.  All of the sides are served family style, not really conducive to solo dining.  She let me know there was a smaller option to choose 3 sides of smaller portions (which is STILL a massive amount of food!)  I went with the sauteed broccoli (love!), sauteed mushrooms (which also have onion and red peppers), and the gorgonzola mac and cheese (which is to DIE for!).  I decided to go with the signature bone in petite filet and I'm glad I did, it was amazing and I had no choice but to finish all 12 ounces.  Hey, I was on vacation!  . . The chef, Walter (?), came out and asked me how everything was and chatted with me for a few minutes about my first oyster experience, my vacation, etc.  Must be the lonely diner on a busy Sunday obligation.  He asked me what I was having for dessert (as if there was room) and I told him I didn't know if anything else would fit in my stomach.  Shortly after the signature butter cake (sans the berries since I had told the chef I am not a fruit fan) AND a pecan pie arrived at my table!  The pie was waaay better than grandma's, you must try it!  The butter cake is really not impressive, especially for a "signature" item.  . . This was seriously the best dinner I've had out in a long time.  The food was amazing (and I'm now a huge oyster fan), the staff was amazingly friendly and professional (shout out to the bus boy as well!), and the atmosphere and music were great.  Also, the bar is really where it's at.  The three piece band was fun and I ended up meeting some great other diners at the table next to me... just in case I ever need a Realtor or malpractice lawyer in California ;). . I will definitely be back next time I'm in LA.. . Oh yeah, and pretty pricey, but worth every penny.
