ReviewID: 2ovNUhd0UMXUw1Hk7jQvQA
ReviewerID: CjvFxl6_7AK3lw5O49MN8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I usually avoid red meat if I can, but at Lawry's I'll make an exception. I took my BF here on a Friday afternoon at 5 p.m. (Opening time) which meant ultra fresh beef at first slice! Before we were called to be seated, he grazed on the complimentary meatballs in the lobby. I held off in hopes not to spoil my appetite.. . The meal started with an intro from our friendly waitress dressed in her perfectly pressed signature Lawry's garb complete with the perfect bow apron (how the hell do they get it so perfect??).. . I love how they pull the entire table out, then tuck the table back in when you're seated.. . She offered drinks and I got a cocktail from their little table mini menu (Hawaiian something or other) and then quickly returned with the salad bowl spinning show. . . I ordered the lobster tail dinner (I knew I could snag a bite of the red stuff from my BF's plate) and he got-what else? Prime Rib!. . My lobster tails arrived-all 3 perched atop their red shells ready for devouring, accompanied by veggies, mashed potatoes, and butta :). . . The chef came to our table shortly after with his shiny metal holder of beefy goodness and cut a fresh first slice for my honey. He got the yummy creamed corn and taters, oh yeah-and a lobster tail.. . The bus boys were very on point and attentive; our water glasses couldn't get down to half full even if they tried!. . Since I made our reservation using Open . http://Table.com.  I was able to add a request/celebration note when I did. I mentioned we were dining to celebrate our anniversary. . . When our waitress came out with two slices of strawberry cake with lit candles and another waiter who sang "happy anniversary to you" after we finished dinner, even I was delightfully surprised!. . A few tips:. -If you're celebrating a bday, anniversary, etc. Reserve online and tell 'em so you can get free dessert and a song!. . -Arrive 10-15 minutes early if you want to sample the lobby meatballs and chips. More free stuff!. . -Prime Rib portions are ginormous; even the California cut is good sized. Come with a big appetite cause leftover prime rib just ain't the same. . -Parking is $3 or $4.50-if you are like me and don't travel w/ cash you can pay for it at the bar.. . -The bill will have tip rates printed at the bottom- tip accordingly as you should have a pleasant experience.. . -If your woman takes you here, then she must really, really, love you.
