ReviewID: 2Pf-u9-rDy-y4dZLzlyM3w
ReviewerID: nOfnmFhlCC60u9ozQHJONw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Buona Terra
Category: Italian
I've eaten here a good number of times over the last couple years, and have always been delighted.. . This visit was no exception except for one big problem, which I'll get to in a minute.. . My companion ordered the carpaccio, which was okay, but so overdressed with toppings (piles of capers, raw mushrooms and and parmagiano) that the meltingly tender raw beef was all but lost.. . I refrained from starters, but enjoyed the Melanzana alla Emilia Romana (eggplant) immensely.  My companion said the Farfalle alla Dominic was okay--mild, not very inspiring, but at least satisfying.  Over all, the food was fine, and the service was great.  We were not unhappy up to this point.. . Thenl the fellow who brought out the after-dinner espresso spilled the hot beverage all over my companion.  And I mean quite literally, all over him.  On his shirt, on his pants--it was a mess, and his clothes were stained rather visibly.. . The fellow who spilled the coffee was extremely apologetic and helped to clean things up.  But our main server showed no interest whatsoever in what had happened--never even stopping to see if we were okay.  Management never appeared to apologize for the gaffe either.. . When the check came, we were sure that at the very least, the espresso wouldn't be on the bill--but yep, they charged us for it.. . Because we felt compassionate towards the young man who'd spilled the coffee on my friend, we didn't voice a complaint.  But where the hell was our server, and why didn't he offer SOMETHING to ameliorate what is pretty much the worst thing that can happen to you in a restaurant--to have food or beverages dumped all over your clothes?. . Unbelievable.. . All of this makes me suspicious that management is vindictive and harsh here and the staff are afraid to let them know when something goes wrong, for fear of being fired.  . . If that's true, it's a shame--management should understand, like we did, that mistakes happen (we still paid the full bill and tipped properly), and learn how to make things right with customers AND have compassion for their staff.. . I'll might go back, because I've had great food here, and it's close to home.  But I might think twice before I do.
