ReviewID: 2r7xZ3HRk9jmUYICQw92PQ
ReviewerID: vVpliIcWnWWEyR7v2wHo3w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Market
Category: American (New)
What is the big hype with this place?  My girlfriends made reservations a month in advance to make sure that we had a table to dine at last weekend.  I guess it might be the "scene" factor.  Personally, this place just didn't do it for me.. . I met the ladies up at the bar and once the whole table had arrived, we were seated.  The booth wegot was pretty nice becuase it was slightly raised, set in a little nook in the back of the dining area and allowed us to people watch quite nicely.   Our server on the other hand completely sucked.  He was mentally somewhere else and could give a shit about serving us.  Or at least that is what he conveyed.  . . We got an appetizer of the sliders, which was either short ribs and gardinara on a brioche bun or BBQ pulled pork with pickles on a brioche bun.  They were good and I do reccomend.  I ordered the turkey burger which was rather dry and didn't come with any special aoli or anything like that.  The server did allow me to swap out the fried for grilled asparagus which was better than the actual burger itself.  The rest of the table ordered the nachos (which are served on a tiered platter with different toppings on different tiers...nice presentation.) and a pizza.  I tasted a little corner of the pizza with no cheese on it and it was good.  Thin crispy crust and good sauce.  Everything was presented nicely.  . . After dinner we took the elavator up to the rooftop deck where we seated ourselves on some wicker loungers.  There was a Dj and the lights kept flickering to beat of the music.  That was weird.  They have a nice space up there and with the nice weather, I really enjoyed.  Soon enough it was time to go to the ladies room and that was just odd.  You have to go back through the servers quarters where they stock all their stuff, down the stairs to the next floor and then into an area with a mens and womens washroom.  There was no attendant, but there was a table with refreshments and towels outside the actual  restrooms for the men and women to share.  Strange. . . All in all, food was American fare and descent, roof top lounge was lovely, and this place is just not my scene anymore.
