ReviewID: 2VUJEAyUOC4LXLU-wrlYUg
ReviewerID: wh4_AwDV2NSsZ-LEmNWffg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
first off - sorry for the horrible yellow tinge on the photos.  i hate using flash and disturbing people but the drawback is sucky yellow pictures. . NTCSR is a busy, no-reservations, Chinese restaurant run by Viet-Chinese people who speak Cantonese.  If you can understand the language, you might chuckle at the vulgar humor the wait staff directs at each other.  Don't be scurrred...they are polite to the patrons and they're great at refilling water, changing plates, and making room on the table.. . The way to enjoy NTCSR is eating with a large group and ordering the 238 Menu.  Here's a few tips for dinner organizers: . . -The group size is best in multiples of 10 (here, we had 20 people). -Have someone arrive an hour early to put the group name down on the wait list.  The wait is about 45 mins to an hour on a Sunday night if you want to eat at 7pm. -Order a set dinner menu and have the waiter put the ticket in while you wait for the tables to be set up next to each other.  This way, as soon as the group sits down, food can start arriving.. . We ordered two sets of the 238 Set (one for each round of 10) and there was plenty of leftovers.  The numbers 2, 3, and 8 are homonyms of auspicious numbers in Cantonese.  Most people ordering a set menu are celebrating a happy occasion so naming the menu in an auspicious way is how the Chinese people like it.. . It's also not a coincidence that the 238 set costs $238, base.  I say base because they might sneak in a $32 charge for 2 extra pounds of lobster.  Is it worth it though?  Yes.  They also put in 15% gratuity and the check is itemized clearly . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... , which makes it easy to divide the check.. . See pics for the exterior, the food, the menus and how big their crab and lobsters are.   . http://www.yelp.com/bi....   There are a ton of pictures up on the listing already so just click "Next" to scroll.. . Everything was delicious.  My favorites were the lobster (so much roe) and crab, the peking pork chop, yang chow fried rice, the whole fish, and the kung pao medley.  The clams were just OK and the sea cucumber was OK (expensive stuff though).  . . Our bill came out to about $35-$38 a head depending on if boba was ordered.  Their bobas are $2.50 and they have a nice variety of flavors.  . http://www.yelp.com/bi....   I got the soursop - haven't found this elsewhere yet.  . . My friend did a great job setting up his own birthday dinner.  Next time, we'll fill every seat in the house and have him eat a crab this big all by himself . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  and tell the waiters some dirty Cantonese jokes while he does it.
