ReviewID: 37Q8uCUf8UXOKW9OHAfINQ
ReviewerID: N00975Ig6_mX73MHGdtVUA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mayan Palace Mexican Cuisine
Category: Mexican
So here's my Saturday date night story. Supposed to get here around 5 to have time before a 7:00 movie.  Date is late (that's right, I'm calling you out on it. Jerk :)) so we don't end up actually getting here until about 615.  All the tables either have people at them or are marked reserved.  At this point Kelly gets very sad that it looks like she won't have the lovely-smelling Mexican food, the scent of which pulled her in by the nose.  HAVE NO FEAR, there's a giant room in back! Who would have known! You have to walk through a makeshift hallway that is clearly actually an alley to get there, but that added to the charm.  So we have time for margaritas and an appetizer.  Chips- perfect.  Margaritas- so good (and I find it hilarious that they try to give me the strawberry one my date ordered and give him my house margarita with salt :)).  Quesadilla- just enough to get us past starving so we can make it to the movie.  Well long story short- movie was sold out. So based on how promising round 1 was, we decided to come back to Mayan Palace to have the dinner we were supposed to have.  This was probably around 7:30-8, and there was still no wait for the back room.  We started off with the tortilla soup (date was still talking about it the next day, it was THAT GOOD).  After 2 more margaritas each and chips (I think all of which they again tried to reverse based on gender stereotypes- but I like my salty goodness!) we barely put a dent in our actual dinners, but my leftovers are calling my name (2 more hours till I'm home and can have them for dinner!).  Only thing I didn't LOVE was the salsa, but I like my salsa chunky so that was the only issue. Service was so friendly, I definitely enjoyed my evening here, both part 1 and 2. . We have been back already too (only 2 weeks after the first time so it has to be pretty good).  After 8:30 it apparently gets pretty crowded, but I think we only waited for a table for about 15 minutes.  It would be a lot better in the summer if you can wait outside- here it is a bit of a pain, and I'd hate to be at one of the tables next to the bar.  Also I think we got charged for soups that never came but I am not sure because I didn't see the bill :) Hopefully we will make it for the margarita specials soon!
