ReviewID: 37sztltq0upsHiEOUOmTzA
ReviewerID: gvvL29LucecJQRXdq01VFw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roy&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Asian Fusion
Highlights (descriptions below):. - Excellent service (thanks to server Chris). - Easy reservation (via internet). - Delicious food. - Souffle. - Cocktails. . A friend and I came in here during dinner dressed up thinking "dressy dress code." Came in a teal dress cocktail top and saw families in casual clothing and a little girl in a white tank top. Didn't bother me much, though I felt slightly over dressed. My bad. . . Service: Excellent. My sister had said the same about the LA location.  Chris, our server, did a fine job giving us an overview of what the highlights are, what the best drinks are, and suggestions on what to order based on our tastes that striked us at the moment. When we asked him about some of the special cocktail drinks, he gave us our two cents on what he thought about it and which one he preferred more.. . Easy reservation: That's right. One click for a time slot over their website. Arrive there on time. Get a table. Easy as 1-2-3. . Food:. Marine Lobster Dim Sum: OMG... you must get it. The best thing to eat! I would have ordered more if I wasn't ordering a plate.. Hibachi Styled Atlantic Salmon: Good stuff. Salmon is cooked to perfection and it is very soft-- just like a salmon should be when you eat it. Blackened Island Ahi: My friend's dish was btw also as great. Tender and the sauce goes well with it.. Souffle: Great... reminds me of how my mom makes lava cakes. Chocolate is always a great dinner topper.. . Cocktails. Original Hawaiian Martini: I love pineapples and to have a pineapple (and have a hint of pineapple taste) in my cocktail made my day. The only downside of this drink for me was that it was pretty strong (I'm not that intolerant either). I had to take small sips every 5 minutes.. Mai Tai: Great fruity stuff. A lot more tolerable than the martini. If it wasn't my friend's drink, I would have drank it all. I love fruit drinks!. . Overall: Great food, excellent service, nice dark ambiance, and to be in Chicago gives it a 5-star rating in my book.
