ReviewID: 38MDnJt9LEm-SNacnqkCiw
ReviewerID: JI_M-PAYeBM0pbZ4spBr_A
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Old Oak Tap
Category: Bars
I have yet to eat inside, but I have been there twice for lunch. I had to go back for 2 reasons: it's a convenient location with ample street parking and there isn't a lot of "good" sit down restaurants in this area so it's refreshing to have this place.. . However, despite this, both times were disappointing. Both times I went there for lunch - once with a friend and once by myself. Prepare to wait a while for service, and not because it's busy - the waitresses just don't seem to care (the bus boys do a better job than the waitresses in my opinion). . . I hate the bread they use to make the sandwiches - it's bulky, not particularly soft, super dry, and there is way too much of it. And then on top of that, they give you fries, which is so stupid. I was not impressed with it at all. The first time I went there I got some sort of breakfast sandwich, which sounded good on the menu, but lousy when it came to my table. The egg was tasteless and I felt like I was eating flavorless bread - something I imagine I would get if I were in prison.. . When I went by myself, I got the worst service ever. I ordered an appetizer with my sandwich (a modified BLT). I don't know why I opted for the sandwich, but I thought it might be different the 2nd time around. I waited nearly 45 minutes for my food, and she brought out my appetizer, which was some sort of salad, with my main dish. The sandwich was horrible even though the bacon was really good. Making sandwiches using that bread ruins everything. I really wish they would change it. I walked away with the roof of my mouth torn up from the bread and leaving most of the bread on my plate and angry because I spent $12 (may be more) for some meat and lettuce.. . I gave the place 2 chances, but the 2nd experience was so horrible, I can now confidently say I will never go back there again.. . The coffee was good though.
