ReviewID: 38Sr6tw7FFs29Bw5dxtKAQ
ReviewerID: tlxpbxBH8tNdM5bUmt4iww
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
There comes a point in Yelping where it is almost ridiculous to write a review for a place that has 1000+ reviews. But I will do so nonetheless. . . We're were on our way to Lakers Fan Jam without having had anything to eat for the day. Due to Man v. Food infamy, we decide to hit up Philippe's. My goodness the 5 traffic made us cranky and hungry. I was almost scared for the lines I had read and heard about. There was one parking spot magically saved for us. Alright, no parking issues = a good start to the experience. . . We walk in and the lines don't seem too long. A little disorganized madness is what I would describe the ordering process. Every now and again you're not really sure which line you're in, but you keep trying to push for that shorter line. We waited less than 10 minutes before we started ordering. Um, I think I've waited longer at Subway?? No wait time issues = another plus. We ordered one pork and one lamb sandwich, potato salad, pickles, and custard with some refreshing iced tea. The lady behind the counter was incredibly sweet and worked swiftly. We were headed to a table in no time :]. . Both the sandwiches were deee-licious. I ate half of a lamb and half of a pork - no i didn't eat both. I really liked the potato salad as well, probably because it had a good amount of relish and I'm a relish fan. The pickle was a pickle, but it's amazing how well pickles go with sandwiches.  I liked their iced tea (but I like most unsweetened iced teas, so that's not saying much). The custard was good - not too sweet, but just a nice refreshing dessert to top of the meal. . . The highlight of the meal was the hot mustard. Hot dang, it was hot! So, I hate mustard for the most part, but I will occasionally eat deli mustard. I've never liked mustard until Philippe's came into my life. I just couldn't get enough of how that spiciness crawls up to your nasal cavity and you're practically breathing it. . . Awesome all around. and cockroach infestation? Meh. Probably, but oh well. Oh yea, cash only! Very old school of them. We spent a good portion of our meal discussing how much bank they must make every day.. . Oh and we forgot to order the sandwiches with cheese, so that may be on the agenda for the next visit!
