ReviewID: 39z2yWUY2uIu5z5wOSaKAQ
ReviewerID: zFXr8Ml6PxJGaxsaSVkZAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
UPDATE 02/19/10:. I had booked my reservation through . http://OpenTable.com.  and received a survey the day after.  They didn't give me much room to respond, but I said roughly the same things stated here.  Well, the day after I sent that in, the manager contacted me and offered me a $50 gift card to come back and experience Mastro's how it was intended to be.  This was a very pleasing gesture on their part and I will update this review again after I've gone back.. . Original Review:. I did a day-after-Valentine's here with my girl and was a little surprised by a few things, but overall a great experience.  To summarize:. . First, the bad:. 1) The main issue is that our lobster mashed potatoes had a large chunk of cartilage, and pieces of shell in it.  This is a junior mistake and not acceptable for a $33 plate of mashed potatoes.  I spent over $360 that night, and I should have been savoring the taste of their excellent steak rather than worrying about biting into shells.. . 2) The layout of the restaurant (at least on the bottom floor) wasn't ideal.  It was a completely open room with hardly any privacy.  The tables barely had enough room for the servers to go between, and I had to watch in horror as our table neighbor ruined his filet with A1 sauce (he requested it), salt, and pepper.. . 3) There was a crying baby for the entire time I was there.  It was very difficult to carry on a conversation with my date and definitely made it harder to enjoy the evening.. . And the good:. 1) Amari, our server, was EXCELLENT.  He was very attentive, friendly, and a role model for many others to follow.. . 2) Amari is so awesome, he gets 2 bullet points here.  Due to the issues with our mashed potatoes, he comp'd us a free butter cake.  I would never have willingly picked this desert on my own (I prefer chocolate), but I am VERY glad as it was one of the most amazing deserts I've ever had.. . 3) Mashed potatoes aside, the quality of food was excellent.  Pending a trip back to Mortons for comparison, Mastro's may have the best filet in Los Angeles.  They are also one of few places to offer a bone-in version.. . 4) I appreciate that Caviar was an option on the menu.  That definitely brings the class of this place up a notch.. . 5) The portions (in regards to the mashed potatoes and desert) were quite large.  Enough to feed 4 people.. . I would recommend this place to my friends, and I would come again sometime.
