ReviewID: 3acYij55E6ocQduTSu93IQ
ReviewerID: sLDF446kPv0jDQTHxPOWsA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Dynamic Dish
Category: Vegetarian
I had a very pleasant dynamic dish experience.  The decor was modest and comfortable, the service was excellent and the food was delish.  . . My husband and I ordered a cup of soup (small $6.50), a salad ($13.95), and two dinner entrees.  We always share so we get to sample lots of things.  I was a bit worried that we had ordered too much food - especially with the $13.95 salad, but we comfortably finished it all with room to split a vegan chocolate cupcake and an espresso.  . . What I'm trying to tell you is that the helpings are not as grand as the price.  And the taste is tasty.. . The cup of soup (sweet potato - ginger) was absolutely tantalizing.  Paired with the homemade bread they brought out, we were off to a fantastic start.  I felt $6.95 was a bit too steep for a cup of soup.  You could also try to justify it by saying the free basket of bread isn't really free?  I make kick ass soup at home all the time with freshly prepared organic ingredients and I would be hard pressed to find enough ingredients to kick the cost up to anything close to $6.95.  Gold flakes maybe?. . Next we had a fennel, apple, carrot salad with cheese (Chevre?) stuffed baby peppers and grapefruit slices.   It was wonderful and I appreciated the flavor combining as well as the effort it took to prepare!  However, seemed a bit small for $13.95.. . Finally, our entrees: millet cakes with arugula pesto atop grilled zucchini (fabulous), and eggplant slices stuffed with a wonderfully marinated tofu.. . I thought both of our entrees were delicious and in in my estimation not overpriced. My dining partner and I both agreed that we were glad we were sharing two entrees - eating the whole serving of one entree may not have been as satisfying as eating a half portion of two different entrees.. . Our service was excellent.  We had early reservations (6:30 p.m. on Friday) which probably helped.  We were seated at the "bar" and were attended to by two different servers.  They were both pleasant, informative and responsive with requests.  Our food arrived very quickly and our green-tea glasses were refilled without asking.  :). . I'm really picky - I come from Asheville, land of locally grown organic food, prepared with love, gourmet-style, and served at a reasonable prices in artful environments.  Pretty much every restaurant in Asheville (veg or not) caters to vegetarians.  I am spoiled.  I may have gone to 5 stars if the ambiance was a bit warmer/more inviting and the pricing more reasonable.  Also, there is no bar here - you can bring your own beer or wine, but I was informed they will charge you $10 to uncork your bottle.  Thumbs down on that.
