ReviewID: 3aGTxsgThem6QwSg9BCcKw
ReviewerID: BOgIX2Z6FX0Zo9zIHUVdcQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
5 stars for steak, and for the sides.. 3 stars for everything else, but you go to a steak house for steak...right???. . My friend has raved about this place, so we were glad to have an opportunity to dine with them during Restaurant Week. The restaurant was well worth the praise. After dining at Primehouse I will no longer be ordering wet-aged steaks.... If you've never had dry-aged steak, then here's your chance. There are very few establishments in Chicago that dry-age their steak due to the prohibitive cost. However, if you enjoy tasty/fatty/beefy steak, then dry-aged is your only option.. . Appetizers and Deserts. I had the Kobe sashimi based on other user's recommendations. This was the worst dish of the night. Very small order, too salty, no subtlety. It felt like I was eating very raw/soft beef jerky. Nothing memorable about this dish. The only positive was that the mayo/horse radish infused with truffle oil was very tasty. It was a great spread for the bread and tostinis.. . Steak!. I ordered the . 55-day rib eye (dry-aged). No sauce/no accompaniments.. Medium-rare temperature.. . The steak was delicious. The flavor was very beefy and very intense. There was a fair amount of fat and marbling, but I wish there was more. Basically, this was one of the best steaks I have ever had, and it was not due to the tenderness nor marbling, but specifically due to the taste. Think of red wine versus aged red wine. Aging brings out smells and tastes that were previously hidden. The same occurs with the steak when dry-aged. Without any additional sauces, salt, or accompaniments the steak itself was delicious and very well flavored.. . The best part of this meal was when I tried my friend's steak (dry-aged 5 days). His steak was bland, dry, boring, and basically incomparable to what I was eating. The additional dry-aging days in the salt cellar really made a huge difference.. . Pros: taste. Cons: temperature was slightly warmer than I would have preferred (more medium than medium rare). Could have had more marbling and been slightly fattier. . The sides were very good. The mushrooms were bursting with flavor (olive oil and herbs), the whipped potatoes were a little dry, the asparagus were fresh, and the creamed spinach was very tasty, although a bit TOO creamy (you could literally taste the butter).. . If you enjoy steak, then you must try dry-aging. Primehouse is one of the few establishments with dry-aging, so go.
