ReviewID: 3B8S4QE7O3AmTBcnaXj7xw
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cypress Street Pint &amp; Plate
Category: American (New)
I am giving Cypress Street a five-star rating for good beer, good food, interesting menu with many appealing items, extremely friendly staff, nice and fun crowd, and excellent location (at least for me).  They have only officially been open for a week or two and are already drawing a good crowd.  When I went, it was steadily busy but not yet crowded - there was always a seat at the bar.. . It has a very inviting interior.  In the main room, patrons can sit around three sides of a large rectangular bar, at six or so small tables with stools, or at one of four high-backed booths; the fourth side of the bar is a wall with a garage-door type opening which will serve drinks to outdoor patio patrons in warmer weather (right now it is just a wall).  There is also a separate, smaller room with tables and table service.  There are two televisions in the main room and you would have a good view of them if you were at one of the spots on the bar close to the TVs.  This is not a TV/sports bar but, if you could score a spot near one of the TVs, it would be a fine place for a few people to watch a game. . . The servers and owners could not have been nicer.  They were quick to offer suggestions for food or beer and seemed very appreciative of the customers.  They were eager to share their vision of the Cypress Street Pint &amp; Plate and to get feedback.  They seemed devoted to really make this place work.  And, all the patrons were friendly, too - everyone was meeting and talking to each other.  I have not been in a bar like that for a long time.. . I ordered Margherita pizza as a light meal/appetizer with my house brew beer.  It had a good, crispy, irregularly shaped crust, with a nice sauce and mozzarella cheese.  I have also tried the spinach and artichoke fondue and the Terrapin ale - both very good.  I saw several orders of nachos go past me and they looked and smelled delicious.  Other patrons swore by the meatball sliders, which are three Krystal-sized sandwiches with a meatball, sauce and arugula on each. Cypress Street is clearly a bar but they do seem to have good food based on what I ate, saw, smelled and heard.. . I am so happy to have Cypress Street in the neighborhood.  It is shaping up to be a perfect neighborhood bar and I hope it can continue in that direction.  I will definitely be going back - soon!. . UPDATE 5/5/08: Cypress Street now has brunch on Sundays and it is quite good.  There are a lot of egg and omelette dishes which were appealing and some starchy griddle stuff, too.  I had the Mile High omelette and it was delish.  I got mine with grits and a biscuit and it was a steal!  My diet may be in jeopardy.
