ReviewID: 3bw_jC4mMLUooruYCCFVKA
ReviewerID: qFv6W7LrsKA4s5yj_UWesQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Disclaimer: I have *never* waited in line for the Kogi BBQ truck. I had heard about the hype and some of my students were going before class and asked me if I wanted to try the much hyped "Korean BBQ Truck". I had heard about the long lines and figured that I would never bother standing in line that long for a taco so I jumped on the idea of delivery. . . That said, I think that LA is seriously behind the the game on trucks/stands that sell food. . (Before you start thinking, is she blind??) . Consider a city like Portland where there are 500-600 trucks out on a given day, clustered in little bunches, selling all different cuisines and hanging around bars at closing time. Burgers, frites, tacos, Thai food, Chech food, sushi, Greek Food, custom salads, etc. They've got it all covered. NOT JUST TACOS! (Portland featured in this week's NYT Travel section, mainly the bounty and diversity of available takeaway street food and the collective nature of these businesses to make up a mobile food court...). . So when a Korean BBQ truck comes up with some cred and hype, everyone acts like it's a unique idea. Well, it's not. That's my point. Other cities are way ahead of us on this one. But hey, in LA - things like this catch on and become pop culture phenomenons. . . Ok - onto the review of the FOOD. . . I couldn't decide which taco to try, so I ordered all of the types on hand. I was amazed by the tofu taco (but immediately wondered how vegetarian it really is... cooked on a separate grill away from the meat?) All tacos were very good and I appreciated the Asian inspired toppings. Not too spicy, not at all tasteless of forgettable. The pork was definitely the best. All of the other meats were kind of similar tasting aside from texture. . . I also tried a kimchi quesadilla, which was totally awesome. I think that if I were to go back, this would be on my list. I've heard great things about the sliders, but for me - this was a one time (ok actually 2 times via delivery) deal.. . I totally agree with the reviewer who likened it to NYE in Times Square. You do it to say that you did it, but you only have to do it once, because there are better ways to spend NYE, you know? . . There are better Korean BBQ joints around, in fact you could get some takeout and some taco shells and make your own for a fraction of the time and money that you spent waiting on this truck. (An hour or more, any way you cut it - show up early and wait in the sun, show up later and get in line.) . . I also think that the "We're awesome" attitude reflected on Twitter, their website and the PR rep is a little much. I think that someone got a taste of their fame and is now a little too big for their britches. I recommend a side of humility. (Minus one star for being too cool for school.)
