ReviewID: 3bz9GeaWcO6d8dUVtdNkCg
ReviewerID: qjkOmSEFFEeWVTtsIl0aAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Impeccable service, lovely food and a relaxed environment are really all I can ask for in a restaurant and sola delivered well on all fronts. . . The four of us enjoyed some flavorful pot stickers and a fantastic squash blossom appetizer with a bright cilantro sauce--very tasty and surprisingly light; a nice way to whet the appetite.. . The entrees were so enjoyed that no one was willing to share--a rarity for our group, indeed.  My 4 wasabi-crusted scallops were enormous and delicious, prepared perfectly and immensely enjoyed--I even enjoyed the micro greens with enoki mushrooms and I am not a fungi kind of girl.  Other entrees at the table included the flat iron steak and the striped bass and lamb specials, all which received rave reviews (although I heard the lamb was especially rich, stuffed with a yummy cambozola cheese as it was, but again, I didn't see anyone offering any samples from their plates).  The heirloom tomato salad was scrumptious and the checkerboard beet salad artfully presented (not such a fan of beets, myself, but they sure looked pretty!).  Dessert was not quite as orgasmic as I'd expected--the baked haleakala's chocolate cake was good, but nothing particularly amazing and the salted caramel ice cream is second to that at Hot Chocolate, but I did enjoy the toasted marshmallow flavors of the meringue.  Next time I think I'd try the banana ice cream hot fudge sundae.... . Cocktails were very well-made and our server was fantastic--very attentive and kind, never obtrusive or rushed, and she made wonderful wine suggestions.. . I would say sola is on the pricey side, so it won't be my typical go-to for regular dinners out, but then again, it's not a "regular" type of place.  It's much more special than that, so I would recommend it for a lovely date, special occasion or splurge with friends.  I can't stop thinking about those scallops, so I'll have to make up some special occasion soon so I can go back again.  :)  4.5 stars and a very happy birthday girl.
