ReviewID: 3CndUH0UL58n4ZEYCcmY_w
ReviewerID: -jo3fYLFRthbbLIIE63jYw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fox Bros Bar-B-Q
Category: Barbeque
This is as good as Atlanta BBQ gets.  When I first moved here from North Carolina, I was convinced I had arrived in a BBQ wasteland until I discovered Fox Brothers.  Then it seemed like everyone else discovered it shortly afterwards.  I judge a BBQ place by the pulled pork.  If they do that well, I will go back.  Everything else is a bonus.  Fox Brothers does the basics well, and scores in the bonus rounds.  . . The pulled pork is always smoky, well-seasoned, and rarely dried out.  I enjoy it without sauce most of the time.  The sauce, however, is slightly sweet and thinner than most local BBQ sauces.  The dominate spice seems to be brown sugar, but I haven't been able to identify everything so far.  They have struck on a good blend that doesn't overpower one way or another.  The meat is smoked onsite.  The cooking method is unrushed and doesn't dry out the meat.  This is the way it should be done.  Other BBQ joints in the ATL need to take notice.. . The wings are worth noting.  They smoke them for hours, before tossing them in their house hot sauce. (I'm not sure if they are fried briefly before this or not) They only come one way, which is spicy enough to satisfy me but not too much to scare off light weights.  The meat will literally melt off the bones.  The brisket is also a solid choice.  They make a "house burger" that consist of brisket topped with bacon, pimento cheese, and hot sauce that sounds heart wrenching, but tastes delicious. . . Most sandwiches come with one side item, I usually get fries.  They changed the fries a while back from basic crinkle cut that were coated with the house spice rub, to a thinner cut spiced with garlic salt.  It improved an already good thing.  Some of the other sides are well worth trying.  The mac-n-cheese is good, and sometimes they serve it deep fried as an appetizer.  The collards and fried okra did the job, but don't stand out.  . . I've never had a bad meal here, but on more than one occasion I have had bad servers.  Finally, while being ignored at the take-out line one evening, I walked out and haven't been back since.  Because they are one of the few bright spots in a BBQ wasteland, I have a feeling my ban will be lifted soon.
