ReviewID: 3crRc78Evj8vrSwYVfh_WA
ReviewerID: MbE3C2bCJJ8FZ1nK7K82bA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
Been coming here for years. Always a pleasure. Always get stuffed. If I'm lucky, I run into Chrys (the proper spelling, folks) and he takes me in the back and shoves some delicious food into my mouth that was just made. Is it the greatest ever? Naw, but the price is right and it IS pretty damned tasty. And occasionally you may have something that IS the best ever. It's certainly almost always the best relatively fast food you've had all week!. . We've always been weak on Greek places in LA, and for me, it's either this or down to Pine in Long Beach to George's Greek Deli (or to their downtown LA location near the Macy's that's closing at 7th and Fig). All the fancy places can go to hell, as they are too expensive and the food has no flavor or size. Chrys' place is reasonably priced and ALWAYS has you leaving smacking your lips.. . I usually get a gyro or saganaki or spanakopita (spinach cheese pie) or kreatopita (meat pie) or something with lamb in a sauce, but I'm gonna finally try the octopus (can you believe it? going there for 15 years and never tried the octopus!). And I even lived down the street from the place when I was a kid. Of course, it didn't serve cooked food then, but heck, it would have been great being a kid, sampling olives and cheeses and then having Chrys or his dad kick me out after hanging around too long. LOL. . Chrys is usually pleasantly grumpy. Forget looking for a smile. The best part is when he frowns at you and starts moving his thick eyebrows. They have a life of their own.....they must have their own agent. He darts all over the place, upstairs and down, back to front, making sure things are going well, receiving deliveries, yelling on the phone at a supplier or customer (seems like most of the Greek places in the county purchase from him). He's a character, and the first time I saw his picture in the LA Weekly, I KNEW the place was gonna be good.. . There's a TON of cheeses and Greek products that you can't find anywhere, so if you are cooking a Greek dish, make sure to visit to get some authentic ingredients.. . Do NOT come here when St. Sophia (neighboring Greek Orthodox church) lets out (either Mass or a special meeting), or you will literally be fighting with a phalanx of pushy peroxided Greek women fighting to be first in line. I found this out the hard way.. . I love this place dearly and will miss it when I leave LA. And if he starts making pastitsio as good as mine, then I may not leave...... . Be adventurous and try some of the strange desserts too. My favorite is a sort of gelatinous rectangular log packed full of nuts, and dusted with powdered sugar. Very dense and chewy and odd, but ultimately outstanding and habit-forming.
