ReviewID: 3dJDfru-bqD8nJARUhHJAQ
ReviewerID: swmrfBnaqU0nyJ3pFBfNgQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
70 yrs of fame for making hot dogs?  Wow.  . But, is it worth waiting nearly 60 mins. for one?  Not necessarily.  The line wound around to the back, towards the small parking lot. So small that they have to hire a guy to move the cars around to make room.  Celeb pics line the interior walls.  Cash only.. Hubby just had to stop here when we visited LA recently, thanks to DDD on the Food Channel.  He and Jr. Yelper #1 tried the chili dog ($3.30) which was very good.  Jr. Yelper #1 normally doesn't care for chili and liked their chili.  Jr. Yelper #2 had the "Lord of the Ring" dog ($4.85), which was a 10 in dog topped with BBQ sauce and 4-5 onion rings.  Looked gross but the verdict was "good!"  I had the most expensive of the 4 dogs we ordered, the pastrami ruben - lean slices of pastrami, mustard, Swiss cheese and sauerkraut for $5.80.  I thought it was OK, but wouldn't order it again.  The buns are soft but not flavorful.  The hot dogs remind me of Casper's dogs.  A crunchy-like outer covering.  It does taste better than your store bought Ballpark franks but not as good as Top Dogs in Berkeley. . . The place isn't particularly a clean dining experience with a few tables inside and lots of outdoor tables.  Sort of like eating at the old Clown Alley in SF before it closed.  They have "lemonade" and other "colored" drinks which they mix themselves and store in these plastic dispensers, similiar to the kind you find in Mexican restaurants which serve horchata.  Then, there's the usual sodas.  The fries and onion rings are  processed, frozen items which they pour into an opening in this machine and it pops out cooked on the other end.  . The place seems to be runned by all Latino/Hispanic women except for the housekeeper (had to tell them there were no toilet paper in the one stall/one room women's bathroom).  If you're adverse to hot dogs, they serve burgers and a tamale.  There's 35 hot dogs, 10 burgers, 2 burritos, 1 tamale to chose from with 3 types of fries.  It can be a real heartburn alley if you eat too much here.
