ReviewID: 3etVHlKaMqs8-x68mIMCjg
ReviewerID: tXqVduTJHLbrrwVEO8JX6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
21+ &amp; by invite only. Make sure you read all the rules (esp the dress code part) off their website before attending. If you know someone, who knows someone, who knows someone, then you definitely should visit the Magic Castle so you can at least say you've experienced it. Downer: I think one of the rules of the castle is no pictures are allowed to be taken inside. Bleh.. . We had dinner reservations at 8pm on a Monday night. Valet was about $7 or so. Little did I know that we could've arrived earlier to check the spot out and maybe catch some extra shows. There was a $20 cover at the door for us. Sorry ladies, I don't think the cleavage spilling tops &amp; short skirts will get you on the free guestlist. After you pay for your cover, say something like open sesame, abacadaba, peek-a-boo, abba-zabba for the hidden entrance door to slide open. Slick.. . There's one perk to having dinner here... You get a guaranteed ticket for the main magic show and you don't have to line up in the wait list line. That means, they will accomodate all ticket holders first then whatever seats are left, they will allow the wait list people in. If all seats are filled, you're a$$ed out.. . The food was decent but I wouldn't say it was "magical." They gave us our own room, no idea why because I saw other parties as big as ours or even bigger but it was fine, we got to be as loud as we wanted to be. Do try the portobello fries if you're looking for an app to share. It was perfectly battered and fried. Great ponzu sauce complimenting it.. . For my main course, I had the Shrimp Scampi. Although the shrimps were a nice size, this dish was a bit overwhelming. Quite creamy and heavy. It will definitely make you thirsty. Great for the first few bites then it quickly gets old.. . After dinner, we swiftly ran off to the main magic show in the Palace of Mystery. It was an entertaining 40 min program. Chairs were those foldable ones you see in the wrestling matches so they were somewhat uncomfortable and it was stuffy when the place was packed but the show was pretty good so it was worth it.. . Awaiting our next show, we were entertained by some magicians with card tricks. I took this window of opportunity to explore the place and just wander about. Lots to look at and many areas of the place to explore. They do provide you with a program that has times of shows, a map of the place, and useful information.. . Although the place closes early, I would suggest going as early as you can and map out what you're going to do. Not only did we all have work early the next morning, we just felt like we didn't have enough time. Unless you don't mind crawling into work the next morning, I may suggest trying a weekend night. It might be more packed though. For a Monday night, there were still a good amount of people in attendance. . . For you Alki Anonymous folks, there's about a billion bars in this place. Plus, everytime you enter a theatre, they have servers going around taking orders. You can't go dry here. BTW, check out that piano downstairs where you say the name of a track and it will play that song. I remember Lady Gaga was playing. Pretty sweet.. . I don't think I got to experience everything one just one visit so hopefully I will return again and try to grasp more of the Magic Castle and what it has to offer. Also, I saw Billy Dee Williams that night. For you new school kids who don't know who I'm referring to, that's Lando Calrissian from Star Wars you fool.
