ReviewID: 3fbl-uqJMIXJUH99gdN6lg
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Community Q BBQ
Category: Barbeque
Two words: Bandwagon.. . ...Or is that one word? Who knows, who gives a shit, just get your ass on it and wrap your lips around their meat. You'll be licking the sauce off their bone. I'm getting chubby just thinking about it... Yeah, it's that good. It's true, you will find a lot of the stuff off the menu from Sam &amp; Dave's, that's because one of the owners was a co-founder. Does it really matter? I rather drive to Dickhater than to Scarietta any day.. . Take a gander at what this heffer troughed.... . Brisket - Sliced, word. Great bark, smoke ring, tender and fucking tastier than dining at the Y with your mom. Brisket done right is a thing of beauty... Like your mom.. . Pulled Pork - Dude, I will pull your pork any day if you keep busting out your fleshy dark meat into my mouth. Go ahead and manhandle my meat... I'm either in luv or I just jizzed in my pants. Fuck it, love conquers all.. . Beef Ribs - Damn Skippy, boneless and fork tender... Mommie, will you feed it to me too? It just gets better and better with every bite.. . Chicken - BBQ chix is only good when it comes right out of the smoker, when it sits around the moisture just vaporizes and you're left with chewy white meat. I suggest using dark meat... Especially, around this part of town. . . Mac n Cheez - Fuck me silly and call me Nancy... This mac is G O O D. Crispy crunchy top and gooey inside. This is the real mac daddy. . . Brunswick Stew - Verra good but the only thing missing is the Lima beans... Besides the squirrel meat, add in the Lima beans and I will be happy as a pig in shit with lipstick on.. . Baked Beans - Looks like poop but tastes like gold. Others mentioned the beans being under or over-cooked but mine was spot on. This ain't your standard baked beanz... It's darker and richer.. . Collards - For what it was, I couldn't stop inhaling this stuff... I didn't leave the table until it's all gone. Pete Tong woulda been proud.. . Banana Pudding - Basically, the only dessert available... A Sandra Lee semi-homemade special that tasted pretty good. Come to think of it, I like to get a lil taste of Sandra Lee myself. Is that so wrooong?. . Two sauces are offered: Vinegar based St. Louis style sauce and a regular sweet sauce. Both are verra tasty but the vinegar sauce works best on the meats.. . Anyhoo, this is definitely in the top 3... Could be #1 in my book if they are consistent. There just isn't enough BBQ joints in town that do it right. Slow and low is where it's at (they have 2 huge smokers in the back)... Not boil and grill like most places. I love Fox Bros but the issue with quality vs quantity always comes into play when a joint gets too popular and commercialized. I hope they stick with their current biznaz plan because it's working.. . No wonder I'm so damn fat... Hogwash.. . Burp.
