ReviewID: 3H-vHbZnzkDJgyGHIBh7fw
ReviewerID: vLK3fmpWaRaQgBIYKFnbXQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
Fans of Langer's and owner's of Langer's, do NOT take what I am about to say as a negative in ANY WAY!. . KATZ's in NYC is still the BEST G-damn Effin' Pastrami in America!!!!!  . . There, I said it.  I needed to say it, to publicly pledge my undying allegiance, and I did.  . . Now to Langer's:. . THANK GOD I FOUND YOU!  I have lived in LA now for over a year and have been pining away ever since for my long-lost once-a-monthly dalliance with Katz's.  I've been taken to Jerry's (terrible, dry, over-cooked, just plain shit-tay) and Kantors (...feh...) and was beginning to despair.  But then I kept hearing about Langer's and how GOOD the Pastrami is there (yes, I capitalize Pastrami, it should be thought of as a proper noun, so deal with it).  . . So last week I went. Finding that Langer's was kitty-corner to drug addled MacArthur Park made me yearn for the bad old days of the pre-hipsterized LES (that's Lower East Side for you naifs). There was even a line out the door (it was 1pm after all) which can mean a couple of things, but I chose to stay on the optimistic path. And inside felt like a total old-school this-is-the-way-we-been-doin'-it-ain't-never-gonna -change atmosphere reminiscient of K's. Seated, ordered the Pastrami with coleslaw--a bit of a departure from my usual Pastrami on Rye, side of pickles, but I was preparing myself for a disappointing dried out sandwich and thought that coleslaw would wet it down properly...and when it came...?. . All I can say is:  Now I know where to go when I am craving really moist, juicy, fatty, flavorful Pastrami!  Soooo yummy!  I didn't need the cole slaw, it was good ALL on its own!. . And even the price was similar to Katz's!  Sandwich= $13.90. . Yeah, it ain't cheap, but if you want quality Pastrami (and this is comin' from a Pastrami fanatic) you are gonna have to pony up the do-re-mi!
