ReviewID: 3hk5TnmThm1X7PzMXRf0nw
ReviewerID: ihlatkSOAYtUCkB_WtSEdA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I had to sign up for  Yelp just to write this review - that's how BAD this place was.  The amount of positive reviews astounds me.  How can people like this place?  . . The decor has obviously been the same since the place opened with pastel murals and strange, unattractive lighting.  You will sit at a long table with others just like you were at 6th grade camp again.  . . Waitstaff was pleasant, but seemed like they had been doing it for so many years (and years and years and years) that they just didn't care much about offering a special experience.  Our server took our order by asking some questions like, "is anyone here ordering the Salmon?" and if no one responded - you got prime rib.  Two people from our six person party didn't even know they ordered, and one of them wanted something completely different than prime rib.. . The  food.  OH the food.  Worse than mediocre.  I've had better prime rib at Coco's - I'm not joking.  It all tasted like a bad Vegas casino buffet.  The prime rib was not hot, tough, and fatty.  Mashed potatoes were similar to KFC's, but the gravy wasn't as good as KFC's.  . . There were a couple final touches I must add.  I hope you enjoy Christmas Carolers (at least this time of the year), because they were there in full force, dressed just like they've been doing it for 85 years.  Their voices were pleasant, but I would have much rather listened to nice background music (and I LOVE Christmas!).  I also noticed the circle of college flags above our eating area, which was totally strange.  Someone told me that football players eat there every year, or something like that??? But I didn't get it.. . PLEASE take my advice and never EVER ever eat at Lawry's.  The only person that I know who would like this place is my tasteless step-father-in-law that prefers bland food and appalling decor.  This restaurant is not high-class at all!  It's overpriced, overrated (by a LONG shot) and in dire need of a makeover.. . Good: my drink was strong and tasty - enough to get me through dinner service. . Bad: everything else.  FOOD, decor, ambiance, waitstaff, seating, lighting, host staff.
