ReviewID: 3jGRtEeNajnEyOsnnFsBFA
ReviewerID: YWFbTcVnun8i03XnEU7kVg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Grilled Cheese Truck
Category: Sandwiches
Someone pinch me because I must be dreaming! . . I say this because I thought that only in my most marvelous dreams would I ever come across a grilled cheese sandwich made with sharp cheddar, macaroni and cheese, BBQ pork and caramelized onions, all stuffed between two slices of French bread then grilled with Parmesan cheese. I have to be dreaming because that sounds too good to be true. . . Well, guess what, it was not a dream. The Grilled Cheese Truck actually makes the exact sandwich I described above. And trust me when I say, it's as marvelous as it sounds. . . The GCT was the third truck I tried while I was at the food truck event in Glendale. I had been wanting to try this truck ever since I read the great reviews my friends Ciara G, Lucy Y and Michelle T wrote about it. Their menu is actually quite large so it was hard to choose just one sandwich. My girl had met up with me to eat at this truck so we decided to get a bunch of different grilled cheeses and sides to try. This is what we ordered. . . Cheesy Mac And Rib Melt- sharp cheddar, macaroni and cheese, BBQ pork and caramelized onions on French bread with a Parmesan crust . . Caprese Melt- mozzarella, heirloom tomatoes, basil, spinach and a balsamic reduction on rosemary bread with a Parmesan crust . . Brie Cheese And Bacon Melt- double brie cheese and bacon on French bread with a Parmesan crust . . Dessert Melt- roasted bananas, Nutella, marshmallow spread and peanut butter (I added this) on some kind of sweet bread . . Side of tater tots . Side of tomato soup . . Every single one of our grilled cheese sandwiches were phenomenal. My favorite was the Mac Rib melt. It was by far one the best grilled cheese's I have ever had. It was stuffed with lots of cheesy Mac and smoked, tender BBQ pork. My girl's favorite was the brie and bacon melt. She also loved the tomato soup, which we used to dip our sandwiches in. The dessert melt, which some people say is too sweet, was amazing. You would never catch me complaining about how sweet it was. In fact, next time, I think I will ask for extra Nutella. . . The prices at the GCT are a little high but since everything was so good, and since I don't get the chance to eat at this truck often, I did not mind paying the somewhat high prices. The service here was great, too. Even though the line for the GCT was as long as an attraction at Disneyland, it only took a few minutes for our sandwiches and sides to be prepared. . . If your ever driving along and happen to come across the GCT, I highly recommend you immediately stop your car, jump in the long line that will surely be present and pick up a couple of different grilled cheese sandwiches. If you're a fan of grilled cheese's then I know you will love the GCT.
