ReviewID: 3K7AUATZTltl6W0tzUDflA
ReviewerID: y87luGXPIVhXPwVJUhp_6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wakamono
Category: Sushi Bars
My boyfriend and I visted Wakamono as per his request for his birthday dinner.  He's from California and he likes this place, so that must mean something (though I became suspicious when he raved for a while about the cool wallpaper on the drive down there).. . The wallpaper IS cool.  So is everything else about this place.  It's on the expensive side, kind of romantically-lit, so it's good for a date or some other intimate occasion.  It was the perfect setting for us to make googly eyes at each other.. . The waitstaff seated us immediately and when I mentioned that I kind of wanted to be seated by the wall, they very willing to accommodate us.  However the server did mention that he had assumed we would prefer sitting away from other people--sitting by the wall meant sitting next to one of the couples over there.  So we stayed put, duly impressed by their forethought.. . Only not-so-great thing was the doorway next to us that opened into their separate bar area.  Cold air kept wafting in through it, which kept my feet cold for most of our dining experience.  It was kind of funny to hear the pounding Mexican music next door, since I could hear the traditional Japanese music in the dining area proper at the same time.. . But those were minor issues.  The food?  D. loved his sushi. I enjoyed mine too, having picked out the delicious and vegetarian and completely fascinating Sweet Potato Roll, which contained tempura yam, cream cheese and green onion.  Dessert was the Heaven and Earth: a scoop of cold vanilla ice cream melting on a slice of chocolate cake so hot it was causing the ice cream to send up steam.  It tasted great and the simultaneously hot-and-cold was a neat sensation.. . Above all, we were both glad to have had the Jalapeno Miso Soup: tangy, spicy, and very appreciated, especially in the subzero temperatures of the evening.  I could have had five bowls of it.  Ahhh.
