ReviewID: 3LKxuVxN9-w1L5ga0ih8Hg
ReviewerID: qczliWfHMN_gR_nTJHj--Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Jerry&#39;s Sandwiches
Category: Sandwiches
I was excited by all the buzz generated by this place, so for lunch today I told myself,  "Let's get into this terrific sandwich shop!"  Beforehand, I did my homework and glanced at their prodigious menu.  "A... pork burger?... With ground pork, Italian sausage AND bacon?...  Is Homer Simpson a majority shareholder in this place or something?"  To say absolutely nothing of the over 100 sandwich variations and the stultifying array of breads, fillings and condiments for the choosing, and still nothing of the exciting daily specials (today it was Louisiana fried shrimp).. . I walk into this place -- an outpost of the original location near the United Center -- and it ain't no Primanti's of Pittsburgh* or Subway, I tell ya.  It's schmancy alright, and it could throw you.  However, the owners were right there and super-eager to please.  I suggested that they feature a roast pork option sometime (this devil enjoys roast pork), and my suggestion was met with such enthusiasm that the head chef even chimed in affirmatively.  They explained that they're going to focus on the standard menu until folks in the area become familiar with the Jerry's concept.  I ended up ordering blackened chicken on a pretzel roll with avocado, hummus and chipotle-mango chutney, my two sides were fries (pedestrian and seemingly not fresh-cut but acceptable) and fruit salad.  Despite the scantness of the promised chutney (likely buried below an ample slathering of decent, albeit gringo, hummus) the sarney itself was quite satisfying.  I could easily detect the piquant smokiness of the well-represented blackened chicken breast pieces.  The avocado lent a sublime creaminess.  Overall the size of the sarney was acceptable, and I just get jazzed by the concept of being able to eat a meal surrounded by a soft pretzel.. . I can't argue with the prompt service I received for my gleefully taken  to-go order, although this place looks much more geared to a proper sit-down meal.  Because I received my sarney within an acceptable time frame, it looks as though they have ironed out more than a few kinks in the operation.  The bar in the back of the place is a microbrew-lover's paradise, with selections such as Dogfish Head, Red Seal Ale and Allagash on draught.  What's more, they have Sprecher's Root Beer also on draught.  Root beer float?  Sure.  Rasputin Stout float?  Absolutely!. . I reckon that because there are so durned many sandwich permutations to choose at Jerry's, this will be but one of many future . visits.  The idea of the pork burger with sausage *and* bacon is intriguing, and I would like to subscribe to their newsletter.. .  [* - For full disclosure, I have never been to Primanti's in Pittsburgh.  I have only heard stories, like the fact that they stuff french fries into the sandwich itself and are open 24 hours catering to truck drivers and techies alike.]. . [UPDATE: Went back with a friend from NYC, and we shared the 750 ml bottle of Unibroue Quelque Chose cherry ale.  So smooth with a sweet, pleasing cherry flavor, yet packs a potent punch at 8.0% alc. by vol.  Dessert was a mind-blowing Toll House cookie bar -- massive, warm, and even went well with the choice of cranberry frozen custard.  Yes, dessert is worth ordering -- the choices are simple but done very well.  Oh, and my friend really enjoyed this place.]
