ReviewID: 3M4d2wzDJ7QwjuxUcDzfyg
ReviewerID: TkGZE41Uq81PwMvWrDMzzg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
Ugo has everything you'll want. They have three different venues with different menus right next to each other. They have different menus because they have separate kitchens. Make sure you go to the right place for what you want. Some items on the menu are available at more than one place. . . First off, The Ugo Bar is located on the corner of the street. They have a great bar with delicious drinks. The item to get on the menu is the Fillet Mignon. It's only available at the Ugo Bar. The Fillet Mignon is only $17 for a good size piece of meat topped with sauteed mushrooms in a red wine sauce. YUMMY!!! It also comes with really delicious grilled veggies. The wine list there is pretty extensive with lots of good choices. If you can, always save room for dessert. The gelato bar there is really good. They have a lot of flavors. You can get samples to taste before you order what you want. They also have a really good bakery. I've had their Napoleon and I was hooked at first bite. Besides all of this, there is a dessert menu as well. They have one that consists of vanilla and hazelnut gelato topped with whipped cream. So good!!! That's available at all three locations. . . Next we move to the cafe. It's in between to two others. The cafe has all the pasta and some of the secondi dishes as the bar. They also have a great pizza menu. They take orders for carry out or deliver. I've never actually had their pizza because everything else looks so good. I heard it was amazing though. . . The last, and my favorite is the Ugo Wine Bar. They have over 30 selections for you to try. They're all from different places around the world. The price of an ounce of wine is different depending on the price of the bottle. There are description card for each and every wine. They tell you where the wine is from, the contents of the bottle, and a pretty detailed description of what it tastes like. You go up to the bar and ask for a wine card. It's $10 minimum. Usually, $20 dollars will go a long way. The card is for you to keep if you wish. You can refill it whenever you run out. They change their selections every couple of months. I've found a few favorites there. Keep in mind, I would stay away from the insanely expensive wines. The most expensive one there is $30 for an ounce. The bottle was about $800. The most expensive one I've tried there is about $15 an ounce. It was not worth it. If I have to pay that much for wine, I expect an orgy in my mouth. There's a Happy Hour everyday from 5-7pm. They provide free appetizers, but you have to go early because they do run out. There's also $5 beers, wines, and sangrias. . . Sometimes, my friends and I start out at one for dinner and migrate to the wine bar for drinks and desserts.
