ReviewID: 3N7on46Yodu_nmdW6brWFw
ReviewerID: 6iwOsEf2nUx7zL6s9TYdMA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Lawry's has been my favorite restaurant since I was 8 years young! I would go at least once a year for special occasions. However, ever since I turned 18 I haven't had the chance to go since I moved to San Diego for college.. . I decided to do my birthday dinner this year at Lawry's, hoping things hadn't changed since a few years ago. I've been so addicted to Yelp lately so I decided to check out recent reviews of the restaurant. . . Everyone was right. The creamed corn was finger lickin goood! Ever since I was young, Ive always ordered the creamer spinach &amp; never the corn. They hook you up too, filling half the plate with corn :] I just found out recently that you can actually order half/half of sides which is good for indecisive people like me ;]. . Ok, well I skipped right to the end. I tried to make reservations at 7PM but they said that there's no spots until 9PM so to just walk in. I saw on the reviews that even if you make a reservation, you wait an hour so we went around 6PM. We gave our name to the hostess &amp; she was a complete b*tch! My voice is on the louder side and she kept saying "What? Huh?" instead of "Excuse me?" which pissed me off. We were then informed that the wait was an hour and a half so my friend got a little disappointed because it was his first time there. . . I skipped on the meatballs and chips because I didn't want to get full since the wait was supposed to be that long. (Once I start eating, I can't stop hehe). My mom ate some and said it was pretty bomb. To me, however, it looked a bit old &amp; Costco-like, but hey, I don't judge by looks...well..sometimes ;]. . I decided to get a glass of Merlot at the bar which was pretty dead but hey, I needed a drink to make the time pass. The bartender recommended Lawry's Merlot. I never drink house wines but it was pretty good &amp; they hooked me up with another glass.. . To my surprise, when I was half way done with my wine, they called my name! it had only been 15 minutes &amp; I had a walk-in! I was shocked because Ive read about people who have waited 2-3 hours. So I go to the hostess, the same "lady" as before, &amp; she kept asking me, "Sooo, your whole party's not here?" I said YES because she has a hearing problem or something but she ignored me &amp; told another hostess "We can't seat them because their party is missing people." Dude, we had 4 people in our "party"! Anyway, I overlooked that because I spoke with another hostess &amp; she apologized &amp; seated us right away.. . Another disappointment was that our table was in this tiny room in the back that I didn't even know existed! All the other 10+ times Ive eaten there, we sat in the main room which actually looks like a classy restaurant. That small room looked like an old Olive Garden :(. . I was bummed out until the food came. The salad was delicious! The croutons were fresh &amp; I absolutely loved the dressing. My friend said it was Thousand Island but I didn't think it was that at all. Most people say they don't like it but Im so sick of typical Italian &amp; Ranch that it tasted so refreshing. I didn't mind it being too much dressing either. . . The sourdough bread was same as any other place. If you're a bread lover like me, don't eat too much of it because it got me kind of full :[. . The food came in 15-20 minutes. We all ordered the Lawry's cut because we couldn't go wrong with that. We also got the side of creamed corn of course, asparagus, and the sauteed mushrooms because we love mushrooms with steak! The asparagus was undercooked &amp; the Holandaise sauce tasted like mayo so I barely touched it &amp; ended up not taking it home. You already know what's up with the creamed corn :] The sauteed mushrooms were fine, same as most restaurants. . . The prime rib was sooo awesome! I got mine a little bloody because that's how I like mine (don't hate! haha). It was pretty big. I didn't know that it came with a huge bone so I guess it wasn't as huge as I thought. Nonetheless, we all enjoyed it. . . So to conclude my looooong review, the service wasn't that good, although my friends &amp; I had a good laugh about their "uniforms." The prime rib is delicious, and the only side worth getting is the creamed corn. Scratch that, the corn is a MUST! Lawry's is pricey but worth every penny if you get the right stuff. So hope you guys enjoy because Id go back again soon :)
