ReviewID: 3NEW-n8FQ2tQrHsYTsxdGg
ReviewerID: mispGXTOU6Q7KUAdc9GdgQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Devon Seafood Grill
Category: Seafood
One of the best seafood restaurants in the city of Chicago.  Hands-down.. . However...I am not a seafood junkie.  When I eat seafood, it is usually the "safe" options like cod or salmon or even grilled tuna.  I never truly venture out of this comfort zone...until now.. . A couple weeks back, I took my boyfriend out to Devon for a birthday dinner.  I called the restaurant a week prior to see if they did anything special for birthdays.  Coincidentally, they had a few semi-private spaces available that I could reserve for the occasion.  I made the reservation late that afternoon online and eagerly awaited the experience.. . The overall space is great for a date - I highly recommend calling a couple days early to reserve one of the semi-private rooms.  These rooms can be for 2 or 4 ppl up to 15.  There is even a lounge for larger groups.  The decor is very modern and stylish, with great lighting for dates (dark - but not too dark).  . . The waitstaff is very informative with the dishes on the menu (the Specials change daily, with a variety of seasonal dishes).  From a gal who doesn't really know what she is ordering, I told the waiter what I did like when it came to seafood...and he was able to give me a few options to choose from (I chose the halibut).. . One of the dishes that I highly recommend are the crab cakes.  They are the restaurant's specialty.  Get your tastebuds ready because they are not your ordinary crab cake filled with bread.  These cakes are heartily filled with crab meat and they ooze flavor.  We ordered 2 orders of this appetizer because they were so good!. . And if you are in need of a drink, the bar upstairs is a very good place to have one.  They hold a great daily happy hour (4-7 p, and one later 9-10 p weekdays) with a great HH menu (remember: crab cakes!).  There is a uber-swanky feel to this bar: blue lighting with silver fixtures definitely exubes a uptown city ambiance.  I would recommend sitting inside versus outside (during summer months) - the patio is a little small and can be a little too busy being so close to Michigan Ave.. . To top it off, you can sign-up at the end of your meal to be put on the restaurant's email blast list for future happenings and coupons for dinner.  . . I am looking forward to having dinner at Devon again soon.
