ReviewID: 3NFCFpKa_AzJRPdd9eWt1w
ReviewerID: 8AnFGp4fzJV8Bhtx1KQ3bA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
my college roommate always raved about this place during our 4 years. "omg it's so good! you bite into and the juices just burst in your mouth and blah blah blah!!!!!" so naturally, i wanted to try it out. after 6 years of knowing each other, we finally went yesterday. . . there are two locations right next to each other. the one we went to is on a small street next to wells fargo. we were seated right way. I was excited!. . upon sitting at our table, i noticed that there was a small sauce dish with very thin strips of something. out of curiosity i smelled it and tasted one. GINGER. ok....cool....i like ginger. and i assumed that we put our soy sauce in the dish and eat the ginger along with dumplings. i was right...but instead of soy sauce, they recommend dipping your dumpling in this dark colored vinegar. looks like balsamic vinegar, but tastes like your average white vinegar. but soy sauce was readily available. i noticed that as soon as a table was cleared, the ginger was set up at the table. who knows how long before someone gets seated at that table. that's nasty to me. people could walk by the table and sneeze and their germs can get on the ginger and you consume it without knowing. unsanitary. or a bad ass lil kid could run around, go to one of the empty tables and start playing with the ginger sauce dishes. putting his fingers that he picked his nose with and sticking it all over the ginger. yuck. i stayed away from my ginger dish....put the soy sauce on my lil plate instead of the dish. neurotic?? maybe. sanitary?? definitely! . . we ordered two fried rices, shanghai noodles, and few dumpling dishes. the fried rice and noodle portions were SMALL! i couldve easily eaten one order by myself. and it tasted bland! so i decided to put soy sauce on the fried rice. then i realized i put vinegar instead of the soy sauce. they're the same color. GREAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAT....so now i was eating tangy, still bland fried rice. . . i definitely wouldn't walk over broken glass to eat here. . . BLAND food and BLAH experience.
