ReviewID: 3OqgxKbeBbRpNE_r8WFvkw
ReviewerID: _2Sao1vLSkNLB4YM8bghpQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Rare Bar &amp; Grill
Category: Burgers
It's no secret among friends that I love French fries. That's why, when I came here for brunch and saw the French Fry Tasting Basket, I just had to get it! The Fries basket consists of shoestring fries, sweet-potato fries, waffle fries, and dipping sauces chipotle aioli, honey maple, and chili ketchup . The waffle fries were really good and didn't really need any sauces, but the shoestring fries worked well with the chili ketchup and chipotle. The sweet potato fries were also fine on their own, but they were really good with the honey maple sauce. There were 3 of us and we couldn't finish the basket (we still had entrees!) For brunch, I had a Lobster Benedict Duo. The eggs were slightly runny, which is how like my Eggs-Benedict, and there was a good amount of lobster. However, the egg definitely overpowered the taste of the lobster. My friend split a "Rare" Classic Burger, and they claimed it was delicious. It looked like a very filling burger.. . I've comeback back for dinner and brunch since then, and got the Fry basket again, of course. For dinner, I ordered the lollipop wings off the appetizer menu for my entrée. They were essentially buffalo wings, but they were tastier than your average buffalo wings. My friend had the Vegetarian Stuffed Portobello burger, which we both liked.. . For my second time at brunch here, I ordered the lobster roll. It was ok. My friend ordered the brunch burger, which she was delicious. It was too big for her to finish though. However, This time the Fry basket was disappointing. The fries were not fresh, they were obviously fried and refried. This made the fries very dry. I kept raving about the basket to a friend too, so I was very sad that this happened. . . The wait staff was friendly each time, but the last time I was here, our server gave us the check before we were done, which made us really confused. But she realized she made a mistake and came back and apologized.
