ReviewID: 3RI1C53131riXodnG5XjUw
ReviewerID: mJjxrTHfAxQMzEJdxqX5Rw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Johnnie&#39;s Pastrami Restaurant
Category: American (Traditional)
So babes and I were on our way to tito's tacos, then we saw there line out the door, okay forget about that ! Afterwards he decided hey lets goto Johnnie's since it's been quite a while. I was totally down for it because I love pastrami sandwiches. This place is a small restaurant, more-so diner like but definitely busy. The waitresses are extremely friend and very attentive with customers. Babes got there pastrami on rye with a side of fries, as I got there hot pastrami sandwiches. The food didn't take very long and it came out piping hot, we actually got the food togo and once we opened up our food it was still hott =), as our crinkled fries were still crispy.. . Fries - the fries were decent, the texture was there but the flavors were alright, once dipped with there home-made sauce, it's then good afterwards.. . Hot Pastrami - I loved my hot pastrami sandwich, the french roll at first didn't look so appetizing to me but once I bit into the sandwich, it was delicious. The roll is also dipped in there sauce but the great thing is, the bread was still to a soft crisp. Pastrami was pretty freaking amazing, the meat was extremely well flavored and could've easily held it's on naked. A little mustard spread and you've got a done deal.. . Pastrami on rye - Babes got this, bread was toasted perfect and still crisps once we got home. Pastrami once again amazing, you had an option of adding cheese to either of the sandwiches, either american or swiss, he opted for american. I'd probably be a swiss fan but the american cheese was still good.. . Overall experience was great, I'd definitely come back here once again. They also had a small baggy of peppers and pickles. The pickles were delicious and tasted home-made fresh. I believe for two sandwiches and a side of fries, our total came out to like $29 ? To be honest with you, everyone's complaining about the price but I mean the food here is great so what's to complain about ? The portions are huge and I could hardly finish just half of my sandwich. Definitely a fan !
