ReviewID: 3RMK1aRby7Arl6sa2VUkGA
ReviewerID: wd00MLyKGaCzAjyi6unU9g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wilde Bar &amp; Restaurant
Category: Pubs
This is a very nice bar/restaurant. We went last night and the place was jumping! I almost wondered if we had to wait for a table. We were seated next to the cozy library with the fire and across from the main bar. I wasn't happy with our table because it was busy with foot traffic from the waitstaff and people using the restrooms. . . We started with the curry chips. I'm not a huge fan of curry but my hubby is. When the curry chips came out, they were just fries with curry sauce dumped over them. I had a few fries that didn't have much curry on them. He loved the appetizer though! . . I didn't know what to get to eat for my main meal. I was starving and for some reason, a burger sounded good to me. I just got a plain burger no cheese. I asked for medium well and it came out like a burnt hockey puck. I still ate it anyways, it was mediocre. My husband had the mac &amp; cheese. OMG, it was SO good! In the cheesy loveliness was bacon, tomato chunks, garlic, mushrooms, more cheese and breadcrumbs. It was very good and he had lots of leftovers. . . The reason why I'm only giving Wilde 3 stars because the service wasn't very good. I know the place was bustling but they need to hire more help! Our waitress never checked in and my guy wanted a beer. To no avail, she came with our check and he didn't get his beer. I would like to go back and try the fish and chips. . . Wilde has very posh restrooms! They have awesome tile work on the walls. Kind of like that green glass tile but the tile is an amber color. Very pretty! The sinks are pretty cool too. The sinks are a square basin with a unique faucet that has a "waterfall" effect. There was a pretty tropical floral arrangement on the vanity. The flowers were real and it included some orchids and some other tropical flower. The restaurant had their Christmas decorations up and they went all OUT! Garland, lights and Santa's were to be had all over that place. I want to sit next to the fire next time. Very cozy and intimate.
