ReviewID: 3sBy_lLyBJQ9MAXb5sJSMg
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pura Vida
Category: Tapas Bars
With 42 reviews already under it's belt, it seems like I'm late to the party here.  But to defend my Foodie (ugh, I hate that word) cred, I've eaten here more than a few times.  In fact, I ate here opening week.  It's just been a while since my last visit.  That has less to do with the food and more to do with my ability to share.  The main premise with tapas is sharing and, growing up in a large family, we used to guard our meals like a bunch of African hyenas.  I remember hoarding Little Debbies in the back of the pantry so my brothers wouldn't have a chance to eat them.  "Hey!  Where'd the Swiss Rolls go?"  I'd play dumb until my brothers Abu Girabed me into telling them where they went. (I'm pretty sure that purple nurples are against the Geneva Convention.)  And it's not like THEY weren't hoarding food either because I'd find the Totino's Pizza Rolls hiding under piles of frozen vegetables and I KNEW my mom wasn't doing that.. . Where was I?  Oh, Pura Vida.  So now that I'm engaged, I decided I need to be a little more generous with the wifey-to-be and so we hit up Pura Vida.  We had four plates in total, the malanga chips with cremini mushroom dip, the shrimp cocktail, the peccadillo empanada and the chorizo-wrapped mahi mahi.  And the spider.  I'll get to that.. . The food was, as always, fantastic.  Gorgeous plating and layer upon layer of spice.  We sopped up every sauce on the plate, decorative or not.  We were tempted to order more, but our movie was going to start with or without us so we asked for the check.  But what about the spider?. . There's an old joke that goes, "Waiter, what's this fly doing in my soup?". . "It looks like the backstroke.". . In this case, it wasn't the soup, it was a water glass. And it wasn't a fly, it was a spider.  And it looked like more of a freestyle swim.  It was a disconcerting blemish on an otherwise great meal, but the hostess handled it with aplomb.  And hey, unless you live in a plastic bubble (John Travolta's best movie if I do say so myself), these things happen.  Luckily the fiance saw the spider before she drank, otherwise it'd wiggle and jiggle and tickle inside her.  Then she'd have to swallow a bird to get the spider and, well, we all know that song doesn't end well.  Tragedy averted.. . The food was so good, five stars--even with the spider, man.
