ReviewID: 3uB-RU3Lo4BBoArq1fw8Aw
ReviewerID: zQJJOtONGqf11ZRwGbipnQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Ok, I for one am not an insider. So when I tell you that this place is great, I am considering it on its merits, not scaling it with every gourmet department-style, paycheck-hoovering grocery store in Napa Valley and Beverly Hills.  I like it for what it brings to my home, downtown Los Angeles.  In fact, I like it so much I recommend you go there.  . . What it brings is a carefully selected assortment of very high quality provisions for the hungry downtown Angeleno, served up in a classy, high-ceilinged cafe whose huge windows make it seem a bit like an open-air market.  There's a restaurant as well as a more casual cafe seating area toward the front.  They have a prepared foods counter with cold dishes, salads, and sandwiches; a bakery that does breads, pastries, tarts; and a full bar, where I got my orange juice this morning.   Pulp-free and freshly squeezed, yee-ah.  They sell wines, honey, cheeses and crackers, jams, chutneys, double Devonshire cream.  . . Their latte is the best I've had in LA.  The espresso was rich and fresh, without a hint of that bitter note that places like The Coffee Bean and even Intelligentsia seem to favor.  If you like your espresso more smooth, you'll like it here.  I had my coffee with an apple muffin and a chocolate chip cookie, both delicious.  You can tell they use the good butter in their cookies.  Everything I had there today was top notch.  . . The service was good, too.  There are staff members everywhere - yes, almost stepping on each other at times. But this is only their second day open, and so I would expect a bit of inefficiency at they find their rhythm; the warm, engaging attitudes and eagerness to please more than make up for the few minutes I had to spend in line.  I hope the haters don't beat this rare demeanor out of them.  . . As a working law student, I have so little leisure time that dining out is often the highlight of my day, my one daily intersection with the rest of the world.  I cherish it.  When I am in a hurry and want my coffee fast, I go to the Bean or the Bucks.  When I'm not, I suspect I'll be here a good portion of the time.  . . Oh, AND they have free wi-fi.
