ReviewID: 3V3GHLAJGHsvYeS82eJnPw
ReviewerID: Nt_PRzn60aeXKCn_kcqdfQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
am i an oddball?  cause i thought bottega louie was just ok. . . let me explain:. . i came by last night to have dinner with an ex-colleagues and was excited to try the "new kid on the block" bottega louie.  first off, the restaurant itself is beautiful, in a minimalist way (huge windows, open floor plan, etc) and i loved the open kitchen.  . . we were seated immediately and got to chatting......sorry waitress for being such pills when it came to ordering as we just chatted and chatted and never really looked at the menu until the 4th time the waitress came by to take out order. . food:. . mac and cheese: this dish was good, but nothing wow about it.  i wish the mac was a bit more al dente.. . kugel (i think): per the waitress this is a polish/jewish dish and consisted of egg noodles, pineapples, cinnamon and a dash of sugar. this was an interesting dish....and by interesting, i mean that i would not order it again.. . penne pomodoro: the pasta dish was so simple, yet quite good.  it consisted of penne, tomato sauce, garlic &amp; extra virgin olive oil.....that's it. the penne was a perfect al dente and the sauce was very good.. . french lentils: this was suggested by our waitress as something healthy but flavorful. yeah, it definitely tasted healthy.....as for flavor. um, it tasted like legumes. haha.. . portobello fries: i enjoyed the portobello fries but my dining companions did not. i agree that they were fried a bit too long and thus were not as juicy as they could have been. but overall, it was a nice spin off of french fries. . . caprese salad: this was extremely good. probably my favorite caprese salad that i have had in LA thus far.  the buffalo mozzarella was fantastic...creamy and silky and flavorful. the tomato was top notch as well.. . peanut butter terrine: this was very good.  imagine a high end and extremely unctuous reese's pieces cup and this is what the peanut butter terrine is.  yum.. . flat apple tart: this was meh.  the apple tart should have come out warm but was room temperature at best. they probably snagged it out of the market area display case, plopped a scoop of vanilla gelato on top and sent it out.  imo, an apple tart (or any tart in general) should be baked fresh when offered at a restaurant.. . service was good and our waitress was very affable. the big mistake, imo, was that we mentioned that the kugel dish was not good at all.  typically a high(er) caliber restaurant would take the dish away and replace it, she kinda shrugged and thanked us for telling her as she would not try it in the future.  seriously, wtf?  lols.. . our waters were topped off by the runners/bussers in a timely fashion and all the plates were cleared in a timely manner.. . bottom line, the food at bottega louie did not wow me.  it is perfectly palatable and i like the fact that most of the dishes are meant to be shared.  if only the food wowed me. bummer.
