ReviewID: 3x_4xBOEyub62qAjefb8Xw
ReviewerID: oZfnAryaLkhspWC0SBB2Wg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
So there I was having a drink with my friends at one of my local hangout bars, The Brigg, on Abbot Kinney in Venice. We already had dinner and were having a drink before we ended the night. The Brigg was slow so we decided to change venues and walk down the street. (Perhaps to the Other Room (?)). . As we filed out, I noticed a taco truck in the parking lot of the Brigg. Curious, I walked over to investigate and discovered it wasn't just any taco truck, it was the ubiquitous Kogi Truck! The one where people "twitter" to find its location and follow around with an occult like passion. There is/was so much hype surrounding the Kogi truck that I had to get in line to try some.  . . As I stood in line waiting to order, I noticed the large number of Asian people sitting and standing around for their orders. We're talking all ages! Mom and Pop types too. I found the scene humorous since I've lived in the area for over 12 years and have not seen that many Asians on Abbott Kinney until that day. Where did they all come from?! (Ah, its a good thing my people are finally making it to the west side!...or are they just there for the Kogi truck?!). . Nevertheless, after about 20 minutes I ordered a Korean short rib taco and a spicy pork taco. After another 10-15 minutes, I got a small carrier/plate with my two tacos. To the credit of the Kogi workers, the tacos looked fresh, clean, and well prepared. The tacos were hot too as if the tortillas were freshly made. However, that's where the positive experience ends. . . As I ate the Korean short rib taco, I noticed a very sweet tangy flavor similar to the salad dressing found on the complimentary salads when you eat Korean BBQ. Except in this case, it was about 8x-10x sweeter and tangy. The rest of the taco was simply okay and the meat flavor decent if not overpowered by the sweet/tangy flavor of the dressing. The spicy pork taco was slightly better but it wasn't spicy and again the sweet tangy flavor permeated throughout. (My friends tell me the Kogi Dog is ok and perhaps the burritos are better - perhaps). . ~Now in all fairness, I knew a Chinese chef who used to keep a 30lb bag of sugar next to his wok and throw in scoop after scoop whenever he made his Panda like Chinese food. When I asked why, he simply answered "Americans like it that way. Everything sweet!"~ . . Other oddities? The Kogi truck also offered a bottle of hot sauce for anyone who wanted it, Sriracha. Am I the only one that finds it strange that they offer a Thai hot sauce rather than offering the Korean chili paste or Mexican Salsa which might actually make more sense?. . Ultimately, I think its the fad of fusion foods that has created the hype around this truck. The food really is neither Korean nor Mexican and does not necessarily take the best of both worlds. Then again let's be realistic, not all of Roy Yamaguchi's dishes or Nobu Matsuhisa is that great either. The Kogi truck is worth a try but if you really like hot spicy tacos, I recommend El Taurino which may even be cheaper.
