ReviewID: 3XDV7Scug-0KSZ-DjDY1Vg
ReviewerID: c83L6AaUE-uZ1IvgCfq_9w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Oh, gotta share a little secret to ordering at Lawrys (esp. if you're one of the people complaining about the flavorless meat) -- try the English cut (the three slices instead of a big chunk OR ask for an end cut (which has all the herbs in a crust). The English cut usually has better flavor, and the end cut, of course, has all the seasonings.. . I am NOT a big meat eater (have been much closer to the vegetarian end of the spectrum for years and years). But yeah, Lawry's is kinda indulgently fab once a year when you have to do some obligatory family event (my in-laws will drive far for red meat, go figure). . . The decor is wretched, of course, and the little 1970s cafeteria worker uniforms on the waitresses (complete with those awful nurse shoes!) don't help. But hey, it's an LA tradition (and, sure, a big tourist trap) and there's something kind of cool about that. I mean, considering how many other things get bulldozed/go out of business/get image makeovers in this city, as long as Langer's, the Original Pantry, Musso and Frank's and Lawry's stick around, I'll figure there's at least a little old-school culinary history in this city -- I mean, geez, sometimes I get all nostalgic about restaurants that have been around since the '90s. . . I may someday get the lobster tails (a friend swears they're great) but I can't bring myself to order the salmon (you just have to wonder how good it can be when you NEVER EVER see anyone ordering fish). You've got to embrace the beef here, but I will say -- the creamed spinach ain't bad (although it's got a hell of a lot of bacon in it -- I mean, you can't even call it a vegetable after a certain point), and the sauteed mushrooms, oh my god, pretty awesome. . . But no, nothing here is a fresh idea or anything -- this is the American definition of fine dining dating back 50 years (hell, we're already at the tail end of the most recent steakhouse revival). It doesn't aspire to be anything more than that. The service is incredibly efficient (the waitresses move fast on those nurses shoes), there's never anything to get really disappointed about, and yeah, you don't even want to count the calories. And a bonus? Your relatives will be lulled into a food coma and you can make a quick escape (did I actually write that? Oops).
