ReviewID: 3zcewAOnqoZJnnL7vY-afQ
ReviewerID: UPn--rhxC2fYe8VLa3jeHQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Stone Soup Kitchen
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I'm a little embarrassed to admit to the fact that I had no idea about this place until I accidently drove past it this week. I've been to every other restaurant in the area countless times and sadly, after 3 1/2 of being open, never new about the Stone Soup Kitchen. For all of those times I waited for an hour+ at other brunch places, that were less than stellar, I now wish I hadn't.. . Like Rise N' Dine, Thumbs Up, Ria's, etc., Stone Soup Kitchen serves breakfast all day as well as lunch. The first time I went, I had the lunch which was very good. Lot's of veggie options and their soups are great (as one would hope from the name). They also have a frequent soup card with the ninth one free which is always nice. I had the Hungarian mushroom and holy cow...there are a ton of mushrooms in this thing. Possibly too many mushrooms as the curry-like broth is extremely delicious, but unfortunately there wasn't that much room for it given the fungi party going on in the bowl. I also had half of a veggie sandwich which was a solid addition to the meal.. . Impressed with the lunch, and extremely curious about their fairly vast breakfast menu, I returned with friends this morning for brunch. If you've read my previous reviews then you'll know brunch is my favorite meal (though I always order breakfast items I still consider it brunch given the time of day). This being the case, I was looking forward to their selections to see if they passed my fairly stringent breakfasty standards. THEY DID!. . Easter came early for me as I discovered this hidden egg. Like their lunch, Stone Soup Kitchen's breakfast is properly portioned, priced and flavored as that 'down home' quality of the food really comes through. I had:. . - Steel cut oatmeal with dried cranberries and toasted almonds w/ side of soymilk. - Huevos Rancheros (which I get almost always when a place has it on the menu. . I gotta say, both were outstanding. The oatmeal was cooked just right and very fresh and the huevos were great. Not overly sauced and everything was proportioned well.. . I finally have another alternative to the other, what used to be, indie/secret brunch places that seem to get more and more crowded ever ytime I go. It's nice to have options and this place is a great one for lunch and breakfast.
