ReviewID: 41YYXQTWmJIc5st_BFnT5g
ReviewerID: eMB_WUbf9f8b9UEA0-cUPA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I went there last night with a group of 6 people and we ordered a little bit of everything and ended up doing like a taster course of them:. . First we had:. - complimentary bread: tasted fresh, but I wish it was warm!. - portobello fries: omg..amazing! they were sooo good. the dipping sauced matched it perfectly! I tried not to eat all of it. - burrata &amp; grape tomatoes: our waiter suggested this and it was definitely good! and he told us to add balsamic vinaigrette to it and that made it almost amazing!. - Modena salad: good mix and it probably would've been enjoyable as an entree, but the little bit I had was pretty good. It was a little sweet from the candied walnuts but the crumbled goat cheese really balanced it. I just don't like how the lettuce is not shredded/cut more.. I prefer not to eat my salads with a knife.. . 2nd course: . - Napoli pizza: I'm a mushroom lover so this was my choice, but it didn't have nearly as much flavor to it as I would have thought it would...I would have preferred the pepperoni any day. . - Fettuccine Belmondo: everyone thought this was bland...but I knew this was going to be. It was dressed with extra virgin olive oil. I think it was meant to taste light. I wanted to try the pappardelle, but no one listened.. - Mussels &amp; Clams: best dish of the night. It was a heaping plate of mussels and clams in the most amazing sauce! I even topped my fettuccine with the sauce to make it taste better!. . Final course:. - Rib eye: medium well done. The pan made sauce was absolutely delicious. I didn't enjoy gorgonzola all that much. I'm pretty sure it wasn't the other way around.. but one of the sauces hit my palates correctly and the other not so much.. - King Salmon: for a dish that was supposed to be garnished with sweet peppers, red potatoes, yellow squash,. basil, watercress &amp; lemon, all I saw was a smaller piece of salmon with some pepper shavings at the top. It was cooked very well and tasted delicious, but I was just expecting much more from it. . . We also ordered a bottle of  Chardonnay Simi Winery, 2007. It was pretty good.. . I really wanted to try the souffle, but we were stuffed..hopefully, next time I'll get to try it.
