ReviewID: 429J5R9enUyKQI1Y8FdaHA
ReviewerID: XuiBAQi8lwPbHfKDgKWwEA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
My palate can't distinguish between Michelin 2 star vs. 3 star cuisine, but I love alinea anyways. I went for the tour the first time in February 2008 for the one-year anniversary with boyfriend, and again in May 2008 for alinea's 3 year anniversary.. . Those who think of it as solely a meal are the ones who miss out on the nuances, and take away nothing but a four hour dinner. No - this is performance art, at its finest - edible.. . There are some unconventional presentations they repeat and alter the composition of: a dish with a waxy ball of some juice that explodes in your mouth, a "shot" glass of a mixture, food on a thin wire that involves no hands, a bowl of rich soup that can't be put down until you finish, with a biteful of something that complements on top, a silver pick, etc. It's hard to review all the dishes in one meal, let alone two, in 5000 characters, so I'm just going to review the memorable ones: bad and good.. . Chicken Skin: truffle, corn, thyme. A one biter, yet underwhelming - texture, flavor, none of it was there. They should take this off, because it felt like an afterthought to me.. Sweetbread: cauliflower, burnt bread, toasted hay. I have the utmost respect for Chef Grant, but this dish hit a sour note for me. I hated the hard/crunchy cauliflower. There were these tan and black dots adorning a "village" that tasted terrible and enhanced the awfulness of everything else. Presentation was cute, but this dish's flavors and textures stunk with me.. Transparency of raspberry, rose petal, yogurt: Tasted like potpourri with the texture of baked saran wrap. not my favorite, obviously.. . But 3 bad dishes out of 52? Not bad. As for the great dishes:. Beans: many garnishes, pillow of nutmeg air. This included a marshmallow and fruit leather, centered around a navy bean puree which was topped with pancetta and a guinness beer foam. Unforgettably rich.. Roasted pear: foie gras, candied fennel, sweet spices. It was like a "cover" of foie over a buttery soup, and they poured more hot soup to melt it. The tastes were totally harmonious. I've only ever had foie fresh at the foire du paris and so i'm picky about my foie, but I loved this.. Caramel corn: *liquified*. Our server's presentation: "well this is intermission, and what do you get at intermission? caramel corn!" I'd heard bad things (weird, caramel corn shouldn't be liquified, etc.) It was lovely, smooth and tasted exactly like caramel corn, but the aftertaste was great - not buttery or gross, just faint and light.. Wagyu Beef: black trumpets, cedar branch aroma. This bite of beef was SO amazing - I'd fly to Japan for it. Boyfriend insisted that the beans were still his favorite, but when I pointed out it was merely a quantity comparison (i.e. if he had less of the beans and more of the beef) he acknowledged I was right.. Ice fish: shellfish, horseradish, parsley. One of my favorites, with fried ice fish (japanese delicacy) sticking up out of a custard of shellfish and horseradish (not at all spicy, very very good) with fried potato - like fish and chips except 34280785723094582 times better.. Short rib: guinness, peanut, fried broccoli. Imagine a sheet of guinness - even without it, the braised short rib was amazing.. Fava beans: lavender, banana, pecorino - i didn't love this so much as the BACON DONUT that came with it, good lord almighty.. Lobster: peas, ramps, mint vapor. This might have been my absolute favorite had it not been for the slightly overwhelming peppermint/spearmint smell. Yet it was ridiculously tasty. . Strawberry: violet, nicoise olive. holy gizmo, quite literally. An everlasting gobstopper mixed with "willywonka" technique of the gum that changed flavors in your mouth. I don't even like olives but it was delicious and the layers melded together beautifully.. Hot Potato: Cold Potato, black truffle, butter. The server came out and I recognized it from pictures online. "OOOH it's the potato" he laughed, "yes!" This is such a signature dish and after tasting it, I know why. One of those few duets that complement each other in every way possible. Temperature, texture, taste - all kicked ass, and the parmesan cubes were wonderful.. Chocolate: egg, pomelo, smoke. Our favorite dessert, hands down. a pool of pomelo, some valhrona chocolate infused with tea, a chocolate brioche bridge, a funky chocolate covered egg and smoke gel.. . With 20+ dishes being served at a meal, a few may not strike your palate perfectly, but it's definitely worth the trip. Chef G and Co. mess with tastes in completely unconventional ways and it is incredibly fun.
