ReviewID: 44a__pJwIpWWYewRylitfA
ReviewerID: 9GfPjfKgJtyORVLPT4LCQA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
The restaurant is beautifully designed/decorated with white marble, gold finishing and bright flowers.  It's very spacious as well, which results in a very noisy restaurant as the smallest sound echoes off the marble and reverberates throughout the space.. . We shared the portobello fries w/ aioli, the napoli pizza, and the mussels &amp; clams.  The portobello fries was definitely the stand-out dish -- I was surprised that they were indeed huge chunks of deep-friend portobello mushrooms (I'm not sure why, but I was thinking it would be more like regular potato french fries topped with sauteed portobello mushrooms).  Nevertheless, they were delicious!  Once you let them cool down a bit (I always find deep-fried non-starchy vegetables to be way too hot upon first bite because of their high water content), they were so juicy and succulent.  And the aioli was particularly yummy!  . . The napoli pizza was pretty solid with a good crust (crunchy on the outside and soft on the inside), but I've had better in NYC.  I think their pizzas could be improved by allowing more options for toppings.  Still, we finished the whole 15" or 16" pizza so clearly we enjoyed it =). . The mussels &amp; clams were good as well, though again, different from what I had expected.  I had pictured a white wine sauce with a dash of cream and lots of parsley.  Instead, it came in a red chunky sauce that had a smoky/roasted garlic flavor.  It was very tasty and the clams were huge (mussels were just normal sized). . . Also, I like that the restaurant allows for half-pours of wine.  We tried the petite syrah, chianti and sangiovese, all of which were reasonably priced. . . And finally, we purchased a blueberry tart from the bakery on our way out.  I only tasted a bite of it (was way too full from dinner), but I was a little disappointed.  It was a pricey little tart (approx. $4) and not particularly appetizing (tasted too buttery -- like actual salty butter, not creamy aromatic butter. . . All in all, it was a good meal if you are grabbing dinner in downtown after work, but not a destination dinner.
