ReviewID: 4F17prtWaa0KMovCWbtvhw
ReviewerID: KcywkJ6WV1Rgb3CaVZ6gow
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Taqueria del Sol
Category: Tex-Mex
I've been a big fan of Taqueria del Sol and always loved their food at their locations Cheshire Bridge Rd and Howell Mill Rd.. . The one thing that I am very displeased about is their service and hospitality.. . A friend and I were there eating food that we ordered and two other friends joined us. One of my friends is in a wheel chair with a physical disability. . . I understand that Taqueria has a rule that if you ordered previously that you are allowed to order more food at the bar and if you have a new guests that joins you that they have to wait in line and order through the cashier. I totally understood that. (This establishment is where you stand in line and place your order with a cashier and then you grab a table to wait for a server to bring you food.). . I tried going through bar to order food for my friend in the wheel chair. They would not allow me to order food for him at the bar but told me that my friend and I needed to go back in line to order food. THIS IS TOTALLY RIDICULOUS. The employee had the nerve to say an insensitive thing like "Well at least he is in a chair." WTF!?!!?!. . You think a place that has special handicap parking which allows people with a disability better access to enter the restaurant would do the same for guests that want to order food.Not in the mind of the workers or managers at Taqueria del Sol!. .  My friend in a wheel chair and I stood back in the line despite the fact that I was already eating there previous to my friend joining me. Crazy thing was my wheel chair friend only wanted one taco. It wasn't like he was going to order a whole bunch of stuff.  Of course it's not fair to the other people in line but my friend wasn't asking for anything big. All my friend wanted was one memphis taco.. . Nothing against the food of Taqueria del Sol (their food is great) but what just previously transpired made me lose respect for this establishment.
