ReviewID: 4gxiz4SYqqHhCS8Xk27EJQ
ReviewerID: lj2xF1JEHQ7J7Vto9jzSig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
My Mother is lactose intolerant and I may be as well.  My grandmother suggests staying away from red meat to avoid 'the gout.'  Upon visiting Ford's Filling Station, I have, on multiple occasions, decided to ignore the advice of my elders.  I do not regret my decision.. . A must: The meat and cheese plates.  If you are really hungry have a piece of bread before it comes so you can take your time enjoying the flavors of the cheese and paper-thin slices of cured meats.  I like stinky blue cheeses, which aren't for everyone, so I suggest just telling your server if you like harder cheeses, softer cheeses, sharper or milder and they will take care of you.  I highly recommend the Humboldt fog.  For three people a 3-meat, 3-cheese plate is a plenty.  It looks like a lot more than it is when it comes out.. . Do Try: The kobe beef cheeks.  Don't be afraid if you've never had this tender cut of meat - it is delicious and melts in your mouth like butter.  Delicious.. . Very good: The pub burger.  Some may say you can't really screw up a burger but yes - you can, and sometimes you just need a good burger. At the filling station it's moist and the caramelized onions are wonderful against the Maytag blue cheese, which is surprisingly well balanced and not overpowering. If it sounds like too much get the blue cheese on the side and add it yourself - though I think you will end up adding it all!. . Drinks: Good bears on tap - Stone IPA draft is a good one.  Had a good glass of malbec on one visit and a so-so pinot noir on another.  As with most places, I was not disappointing when following the suggestions of the bartender.. . The scene: Gourmet food in a LA-casual setting.  A little dark for some but I like candlelit dining.  Sony executives love it, and celebrities (not to mention the chef is Harrison Ford's son).  We saw Will Farrel there last week, looking good Will, I recommend the beef cheeks.. . Tip: Make a reservation!  They use . http://opentable.com.  which is an added bonus - you don't have to make a phone call and you earn points just for showing up for your reservation.. . Next time: I'm looking forward to trying the appetizer flat breads.  I've seen them come out and they look and smell wonderful.  After all what's better than a big plate of gourmet cheese and bread?  You guessed it - melty cheese and bread :)
