ReviewID: 4Hy2wsObHc_tZMLcAL0_Ow
ReviewerID: m07sy7eLtOjVdZ8oN9JKag
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
L.A. is too much for this man...but Pink's has weenies for days. Long ones. And really long ones. . . On one of my rare visits to L.A., my friend and I found this place with no idea what it would be like. We were quite lucky because there was barely a line in front, so we immediately had to strategize on how to divide and conquer on the most elaborate hot dog menu I had ever seen. There is something about grilled hot dogs that makes my eyes bigger than my real appetite, but we dove in and decided on three. . . First up was the Giant 12-inch Jalapeno Dog with chili, onions and mustard for $3.80. It was so long I was intimidated to even look at it. Could it be a creative application of Viagra? No, it turned out to be a tasty dog with a generous ladling of meaty chili on a somewhat undersized bun that would have been the right size for two petite people. . . Since my friend and I are not petite, not by a long shot, we had another dog, the Pastrami Reuben dog with mustard, pastrami, Swiss cheese and sauerkraut for $4.95. Talk about overkill. You have the dog and then you have all this fat-laden meat on top of it and then a layer of melted cheese. It was delish, of course it was, but it should have come in a wrapper with a crossed-out skull and bones insignia emblazoned on it. I expect Roseanne and Dan must come here to order that as an appetizer. . . You would think that was enough, but no, we tried a third one - the Guacamole Dog for $2.95. Put this one in the WTF pile...I like hot dogs, and I like avocados. Put them together and pass the bromo. It's like orange-flavored cappuccino or pizza-flavored Ritz crackers. Why combine two good things to create a disaster? Alas, we had to try the fries too for just a $1.95. They were worth their weight in carbs. Fifteen bucks later and we could barely move. . . As we belched profusely over what we digested, I noticed a couple of thin, young Japanese girls at another table in matching pink sweaters. They ordered almost as many dogs and had no trouble downing them. The nerve. The patio tables started filling up quickly as we finished. By the time we waddled out of the place, there was a line growing down the block. . . Am I recommending Pink's? Sure...but don't tell your Jenny Craig counselor. . . FOOD - 3.5 stars...delish dogs but toppings get a little too creative  . AMBIENCE - 2.5 stars...well, there's lots of photos of Hollywood stars like Potsie on "Happy Days" . SERVICE - 4 stars...they pull 'em, pile 'em and serve 'em real fast . OVERALL - 3.5 stars...know your maximum quota and you should be fine
