ReviewID: 4iVSIXu-XSXNNFZEnft0KQ
ReviewerID: Y2nk3lbalhUZi7M_CQpPKA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
This Duck Rocked My World!. . Seriously....some of the best damn Peking duck I've ever had.....carved table side....they make sure every single piece has delicious crispy skin....mmmmmmm.....then you can make little duck sammies with the pancakes, scallions, carrots and hoisen.....ohhhhh but that's not all folks....they then bring you a giant bowl of duck soup and a pile of duck fried rice......it's enough for 4 peeps fo' sho'.....it's only $32.......and it is all good....so so good. . We did order other things and even had a couple of very cool veggie friends with us....here's the run-down:. . Soy Chicken: Liked didn't love....it was tender but I just wanted more from my dish. . Chinese Broccoli: Again...didn't love this but it was fine. . Mixed Veg w/ Noodles: I liked this a lot.....crispy noodles on the edges.....more gooey &amp; noodley towards the middle....topped with a nice mix of fresh veggies. . Egg Rolls: I must have something fried and crunchy when I eat Asian food.....so I got these and they were fantastic!! To start they used the correct kind of egg roll wrappers...not those bullshit thin smooth ones....and this little fatty was stuffed full with the precise mix of pork, veggies and spices....def order again..... . Straw Mushrooms w/ Tofu: I didn't try this but my veggie gf didn't love it....and barely ate any of it....the tofu was way too mushy (I could tell just by looking at it)....and that ruined the whole dish. . Veggie Fried Rice: It was a hit with the veggies!. . We actually had pretty decent service.....I think they came to our table no less than 3x in 10min (I am not exaggerating at all) to see if we were ready to order....which to be honest was slightly annoying but at least we didn't have the slower than molasses service some of the other Yelpers have experienced. Our duck was a little late....but they did let us know in advance that they were running behind....so we weren't put out....and really after you taste the duck....you won't care how long it took to get there...only that these little morsels of love are gracing your taste buds with their presence!. . We ate there Saturday night.....it's Tuesday morning and I'm still thinking about it.....I can tell this is going to be a problem......
