ReviewID: 4IwfBxznNSFTkVJAMZ2gEw
ReviewerID: 6EHbIv5w2I4XbXs3dG_D1Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hamburger Mary&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
This is obviously a place to come when you want American comfort food and don't care about atmosphere or service.  Because they both suck.  But the food is decent.  But not great. . . Macaroni and cheese fritters:  B+ on taste, but there were only five on the plate, they weren't hot, and the wet lettuce on which they were served made them soggy after a few minutes.  The devil is in the details, Mary.  On the upside, the barbecue sauce was delicious (although a little sweeter than my preferred perfect version), and I used it on the fries and onion rings later in the meal.. . Fries:  C-.  Perfectly cooked but WAY too overseasoned.  Let the potatoes and oil speak for themselves!. . Onion rings:  Solid B.  These are one of the things (like calamari) that I try almost everywhere, but I am still searching for the perfect Chicago onion rings.. . Philly steak burger:  B+.  Here's where they redeemed themselves a bit.  Of course, they neglected (or didn't care?) to take it easy on the cheese as I requested, but it was still a great burger, with green peppers and onions, and crispy fried onion bits which I honestly could have done without.  Cooked just the way that I like, even though they didn't ask, on a good bun, this was the most satisfying portion of the meal.  . . But I was so unimpressed with the lack of attentive and friendly service that I probably wouldn't return.  I was even more dismayed to see some patrons seemingly treated like regulars by our same server, but even other staff in the restaurant seemed aloof and almost aggressively indifferent.  Plus, despite the extensive menu, I couldn't see anything that I would strongly desire to try on a return visit.  The annoyance and disappointment factor urges me towards two stars, but they apparently accomplish what they set out to do, so I'll let them off with a three.  Dare I say?...2.5.
