ReviewID: 4LlbZucl4BoiMJeOOEgySA
ReviewerID: 2tzAgJzPJa4M21HB6bM3bA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: No Mas Cantina
Category: Mexican
A friend celebrated his birthday at No Mas on Saturday night.  Mexican food is my favorite cuisine and I was very excited (to say the least) about the opportunity of trying a new Mexican restaurant--frequent flyer at On the Border and La Parilla.  Before I left to go the restaurant, I went to their website to look up directions and to my surprise it said, "Complimentary valet Thursday through Saturday.". . False.. . As we pulled up to the restaurant the sign said that valet was $2.  I have no problem paying for valet; however, I do not like being blatantly lied to.  There were no special events that night either.. . The interior of the restaurant is very pretty--prolific decorations, lots of indoor and outdoor seating with a big bar, and a few families.  We had a big party and got seated upstairs (after 75% of our group showed up).  We ordered a few pitchers of margaritas (~$30 each) which came in beautiful tall vase-like glass pitchers.  The margarita itself was a little too sweet for my taste; I prefer a little bit more of a zing.. . For my main course I ordered the Burrito Grande.  This meal, or the equivalent, is what I generally order at Mexican restaurants.  When I received my plate the presentation was nice, two halves of the burritos cut and leaning against each other with the rice and beans.  I took my first bite into the burrito--all rice.  Okay, thinking to myself, I can't wait for the Chipotle peppers, meat, queso, and  lime sauce!  Next bite--all rice.  Rice. Rice. Rice. Rice.  Really?  I pretty much ordered a plate of rice.  Yes, there were chunks of meat, a few scattered peppers, and some beans, but I would have rather have gone for a Willy's or Chipotle burrito. No joke.. . After going through three or four bites of my burrito, extremely disappointed and confused, I inquired the waitress about the missing ingredients in my burrito (okay, they were there if you used a microscope!).   Very nicely she pointed to the side of my plate (to the pico de gallo) and said that is what they were talking about on the menu and offered some shredded cheese, since according to her, that was the only thing missing.  The menu clearly states what the flour tortilla is stuffed with and what comes served with the meal.  . . Several other people were disappointed with their food, although the people that got enchiladas seemed happy.. . Overall, the decorations and ambiance of the establishment is very nice but I will never elect or recommend anyone to dine at this restaurant.. . Tldr; No mas isn't only for the name of the restaurant..........
