ReviewID: 4lsduQU55rSkJDOlHOsa2Q
ReviewerID: wGEWMqOxZb2hHg6WACmEQQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
So it's the 4th of July and I'm feeling lame - I'm sitting at home, by myself, without a BBQ or a firework in sight! . . Yes, I'm lame, but I'm also hungry. . . Decision time, baby! I want something good but sort of greasy (which will make up for the lack of BBQ this weekend) and something with a lot of flavor (it'll be like fireworks in my mouth!). . So let's see...The Hat (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... )? Tops (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... )? Oinkster?. . Oiiiiiiinkster...that's what I want. The restaurant that's been on my bookmarked list since October '07. Yeah...that's the one!. . So I drive down there, order a pulled pork sandwich, a regular order of Belgium fries and a ube shake. (Yeah, I know...that's a lot of food. But give me a break here - I'm by myself on the 4th of July!) . . The verdict?. . 1) The pulled pork sandwich is surprisingly tender. With the runny, vinegary BBQ sauce, it's pretty damn good. The red cabbage slaw on top is a great compliment to the juicy pork.. . 2) The Belgium fries are a totally weird concept. You look at them and you think, "Wow. These are going to be crunchy." But then you bite into them and it's soft and soggy on the inside! I'm really perplexed by the texture of them, but they get addicting once you get over the initial impression.. . The sauces you can get with your fries are pretty amazing too. I tossed a container of regular ketchup and chipotle ketchup into my to go bag, but they got all mixed up on the ride home. So which one's which? "Hmm...this one tastes like ketchup. WOAH. That one's TOTALLY chipotle ketchup." The garlic aioli sauce has a shock of flavor to it too (although it's a tad bit rich for my taste).. . 3) Ube is not taro. I thought they were the same - they are both purple tuber like things that are used in cakes and shakes and such - but they are not the same thing. I took the first sip of my shake thinking it'd taste like taro...and it did not. The ube shake is good though! I wish it was a tad thicker but the flavor was awesome.. . So what's going on now?. . I'm still sitting around my house, by myself, on the 4th of July...but I'm full of Oinkster, and that seriously makes life a whole lot less lame.
