ReviewID: 4MNpQZ5dw8B--G0m11qweg
ReviewerID: clYmSikiOnn-9_rDBdRvbw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sun In My Belly
Category: Caterers
Located in a restored hardware store with lots of character, Sun In My Belly has lots of charm and great food!  I was a bit turned off at first, as my glass was lipstick-stained on the side and my knife had a small chunk of food left of it, but I'm not one to complain and demand new silverware in that sort of situation, so I got over it, and the food made up for it.. . The Citrus Poached Shrimp was my favorite.  While I usually like my seafood Baltimore-style (for shrimp, that would be Old Bay &amp; vinegar), the red pepper aioli sauce made up for the lack of flavor in the shrimp themselves.  They're actually served with three sauces, but I practically ignored the other two because that one was so good.. . The Asian chicken skewers were pretty good, though they have a bit of a burnt taste...Though I think they're supposed to be that way, as they're covered with burnt sesame seeds.  Interesting.... . I don't normally eat ham, but the purpose of our visit was taste-testing for a catering event, so I tried the Coca-Cola Glazed ham.  It was served thinly sliced on biscuits, and those biscuits were delicious!  The mustard was really high-quality stuff, but I would have preferred it without it.  I didn't really taste any Coca-Cola, but it was still quite good.. . The salmon was pretty good, with delicious seasonings atop the filet.  It wasn't the best salmon ever, but it was definitely delicious.. . For dessert, we tried the key lime tarts, lemon-margarita triangles, and bananas foster.  The key lime tarts were adorable, but too sweet for my taste.  The lemon-margarita triangles were much better...but the bananas foster was my favorite.  Served in adorable little cups, this dessert is topped with Jack Daniel's whipped cream!  Sooooo good!  That by itself is a must-try.. . Overall, Sun In My Belly is a good experience with a helpful staff and delicious food.
