ReviewID: 4nFiddtwHDituXE8K6VhVA
ReviewerID: MHmKe1NQ1pCpIrbK4XREDw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: One Midtown Kitchen
Category: American (New)
It's about time that a restaurant it Atlanta gets pork, sweet potato, and service all spot-on during my meal. . . The decor in the entryway took me off guard, but as soon as we pulled back the drapes and entered the main restaurant, I was mesmorized. Beautiful light fixtures dangle from the ceiling, creating a soft yellow light that just screams (or whispers?) chic. It was the first time I've felt like I had dejavu after visiting a restaurant's website- the warm, elegant feeling you get after visiting ONE's homepage is the same feeling you have dining in the restaurant.. . We started with some wine, which was a steal at $5 a glass. Much appreciated pricing at such a nice place. The edamame-hummus spread for the bread basket was an interesting twist on a classic favorite, one that I enjoyed no less. . . My friend and I shared the belgian endive, which I can best describe as a fruit salad with...meat. It left me wondering if the items on the plate really did pair well together, or if my palate is just sooo subpar. Certainly an interesting dish, but I would try something different next time.. . For entrees, I ordered the Pan Roasted Cod and my friend ordered the Hanger Steak. Both were fabulous, although I was partial to mine because the sweet potato puree was on point. Also, it seems like most chefs have a hard time pairing apples with anything other than pork, so I was glad to see some grilled fuji apples on the dish, it added a certain tartness that was missing. When our waiter, Peter, asked my friend if she'd like some "crumbles of blue cheese" on her steak, I was not expecting the overload she got- I had to chuckle! See the pics I added. Entrees earn an A plus! . . These days I just can't leave a restaurant without the full monty - meaning dessert! Nothing on the dessert menu really stood out to me but I was determined to find SOMETHING to try. We went with the Chocolate Mousse. The server tried to convince us of some chocolate peanut butter concoction, but I wanted my mousse. I probably should have let Peter steer me in the right direction, because I was not too impressed by the dessert. The presentation was great, they had a bunch of these cute mini-meringues. But the mousse was so thick it was sticking to the roof of my mouth and seeing as how my wine was gone, I had nothing to wash it down with.. . We were able to use my $20.10 off coupon from being a Twitter follower on the meal, which was great (thanks Concentrics!). Overall I was very happy with the experience and would definitely return for a more casual, but still nice night out.
