ReviewID: 4otxLoQC0V4j39hSBtzmQQ
ReviewerID: a2mgFM5LYuxdP-rwDpk--Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
If I could give it a 4 and 1/2 that's where I"d put it.  Batali really impresses me with his low toned candor. Long before the Iron Chef, he was just a simple chef doing his Malto Mario show. The man is a historian whose dialog is Pasta and Sausages. . OK, this is was a first for me, considering I search for unique and special, this site was a notch above the rest. . . To start off, the 1/2 star that i cant give this site has to do with the fact, we had to wait for a table.  Our reservations were at 845, we sat down at 930.  I suppose being busy is a good thing and the truth of the matter, it wasn't that we were stacked up, people just wouldn't leave.  The were very apologetic, they even comped us a free Burrata with Bacon.  Thank you guys, that tapas just blew me away.   Have you ever took a bite of food and giggled at the sheer excitement you got from the flavors?  This tapas nailed it! It wasn't just the Bacon and Cheese mix, it was everything, the caramelized onions, the leeks, the balsamic vinegar. Almost made up for the wait,  I was truly sold at this point.   . .  The service was very detailed, they paid attention to everything, they read our faces rather well and knew we had questions.   I'd have liked a menu that translated Italian to English, but I suppose that's what the waiters are for, he had to translate nearly the whole menu.  Sorry I guess I'm just Italian language naive.   Another tiff I'd have is that we went through about 4 sets of silver ware.  Come on guys I'm OK with one set, no need to waste so much water in washing sooooo many silverware.  . . For our Primi, we tried the orecchiette, something I highly recommend.  Flavors and textures were very well balanced.  . .  The servings in my opinion was decent, I shared this dish with my gf and even though we had halves, it was a decent amount.   As busy as this place was, we never had to wait long, but we were never rushed. The food came, in my opinion, at a good pace, giving us time to digest and ponder what we just experienced.  . . For Secondi,  I had the Taglieta, I asked for rare, I got rare. My Golden Beets were cooked perfectly. The roasted Potatoes were very crispy, I wish I could do this with a fingerling!.  My Gf had the Duck.  Now, the duck was roasted, fairly simple, however what you may not notice was just that it was so tender, so perfectly cooked. I see some people complain about the duck being bland, however if you complimented the bite of duck with the pear jelly as it was intended, you'd start to notice the superb caramelized skin of the duck, the meat that's not oily or greasy as duck can easily turn out. It was a very balanced flavor. They were in complete control of the out come of the duck.  . . Finally we had our dessert. We had what is basically a small lava cake with a scoop of Bourbon Gelato on top. They used dark chocolate, which was a sharp chocolate, the Bourbon was very subtle in flavor in the gelato.  They dressed the dessert with some Carmel sauce, which I felt was a bit salty.  My GF suggested that maybe this was intended as to have a salty Carmel is not normal. I do agree that it added a certain twist to the dessert, but I think I could have done with out the saltiness.  All in all I loved the meal here. I will go again.
