ReviewID: 4QlnaK29WJRp3WuwlCQQRA
ReviewerID: y6cy0wfDyqb7CNUVlMUwWw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
If I was Eve... I would have done it too. The apple lives supreme... and at the Pan de Apple, they've been flipping up perfectly-seasoned, masterfully-grilled, perfectly-topped burgers for over sixty years. Driving down Pico, it's kind of hard not to notice something a little different about the Apple Pan. You start with the classic neon sign, then your eyes move to the 1960's green awnings, and finally you focus on the building itself. It sits amongst the other storefronts... the seasoned pro of the block. Undoubtedly it has seen its neighbors come and go, but inside its walls the burgers keep on flipping... and it's packed. Come in and grab a seat at the counter... you don't really have a choice... because once inside the Pan you'll find a central grill encased in red bricks bordered by a single wrap-around counter... giving its patrons a front row seat to the burger ballet. Behind the counter, you'll find the burger veterans... a couple of legends who've been doing it since the beginning... ready to pull out a few patties from the under-counter fridges and throw down a burger or two on the grill immediately following your order. There's not too much variety on the menu, but you don't need it when your staples are this good. We go with the Steakburger topped with the Pan's famous "burger relish." With some of the ketchuppy relish on the top bun and some mayo on the bottom... it's like the meat is trying to play crowd control in a match-up that is destined to become thousand island in your mouth. Throw in some grilled onions to mingle with the layer of tillamook cheddar, and you're on your way to burger bliss. Don't forget to add to your order some of their golden fries and of course... a slice of pie. What kind should you get? If you need help with that from a place called Apple Pan... you might want to just stick with those velcro shoes. Sadly, supply hit demand, and we were forced to go with our second option of banana cream... which we'd support in the pie royal rumble any day. But beyond just having a great burger and delicious pies, Apple Pan is just downright old-school... in a good way. You've got the 1940's cash register in the corner, tiny metal cups with a paper cone for your soda, and plaid wallpaper adorning the back wall... then it hits you... this is the place they were talking about when they referenced "back in the day." It's the kind of place that can change the meaning of "your momma's so old" jokes. Like... your momma's so old... she could make a really, really good burger... and is a lovely lady. So when that next burger craving hits you, you need to look no further than the neon sign and the plaid wallpaper, because simply put... Apple Pan's was throwing down Good Grub before you were born... and still is.
