ReviewID: 4sUjNdgEtGkDhsL-_4TDcA
ReviewerID: 9r3CVkiNH6cx6FqvCU3EwQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
I had such a wonderful time at CUT! I'd give 6 stars if I could! . . I had dinner on a Friday night. We arrived at 9:30 and stayed past midnight. It was full and lively the entire time! The atmosphere is refined but comfortable. The dining room is light, with large windows, light woods and comfortable office-type chairs. There are huge portrait pictures of famous actors and musicians on the wall - kind of popy and fun. (One question to you Wolfgang: Why the pics of Heidi and Spencer? Are they personal friends of yours or did they pay you for the publicity? I'm baffled.  Whatever, thanks for an awesome dinner). Anyway, you can hear rock music playing under the chatter and laughter of happy diners. The atmosphere really allows you to relax and enjoy your food and your company, without any stuffiness... especially in the later hours. . . We enjoyed the variety of breads brought by our waiters as we scoured the menu. The waiter also brought a tray of the Weygu steaks for us to examine.  It was nice to be able to see the marbleizing of the meat and the variety of cuts. . . We started with the pork bellies with maple glaze, served with bitter greens and persimmon. It was wonderful! The pork was soft and juicy and I could cut it with my fork. I highly recommend this starter! . . My boyfriend and I decided to go with American-Weygu steaks (rather than the extremely expensive Japanese Weygu or the USDA prime). He tried the New York ($75) and I had the fillet ($70). I have never had such a flavorful fillet Mignon! The best steak of my life! The meat was so tender I barely needed to chew! I ordered a brandy and green peppercorn sauce, and bone marrow to go with it. Both were wonderful, but nearly overkill as the steak was perfect on its own.  . . As sides, we kept it traditional, sharing Yukon gold potato puree and creamed spinach.  The potatoes were good.  The spinach was great!  It was served in a hot pan with a soft fried egg, mixed together at the table.  The textures of the egg made for a really special creamed spinach.  . . Finally, we ended the meal with an apple-raisin crumble, also served in a hot pan with ice cream. I could barely eat three bites at that point, but it was very good. I thank the staff at CUT for moving at a reasonable pace. The waiters were attentive, but the kitchen and wait staff took their time bringing each course. And this was necessary!  Any meal this rich, delicious, and expensive needs to be savored!    . . It's official. .. I have a new favorite steak.  And maybe someday if I'm a very, very good girl someone will take me there again :)
