ReviewID: 4T5gf1ZI7XvV46LRZYmJ-w
ReviewerID: YSfAlm6XNaym-JOrRjv3Tg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Dogwood Restaurant
Category: Southern
Around 5pm today, a feeling of death hit me like a ton of bricks. I had a severe headache, was feverish, and would have waves of nausea take over me whenever I moved too fast, drank water, or did much of anything. As awful as this feeling was, I was more upset at the low likelihood of enjoying myself at Dogwood, as we had reservations for my mom's birthday.. . Due to the deplorable parking situation at my building, the famdamily luckily scrapped the drinks at my place and we headed to Dogwood about 30 minutes prior to our reservation time, figuring we'd just chill at the bar. Again, the nastiness I was feeling didn't make me too enthused about much of anything beyond coming home, getting in jammies, and watching Felicity, but I had to pretend like I was having fun. Luckily we were able to get seated immediately and I tried to sip water to keep myself from likely being the first person to get sick in Dogwood's bathroom. . . I was most upset as the menu looked incredible. I've never had such a hard time deciding what to eat, and I've never been so crestfallen that I had absolutely zero appetite. Everyone else at the table was having similar issues, as all of the options looked so dang good. I settled on the trio of soups and the arugula/proscuitto salad. . . The soups were each phenomenal. My favorite was the special soup of the evening: a caramelized sweet onion; perfectly creamy and flavorful, it's certainly something I am going to crave. The tomato bisque was just as delightful, quite tangy, and the goat cheese ball served in the middle was the perfect complement. While I wasn't as wild about the mussel corn chowder, it could have been that the slight fishiness of the dish just didn't mesh well with how i was feeling at that time. The pimento cheese grits I sampled could best be described as all of the goodness of the South in one little bowl.. . As the soup settled, I began to feel miraculously better. One wouldn't expect cream-based soups to fix pangs of nausea, but I realized I was no longer calculating the time to get to the bathroom from the table or slyly putting cold water on my neck to try to stop the headache. . . The arugula salad arrived and it too was perfection. Crisp bundles of arugula wrapped in thinly slices prosciutto, served atop a crunchy french bread and caramelized onions. Heaven on a plate, and medicine for my soul. After polishing off the dish, I daresay I was running at 90%, and kind of wishing I had gotten an entree. Not because I was hungry, just because everyone's food looked SO good. I certainly felt well enough to order dessert, and the table sampled both the chocolate molten cake and a blackberry dish. The flavor of the cake was good, although it was far too dry. The dulce de leche ice cream that accompanied was fantastic, as was the sour cream ice cream that came with the blackberry dish. I loved the blackberry: perfectly tart berries served with a flaky biscuit and super creamy ice cream. Refreshing and not cloyingly sweet.. . Service throughout the night was on point: never rushed us or hovered but was always there when we needed him. Once I finished my mint green tea, I felt alive once again. . . I'm pretty sure the food here is magic, and I can't wait to see how great I feel trying it out again when I'm feeling fully up to snuff at the beginning of the meal.
