ReviewID: 4tCrRDiGCmdSwjvXfyv7FQ
ReviewerID: gEx19xm2RZQo4XdobKGkWQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
best.dining.experience.ever.. . the service was excellent save for a few missteps and one server who was quite stonefaced.  also, all of us got the tour except for my wife who got the veggie tour and it was excellent too!  we couldn't have asked for a better evening!  perfection!. . here's the course by course break down:. . osetra, traditional garnishes -. . very much like thomas keller's oysters and pearls but a modern twist (and no oysters).  very light w/ perfect caviar.. . pork belly, iceberg, cucumber, thai distillation -. . their play on thai food and it was unreal. pork belly was excellent but what stole the show was the shot of a liquified thai chilies which smelled like it was spicy but had the pure flavor of the chilies w/out the heat.. . oxalis, juniper, gin, sugar -. . a gelee dish. it had a bitter flavor which worked well with the flavors of the berries, gin and sugar.. . lilac, scallop, shellfish, honeydew -. . this was quite a dish! the base was a lilac "pillow" that had essence of lilac. the seafood was incredible and so perfectly cooked. the honeydew foam added a nice sweet accent.. . pigeonneau, a la saint-clair -. . chef achatz showed us that he's not all about new styles of cooking. this was a classically prepared dish and was fabulous. the squab, foie gras, and the onions were exquisite and we couldn't have asked for a more perfect crust.. . black truffle explosion, romaine, parmesan -. . one of his signatures and it didn't disappoint. it's just one bite but as soon as it enters the mouth, the insides of the ravioli come out and all you're left w/ is black truffles in all of its glory.. . tomato, fig, nicoise olive, pine nuts -. . basil leaves and tomato stems that provide the aromatic blanket for this course.  a whole salad re-thought! there are olives, black garlic, charred figs and olive oil snow! a great combo of flavors and a dehydrated pumpernickel crouton added some nice texture. the heirloom tomatoes were so good!. . mustard, passionfruit, allspice. bacon, butterscotch, apple, thyme. sweet potato, bourbon, brown sugar, cinnamon -. . the mustard ice cream w/ allspice and passionfruit were presented as a disc and we were asked to let it melt in our mouth. it went from spicy to light to sweet. a very cool effect!  the bacon first and it wa perfection. sweet, salty w/ a herb twist w/ the thyme. the sweet potato was basically pie on a stick and perfect way to end the trio. sweet, creamy and w/ a nice bite.. . hot potato, cold potato, black truffle, butter -. . another signature of his. we had to pick up the bowl and pull the pin on the side so that the hot contents of the pin would drop in the cold soup and eat right away. the contrast of the temperatures and textures added to an already incredible flavorful dish!. . yuba, shrimp, miso, togarashi -. . the yuba (skin of tofu) was hardened and fried to give it a crispy texture. the shrimp was delicious and had the miso dip was outstanding!. . foie gras, peach, fennel, shiso -. . the foie gras and fennel which needed to be eaten right away and then the peach juice in the cup needed to be drunk right away. the savory and sweet is the mix here and it tasted nice!. . uni, aloe, yuzu, chili -. . this dish made its debut on the menu that night and we were asked by a lot of the wait staff on how we liked it. while uni isn't my thing, this was void of any weird fishy flavor or a weird texture. the flavor worked well w/ the yuzu and aloe but it was inconsistent from bite to bite.. . wagyu beef, powdered a-1, potato chips -. . wow! i've never had beef this good. the potato "chips" was like a cube of all that is good w/ potatoes. the powdered A-1 was a deconstructed version of A-1 steak sauce and was a nice addition as was the salt and pepper on the side but the beef really stood on its own.. . lemon soda, one bite -. . once in your mouth, this almost becomes a bite of lemon meringue. great and playful!. . transparency of raspberry, yogurt. bubble gum, long pepper, hibiscus, creme fraiche. watermelon, lime, nasturtium -. . this was a thin paper of raspberry which was a fun fruit roll up type thing and a "cigarette" of bubble gum w/ creme fraiche that needed to be sucked from the one side and a ball of watermelon w/ lime. just a fun course!. . rhubarb, goat milk, onion, lavender air -. . a pillow filled w/ lavender air was placed in front of us and the dish was placed on top.  the pillow slowly lost it's air as the plate sat and gave off this wonderful lavender aroma. The bites on the plate had a lil bit of cotton candy to drops of sweet onion. nice dish.. . chocolate, blueberry, tobacco, maple -. . the highlight of the evening. A silicone mat was placed on our table top and chef achatz prepped this on our table and every component was insanely good.  here's a video of this course: . http://bit.ly/vWIQS. . . pound cake, strawberry, lemon, vanilla bean -. . a dense pound cake w/ strawberry in it and a lemon snow around it. the vanilla bean is used as a fork and adds a nice background flavor. lovely!
