ReviewID: 4vJAXDcC4L5WM20oOg7sIA
ReviewerID: 7dLnKQ0LyWaBoAEos5IG2A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
My rating is actually a 4.5 rounded up to a 5. . Did anyone notice the article on the Boiling Crab in the LA Times this past week? Well, that's how I first heard about this place, I guess I don't go on Yelp enough. Hehe. . We arrived a little before 4 on a Sunday (today) and we had to wait maybe 10 minutes, although the girl said 20. The first thing you notice when you enter the place, is the wave of garlic that hits you. It almost made me a little nauseous. So the waitress puts the bibs on us, a little awkward there, I felt like a kid, and I'm sure my grandma felt silly. . . OK... I see the paper towel roll, the butch paper..what's next. We sat there for awhile... chilling.. doing nothing... What was wrong... we didn't have any menus! At first I was like 'HUH? is there menu tacked on a wall among the numerous tags on the walls?' So I asked one of the girls...and she was surprised too and quickly gave us the menus. She did make sure to ask us who had seated us. Imagine sitting down customers and not giving them menus? I guess she was new?. . We ordered 2 lbs of shrimp (whole sha bang) and the fried catfish that came with the cajun fries. The shrimp came quickly, the guy just plopped it in front of us. My mom and grandma were rather shocked. So we all dug in. OKKK...I have an excuse for what happened next. I thought the shrimp was alright. My EXCUSE was... I had a cold.. my throat felt funny and I think the spices were a little harsh on my throat... I don't know. BUT I did stuff myself full of it. . . The fried catfish was DELICIOUS! We were all fans of it. SO SOFT, SO TENDER! Cajun fries lived up to the expectations. I LOVED the fact that there were no plates. I was thinking 'Hm, the ketchup goes...'SQUIRT! on to the table. It was fantastic, I loved the fact that we can get down and dirty. Did I mention it felt orgasmic when I was able to wash my dirty hands with some hot water in the bathroom?. . The customer service was ok...No one offered us any lime : / My mom wanted to to-go the 4 pieces of shrimp left, the waitress never came back with a bag, so my mom just wrapped it up with paper towels and tied the plastic bib around it. Lame. We did get our drinks re-filled.. . So yea... they need improvement on that..and parking spaces. I wonder where the employees park their cars? It seems like the lot is not enough for the employees' cars. We ended up parking at the end of the street. . . In the end, we were happy and content. $34 for the four of us. That's pretty cheap. It's definitely a unique place to dine at, I would recommend everyone to try it.. . EDIT.... . since then..everytime i am hungry at school..i go on yelp and read boiling crab reviews : (
