ReviewID: 4Ww4A5y73nuZchY1rDcsNw
ReviewerID: fP5-u5yZ683B0Mdd7Zjb6A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
Ciudad, I can't pronounce your name, but no bother. You are delicious!. . Food: This was the sole restaurant I hit up during DineLA week. For shame. At least this was better than my experience last year. A group of friends and I sampled everything on the prix fixe menu. To start off, we were given two kinds of crunchy flatbread with olive and hummus dips (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). The olive dip was okay, but the hummus was fantastic. We were also given a bean appetizer that I have never had before. They season the beans, still in their individual pods with a savory lemon juice (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). It's sort of like getting edamame, only better. Next, we burned through the appetizers from the prix fixe lineup. Of note were the shrimp tamale negro (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) and the spinach empanada (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). I wasn't able to sample the empanada, but I heard it was so good from my friend that she couldn't stop thinking about it for a week. The tamale is black inside. Not sure how they color it (maybe squid ink or black corn?), but I really wanted more. It is possibly the best tamale I have ever had. The entrees we tried included the pollo Ciudad (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ), extremely tender chicken covered in a delicious green sauce, Niman Ranch pork carnitas (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) which were tender and drenched in a sweet fruit sauce, and the artic char (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ), a fish which tastes and looks eerily like salmon. I had the char and indulged in the perfectly cooked and seasoned fish, as well as the bed of soft barley soaking in a rich green sauce covered in pine nuts. The only downside of the meal in terms of the food. None of the desserts were good. This is a serious comment because I hardly ever bash dessert. The torta tres leches did not at all taste like tres leches and had this awful tropical flavor to it (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). It was gross and I didn't finish it. The chocolate cake was hard as a rock.... . Atmosphere: I love the way this place looks on the inside. It feels as if a part of a contemporary art museum was ripped out and transplanted inside Ciudad. The lighting is a mellow yellow and everything is wrapped in amorphous blobs of color. There's also a patio where they serve paella. Yummers!. . Service: Pretty slow even though there weren't that many customers. They also forgot to bring my friend's dessert out. . . Synopsis: Admittedly, the food is very good, but the quantity/price ratio is severely disappointing as is the dessert. If you come, avoid dessert and go for the crazy good appetizers. I bet a tapas meal here would be most satisfying.
