ReviewID: 4xbcl0j033tox24cpi-hKw
ReviewerID: oLBGZYLpgqibClTaXjMpQQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
What I love: Nothing.. . What I don't love: The overrated Hainan Chicken and Rice.. . One star.  Yes, just one.  "But Paola, everyone RAVES about the Hainan Chicken and Rice!  It's so juicy and the dipping sauces go perfectly with the chicken!!!"  That is exactly why I am giving this place one star: because the Hainan Chicken and Rice are nothing to rave about.  Not at all.  . . I just saw a Bourdain episode on Singapore.  He was booed by a conference room full of Singaporeans when he revealed to them that he'd never tried chicken and rice.  I respect Bourdain's opinion.  So when he finally tried the dish and raved about it, I was intrigued.  Then a couple of days ago, a friend mentioned Savoy Kitchen.  I'm trying to start a monthly eating club, and Savoy was to be the setting of our first meeting.  I was pleasantly surprised to learn that Savoy's specialty was chicken and rice.  How perfect. . . I spent much of today reading fellow Yelpers' reviews of this place.  Most of what I read reached the same conclusion: "Everything you've read and heard about Savoy Kitchen is true!  The Hainan chicken is absolutely delicious.  The chicken is tender and juicy and the rice is flavorful and cooked in broth."  Needless to say, I was excited.  That's what Yelp is for: a space for discerning palates to tell you what's worth eating and spending money on.  . . Yelp did me wrong with this one.. . We ordered:. . 1) Shrimp spring rolls. 2) Hainan Chicken and Rice. 3) Seafood casserole + pasta. 4) Chrysanthemum tea + Diet Coke. . Shrimp spring rolls were good.  Tea + Diet Coke, you can't go wrong.. . Hainan Chicken was so disappointing.  Chicken was juicy, but NOT delicious.  Just because chicken is tender and juicy doesn't make it delicious.  It tasted bland.  Hendrik P. put it best when he said he thought the simplicity of the dish would be its redeeming quality.  But it didn't happen.  Not even close.. . The dipping sauces added little, if anything, to the dish.  Okay, soy sauce is a staple, nothing extraordinary there.  Ginger gave the chicken some flavor, so that was okay.  But the chili sauce added zero, zip, nada.  Chili flakes in chili oil or something spicier would have been a lot better.  Unfortunately, the sauces fell way below par.  If you're going to serve boiled chicken, your sauces have to be spectacular.  Look at the French. Sauces are everything in French cooking.  Savoy failed.. . The seafood casserole + pasta were only good because the chicken and rice were so bad.  The cream sauce was too rich, and as "sinfully delicious" as it may sound, a battered and fried filet of fish should rarely, if ever, find itself covered and smothered in cheesy, cream sauce.  The dish needed some major contrast, and fat on fat did not provide that.   . . Here's my biggest gripe: Everyone is entitled to their opinions, that's fine.  I respect that.  But Savoy Kitchen has a TON of reviews--579 at the present time.  How is it that a vast majority of Yelpers speak so highly of the chicken and rice?  I am struggling to reconcile my experience with the Yelps.  I don't get it.  But it's all good.  To each his own.  Hopefully I'll have the good fortune to travel to Singapore someday.  Perhaps I'll have a better experience with chicken and rice elsewhere.
