ReviewID: 4XQrTc8_pXZdBHrxpusaRw
ReviewerID: JUjsVSryk1cQLr2xEtiu4Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wishbone
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I went here with my best friend wanting to try a new restaurant. I found it in my handy dandy Time Out Chicago Guide Book I bought. So needless to say I was really excited to put it to use. Anywho... I must say the staff was very friendly and being that it was a Tuesday night, there was no wait. Everyone seems to be giving rave reviews about the cheesy grits so my friend ordered them as an appetizer. Neither of us cared for them and were in fact quite disappointed. . We both ordered drinks. I got my normal Cosmo and he got the Electric Lemonade. Both drinks were very strong. Mine tasted like straight vodka. But I felt like I got my money's worth in that sense. . For dinner, I ordered the meat loaf with the rosemary gravy. For my sides I got the Mac &amp; Cheese and the greens. The meatloaf was mediocre. The mac &amp; cheese was ok. I make better at home. The greens tasted like they had a tad too much vinegar in them but were still tolerable. . My friend had the pulled pork, which was really the only BBQ thing on the menu and he LOVES his BBQ. However he was slightly disappointed when his plate just had a bunch of pulled pork on it and no sauce. They served the BBQ sauce in a little cup on the side. For his sides he got the mac and cheese and the home fries which he found to be just ok. . We both agree that the best part of the whole meal were the corn muffins. I could have just eaten those and left happy. They were quite yummy. . Even though we were both pretty full, we couldn't resist trying the desserts. I had the praline cheese cake which was totally homemade, definitely not made somewhere else or out of a box. The praline topping was very tasty. I should have gotten some coffee to go with it. My friend ordered the bread pudding and said that it was very good. . . All in all, I was a little disappointed. I expected more options and better food. I don't see myself running back there anytime soon. I might give it another shot just for the cheesecake and the corn muffins. Those two things and the friendly staff--3stars.
