ReviewID: 4xVeG1XH_h7hgo1xj-e2Eg
ReviewerID: 1SpiZBXHv5LYUcAsFthFiQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
the clean white walls and gold signage in roman font makes you think that this is a really expensive formal restaurant, but when you peek inside you can see there is a take out counter, patisserie, and bar in addition to the restaurant.. . upon stepping in, my friend and i were taken by the selection of foods at the take out counter, bakery, and patisserie.  we were quickly greeted by 2 hostesses who guided us to our seats at the restaurant.  it's so open inside: you get a great view of their stone oven where the thin crust pizzas are baked, the kitchen is free for you to look in to see what is cooking, and the whole flow of the restaurant transitions seamlessly from the takeout, to the bar, to the sit down area.  it really is a hybrid of joan's on 3rd, dean and deluca, and pizzeria mozza.. . ok, back to the food: we got the napoli pizza (red onions and mushrooms), louie salad (jumbo shrimp, heart of palm, iceberg lettuce, shallots, and avocados), and fried calamari.  The fried calamari was ok, but i really liked the salad and the pizza.  me and my friend were having a nice heart to heart, so we erroneously allowed the pizza to cool before we ate it...something i don't recommend.  next time we'll learn to eat and talk at the same time.  hhahaah.  the whole meal for the 2 of us was about $36.. . service was really good: our hostess and waitress took the time to learn our names and remember them.  they were both so helpful in suggesting where to sit and what to order.  i'm sure it helps that we are customers eating there on day 2 since opening, but it's great to know they took the time to make sure service was on top of things.. . on the way out we stopped by the patisserie and picked up parisian macarons.  because it was so late (they were closing everything up in the takeout side), the guy gave a whole box ON THE HOUSE.  i'm sure this has to do with the fact that you can't really keep macarons very long and that bottega louie just opened a couple days ago.  but still, very nice.  and the raspberry macaron was very good btw...not quite as good as boule (R.I.P.), but still very good.
