ReviewID: 4YviJNDyVvXv2-J1mYUO9w
ReviewerID: PutMYRE0vSv3vDQ2LnURqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
After wandering about downtown for a few hours, I was feeling peckish and told Soap Opera Dude (SOD) that it was high time to have high tea or my low blood sugar would lay him low in the street.. . Through chance, our tour had brought us across the street from this renovated building.  Previously the Brooks Brothers store, the owners gutted and expanded the space for Bottega Louie and made the upper floors into loft-style apartments for sale.. . The interior is very Audrey Hepburn-esque:  white walls, few columns, concrete floors, super-high ceilings (veritably, at train station height), simple dark wood tables and chairs, glass pastry cases, pizza oven, and classic chic decor.  The host greets you at an oversized rococo office desk - and asks for your name to write in the book, even if there is no wait.  The staff is turned out handsomely in crisp white shirts, black ties, slacks, and aprons.  And, there is a very generous staff-to-patron ratio - the owners are definitely doing their part to absorb the local workforce.. . SOD and I pored over the menu while one half of the team offered us a choice of still or sparkling water [gratis].  The other member, Brenna, greeted us warmly, bantered with us, and took our order to split a delectable fennel sausage pizza ($16).  . . I asked the male team member if he could recommend something for now since I was eager to stuff my face; he suggested the portobello fries but Brenna quickly jumped in and said that it was available during dinner only.  She offered her own suggestion of the basket of mini-muffins (six for $3) and I agreed since I wanted to try life eating dessert first.  SOD had a bottled Coke ($2.50) and I had a New Jersey Boylan's black cherry soda, sweetened with pure cane sugar, ($3) to go with our meal.. . The place was a beehive of activity at 3 PM on a Saturday afternoon and the noise level was elevated without being obtrusive.  Usually, I am turned off by high noise levels but the mix of elegance, airiness, and service warmth negated this for me.  A wide cross-section of people and dress were here yet everyone was treated at an equally high level by the ample staff.. . On the way out, we checked out the large glass pastry cases where toque-wearing and white-smocked staff were doing a bustling business.  Having never been to Europe, I'd imagine that this is what a lot of Parisian patisseries would look like.  Everything looked fresh, tempting, and divine but we had no room for any of it.. . Check out the listing's pictures to get a better flavor of what I and 826 others have been raving about.  And, if you're in downtown LA, stop in to offset low blood sugar levels and the violent tendencies that come with it.  It is the civilized thing to do.
