ReviewID: 5-1OTSBkFK3EL4zY3SAU3w
ReviewerID: 4X2ND1JTZZ7qih1KXaSdNA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
After hearing all the rave reviews and being touted as one of the best steakhouses, I must say I was honestly a bit disappointed.  If there were half star ratings, I would give it a 3.5, but since there aren't, I'll round down and give it a 3.  I figure I'd be fair and under rate an overrated restaurant.. . The decor was underwhelming and unnecessarily dark.  If the dim setting was an attempt at a seductive and romantic ambience, it was shamefully offset by the raucous noise levels.  Also, the tables for two were all placed too close to each other, and I felt that the couples to the sides of us were about to throw them bows.  Wow, based on what I just described, you'd have thought Ludacris was up in there Disturbing Tha Peace.. . For starters, we got oysters.  They had 2 types, the main difference being that one was bigger than the other.  Of course we went with the bigger ones, but they came out pretty small, so it makes you wonder if our server mistakenly brought out the wrong ones...or maybe "bigger" really just meant not as tiny.. . The steak (bone-in ribeye, medium rare) was baffling.  For some odd reason, the center of the meat was confusingly tough.  The outer parts, however, were just magical (soft, tender, juicy, flavorful) and they slithered down oh so smoothly.  If only the entire steak was like this, but it was struggling to find its identity, which left me ambivalent.  It was weird.. . To complement the meat, the sides were just as lackluster.  The gorgonzola mac n cheese was alright, but you need to eat it quickly or else it'll cool down and harden on you.  Then it solidifies into this unpliable mass with a viscosity of rice krispies treats.  And the lobster mashed potatoes? More like lobsided mashed potatoes...it was misleading.  All the lobster pieces were floating at the top, and you never found another piece below the surface, no matter how deep you dove.  Good but definitely not worth it.. . Overall, I just don't think it truly lived up to its reputation, but again this is all just based on a singular instance. Hopefully, the case of the confusing steak was an isolated one, but I wasn't impressed enough to consider going back and giving it another chance.  So that means I'm just left with this lasting impression of an A-OK experience.
