ReviewID: 5-VdscKvX_aevpjzausMbA
ReviewerID: azPMZoWkxdyjpnFul3aBQw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Moody&#39;s Pub
Category: Pubs
Disappointed, disillusioned, disenchanted...and that was just at the burger.  This place has been acclaimed as having one of the best burgers in Chicago.  I read it on Chicago Magazine, and other Chicago publications tend to agree.  I really hope that I went on a very, very, very, very, very, bad day...but I think that's just how it is at Moody's Pub.  Upon entering we stood there, and the bartender and waitress just looked at us.  The sign that stated "Please seat yourself" was not really in plain sight.  . . We quickly caught on and found a booth by a window.  It was dark in there, and I can understand if that is the look and feel they are going for.  There is clearly a beer garden outside, but its still too cold to be open.   There was one waitress for the whole place, and I try to give people the benefit of the doubt...but she was not good at all.  She never bothered to stop at our table to say hello/take our order, so we just sat there for a while until I flagged her down. . . I ordered the Moody Blue Burger, and I was hoping that the food can somehow validate all the good reviews that I have been hearing about this place.  We ordered onion rings, and I must say that they were pretty good.  There are no free refills on drinks, so I would suggest ordering a pitcher if you come in a group.  The free peanuts at the table helped us pass the time, and I made a quick trip to Chase Bank down the block since this place was cash only. There is a ATM inside, but I don't think it was working.. . I got back and my burger was waiting for me.  The blue cheese was slathered on top of the burger patty, and the other toppings were off to the side.  I quickly put my burger together, and took my first bite.  I found the burger patty to be tasteless, and it was dry.  The only flavor I could clearly taste was the blue cheese.  I was very disappointed at the food here.  I have had better burgers at dive places, and bbq's.  I couldn't believe that this was voted one of the best burgers in the city.. . As we finished up, the horrible service just continued.  I can understand if the waitress was frustrated that she was the only server there, but there is no excuse for the bad service we received.  I had to flag her down for our check, and I clearly put the money on top of the check, at the edge of the table.  She passed up our table several times, and never bothered to pick it up.  We ended up having to go to the bar and pay.  That was a perfect ending for a horrible dining experience.. . If the highlight of your meal was the onion rings and free peanuts, then what does it say about the place???  The burger was bad, and the service was beyond horrible.  I cant say I'll ever come back to this place, even if someone else offers to pick up the tab.  I would have at least given this place 2 stars, but with service that bad...it barely deserves 1 star
