ReviewID: 522W8aJdNcbn-wGKii7r8g
ReviewerID: NxJ9zTAwDYFsKru8z0DqLg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
MAKE SURE YOU'RE ON TIME FOR YOUR RESERVATION!!!. . The food was good, but I didn't really get to enjoy it because of their rude service.. . Party of 4, a reunion of sorts, 2 driving from OC (as far as Laguna Niguel) for a 6pm reservation.  One was 5 minutes early- she was told she couldn't be seated until all 4 arrived.  The 2nd was 10 minutes late, the last 2 were half an hour late due to OC and LA traffic.  Luckily, they were "kind" enough to seat the first two who arrived around 6:15pm and proceeded to pressure and rush them into placing their order right away.  After some good pizza, we were promptly kicked out of the restaurant at 7:30pm even though we were about to order 2 more pizzas!. . The general manager told us that if we had been on time for our reservation, she would've allowed us to sit and lounge as long as we desired, but since we were late we had to leave.  After she continued to lecture us for about 5 minutes, and after paying our bill, we suggested that they make a point to tell customers about their strict policies when reservations were made.  At that point, she said something condescending to the effect: "...I think that If you go to other restaurants, you'll find that most people are on time for their reservations..."  I told her that 2 of us drove up from OC to come to this restaurant, came across horrible traffic, and I also politely asked her please not to assume that I had never been to a restaurant or made reservations before.. . i wanted to remind her that she was working in the SERVICE industry, and that even if mario was making my pizza himself, it didn't give her the right to have such a horrendous attitude.  but giving her the benefit of the doubt, she may have just been in a bad mood because she didn't get that soap opera role she probably auditioned for earlier in the day, or found out that her SMC AA degree wasn't actually worth that much.. . Good food, but make sure to stay on their good side by BEING ON TIME!
