ReviewID: 53jvKIB71LMlCVDyQhLM8A
ReviewerID: jfZx-prefMuNHJh4eMUksg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
I don't like this place.  I was there once and had a bad experience so I'm never going back.  Did my bad experience warrant a boycott?  Read on and be the judge.. . Here is the story:  My wife and I were going to take our daughter there to celebrate her graduation from college.  It was an occasion.  I had researched the restaurant in advance and was aware of their dress code so we were all dressed appropriately: occasion dresses for my wife and daughter, sport coat, tie, etc. for me.  We had a reservation. When we arrived we were treated nicely and given a good table toward the back of the first floor just to the right of a party of four.  All was going well until about midway through our salads when this guy, I'll call him Fred, walks in off the street, spots the party next to us and joins them.  Now, Fred is not dressed for a restaurant.  Fred is dressed for beach volleyball; Hawaiian shirt, shorts, rubber sandals.  He is perhaps ten years younger than the rest of the group, but they welcome him warmly and invite him to eat with them.  Very soon a waiter appeared and while I did not hear the exact words that were said it was clear the waiter informed Fred of his inappropriate attire.  The party protested and assured the waiter that Fred was so highly evolved that he didn't need to accommodate any arbitrary dress code.  The waiter left and within a few minutes another man - presumably higher up the chain of command - came over to discuss Fred's attire, or lack of it.  Again the party protested, and again the employee backed down.  The next man to visit the table was clearly the head honcho, the big cheese, the main dude, the capo de tutti capos.  His appearance brings with it a sudden change in both attitude and policy; he is prostrate with humility, absolutely grief-stricken about the behavior of his employees, and all but grovels at Fred's feet.  Not only does Fred stay, he comps the table a round of drinks and dessert.. . So, who is this Fred that he can bring about so sudden a change in restaurant policy?  Beats the hell out of me.  He wasn't Brad Pitt, I know that.  What was it about him that commanded such obeisance?   I'll tell you one thing for sure, he wasn't you or me.  If you or I had shown up dressed similarly we'd have been directed to the nearest Denny's, no ifs, ands or buts.  Did we get free drinks? No.  Did we get the time and attention of four or five different employees?  No.  Did Mr. Big come over to our table to apologize or ask us how we felt about sitting next to Gilligan and the Howells?  No.  We didn't have the juice. . . Now I'm not big on dress codes.  I'm a casual kind of guy.  But my feeling is that if a restaurant, or anyplace else, has a dress code it should cover everyone, not just regular folks who lack "connections".. . Am I pissed?  Damn right!  Not only will I not go to Crustacean again, I am going to encourage you not to as well.  Odds are you don't have the juice either, and at those prices they need more than a pretend dress-code and koi.
