ReviewID: 53Q7-XAy43FfskPS4sP8tA
ReviewerID: XsUHLtb7z8cLA3XnN3V34Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
The Kogi Kraze has died down a bit since it first came out, but that doesn't change the fact that the Kogi truck rocks my Korean socks off.. . I don't know if the lines are still torturously long, but regardless of how long you have to wait, it's worth it.  I know lots of people give bad reviews because they get all crabby, waiting in line and all, but keep your chin up, and wait out the line.  It's gonna be awesome, I promise.. . Everyone in both the Mexican and Korean community agrees that both cuisines are probably the best cuisines in the world.  I like to think that the culinary affinity shared between Mexican and Korean food is much like the affinity shared between Italian and French food.  Their flavors seem to feed off of each other, and while Italian and French food go well with wine, Mexican and Korean food go well with hot sauce.. . After waiting about thirty minutes in line, my friend and I finally made it to the front.  We wanted to make the most of our first experience, so we ordered almost everything.  We got two of each taco (Korean Short Rib, Korean Spicy Pork, Korean Chicken, and Korean Tofu) and we also got a Kogi Kimchi Quesadilla.. . Of the tacos, the Korean Short Rib was by far the best.  The beef was perfectly cooked, and the marinade was not too sweet.  The rest of the tacos seemed a bit underwhelming and overcooked for my tastes.  I think the chicken could be a real winner if it was seasoned with a bit of chili paste.  The bed of vegetables that sits on top of the tacos is lightly seasoned with sesame oil, which gives the tacos a nice balance.. . The Kimchi Quesadilla stole the show.  I know what you're thinking.  Kimchi?  Quesadilla?  Yes, the Kimchi Quesadilla overcomes all doubts and explodes in your mouth.  Topped with a little bit of sesame seed and an addictive spicy sauce, all the flavors come together amazingly well, and the spice and sweetness of the different ingredients balance playfully around the tortilla.  What does that even mean?  Go and find out.. . Haven't been to Kogi truck yet?  Well get in your truck and Gogi already.. . GET:  Korean Short Rib Taco, Kimchi Quesadilla
