ReviewID: 56BPzZrkhza2IZS3RoEZVQ
ReviewerID: 6QLuXNLUEnSHHFKIqf4c2w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Parish
Category: Cajun/Creole
I had a Sunday dinner upstairs in the dining room at Parish.  I'd made a few brunches, and have done the market, but this was my first dinner.  This review is strictly about dining upstairs.. . The first thing I noticed is that the menu is very, very unfriendly to vegetarians.  Very.  Not only were there very few vegetable-only items (one I think...and it was: "Seasonal Vegetables", yawn.), but there were no descriptions of items to let you know what was in them.  I'm vegAquarian, but it turns out the fish selection was cooked with chicken livers --- whaaa? *sigh*  I apologized to the chicken and ate it anyway.  The meatloaf that my date ordered, it turns out, was made of meat.  So she was happy.. . The second thing I noticed was that our waiter was compelled by some inner demon to describe everything in annoying detail and with faux-dramatic flair.  I felt he was trying to pretend to a level of snooty upscale that was somewhat reflected in the prices, but clashed with the overall theme and style of the place.  The waiter's demonic possession also seemed to include the need to push oysters and a glass of $14 off-menu wine on me...he spent the first 7 minutes of our conversation (monologue?) describing them to us, but never asked us what kind of wine I preferred,  what I had in mind to eat, etc.. . OK, now you're wondering, "Wtf?, you gave the place 4 stars."  As I mentioned I ordered the fish.  The "Enchanted Mountain Trout"...enchanted?  OMG.  It was AWESOME!  I blame the chicken livers and this crazy citrus butter sauce...not lemon, citrus.  It was amazingly good, perfectly cooked, with the citrus adding a nice zip and sour pucker.  Apparently the meatloaf was quite good too.  The food was so good, I forgot all about the goofiness of the waiter until I wrote this review.. . I should also note, the chef did a token drive-by to ensure the food was to our satisfaction.  Nice touch.. . So.  Not vegetarian friendly.  Annoying waitstaff.  A little expensive.  But at the end of the day, we came for great food, and they delivered.  Props to the new chef.  Tighten up the overall experience, and we have 5 stars in the making.
