ReviewID: 56iCJotmp-ck2zCFdwjfZw
ReviewerID: 5UbXII0XZdNorCN9ByyZ8g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
Some of these reviews are much ado about nothing, but Green Zebra is not. I ate there recently and loved every second of it.. . Initially, I was confused by the ordering system. The very polite and helpful waiter explained it to us, but for some reason I was confused and thought we were ordering 3 or 4 dishes to be shared around the table. It's actually 3 or 4 per person. Once you understand how the menu is laid out (and if you follow the well-considered process), you're guaranteed a delicious and satisfying culinary experience.. . I began with the Sweet onion and garlic soup with truffle cream. As the lovely and talented V. C. said, this is the best soup I've ever had. The presentation is really cool (they bring the bowl with the truffle cream in the bottom, then pour the soup over it from a teapot of all things), and the flavor was perfect. I could not ask for better soup without, perhaps, Jaques Pepin himself preparing it for me.. . My second dish was the Saffron risotto with summer squash and heirloom tomatos. Again, lovely. Light, buttery risotto, crisp and fresh veggies full of flavors that contrasted each other nicely without overpowering each other.. . My final dish was the Slow roasted shittake mushrooms with crispy potato and savoy cabbage. In terms of the food progression, I felt this was an ideal plate to end with, as it was certainly the heaviest and most savoury of the three, although it was still beautifully textured. The mushrooms were wrapped in the cabbage (sort of like maki rolls in a way) with the grated and lightly friend potato in the center.. . After this, plus a glass of riesling (which complimented my foods nicely... I seem to be developing a good head for wine), I was well satisfied without feeling stuffed. I was past the point of consuming one of their delicious-sounding desserts, so I instead opted for an after-dinner cup of coffee. Their coffees are from Intelligentsia, a magnificent choice, and I had the "El Diablo", a dark, rich brew that did a great job of capping it off. . . This place is very classy, yet not at all pretentious. Although it is dressy (business casual) some guy at the next table over from us showed up in jeans and a wrinkly t-shirt and they didn't turn him away. The waitstaff is probably the best thing about the place. They are plentiful (it's fairly small, yet the staff is large and they give lots of individual attention to their patrons) and very professional. Our own server was outstanding and we left him a fairly generous tip as a reward (I felt he earned it at least in part because my companions for the evening opted to buck the carefully-crafted system, and he was willing to go along with this even though it clearly made his job a bit harder).. . Presentation: Each dish is brought out to you one by one, with about 20 minutes in between. The server tells you what the dish is, places it and offers to refill drinks. After about 20 minutes, assuming most of the table have eaten their first plate, he returns, removes all used plates and utensils, places fresh utensils, and presents your second dish. Repeat for third dish. Once or twice, another server will come by and offer you bread (which was really yummy).. . Our party of three paid about $188.00 for our food, drinks, tax, tip, etc. This place is a bit more expensive than your ordinary restaurant, which is why I haven't given them 5 stars, but I think if you're either quite wealthy, or if you only come here a couple times a year as a special treat, it's well within a reasonable price range (particularly considering the quality of the food and attentiveness of the waitstaff).. . They even played cool music (The Smiths).
