ReviewID: 57C8hJlVyP3CCtXX14hpfA
ReviewerID: wp0ya-F5FU05QutPd_4c7w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Been hearing about this place for a while so decided to take my foreign cousin to give it a try. . . - Location: a bit difficult to spot even via my iphone navigation, missed it twice while driving by! If you come from the 5S freeway it should be on your right side so look carefully! . . - Parking: was difficult as well! meter only parking across the street and street parking in the nearby neighborhood but WATCH for street cleaning day esp if you want to come here on wed/friday!. . - Service/ordering: order at the register and drink menu only available inside (not on the menu).  Menu has a variety of stuff: breakfast, salad, sandwiches, desserts you name it! They also have a wide selection of baked goodies next to the register! . . -Food: 3 of us ordered a crab cake sandwich with onion rings, breakfast quesadilla, and a peach crepe with espresso syrup.. . ~ Crab cake sandwich: really good quality, can actually taste the crab! The sauce that came with it was perfect with the sandwich.  The side onion ring was just ok.  It tasted different from the typical onion ring you find at the fast food joint/cafe: a bit more floury sorta like a corn dog texture.  A lot of people liked it though.. . ~Breakfast quesadilla: pretty typical, didn't find this dish extra delicious.  The salsa was included in a cute little tin jar but it was hard to obtain it with a fork : (.  the side fruit was very fresh though.  . ~Peach crepe drizzled with espresso syrup: this dish was my favorite out of all three things we ordered! It was very unique and not super sweet.  The peach was very fresh and it pairs perfectly with the espresso sauce!  They even decorated the dish with few espresso beans! . . Drinks: We ordered pomegranate signature hot chocolate, espresso, and a vanilla latte.  The signature was not so signature! Couldn't take the pomegranate and it wasn't very hot! Espresso was just ok and the vanilla latte wasn't impressive either.  A definite improvement is necessary ! . . Loved this cute cafe!  DEFINITELY a great place to spend a sunny afternoon with small group of friends/family etc.  Tables are small so large group would be difficult to accommodate.
