ReviewID: 5A1v8X0lgQOcobyVG1vbqw
ReviewerID: F_NG8ZaNVriV_hujoOejIA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Jerry&#39;s Sandwiches
Category: Sandwiches
Edit 10/14/2007. I am pleased to announce that I am upping my stars for Jerry's.  From 2 to 4, nice progress.  I decided to give the place another chance.  Honestly, I couldn't stay away from their sandwiches, and it is just too close of a location for me.  This time companion and I dined in.  It was packed for a sunday afternoon but luckily we got seating by the lounge area.  I was nervous because some of the servers seemed confused and there was even a pair arguing about whose table was whose.  Anyway our waiter did a marvelous job getting our sandwiches into our hungry little mouths.  He even thought it was an outrage that I didn't get pickles with my last carryout order.  I still feel like this place looks like a trendy ski lodge, the service can be dodgy, but the sandwiches are undeniably tasty.  . . I've never been to the Jerry's on Madison so I was excited when they opened one right down the street for us.  When Rachel and I arrived to get our snacks for our Dynasty season 2 marathon we were greeted by a rather surly and unfriendly hostess.  She seemed to busy to doing nothing to see what we wanted.  We informed her that we were doing carry out and she heaved some menus at us.  We ordered and then sat down to wait.  A very long wait in fact.  Who knew sandwiches would take so long to prepare?  I felt like I was trapped in some pseudo swanky Aspen ski lodge craphole listening to some weird live version of a Beatles cover band playing on cd.  30 minutes later our sandwiches arrived and the hostess snottily dropped them by us.  Luckily we examined our order because they messed it up.  Some guy apologized and said it would only take 5 minutes to make a new sandwich.  So why in god's name would it take 30 minutes in the first place?  The sandwich was delicious but the service and the experience was not.  I think i get better treatment at Quizno's.. . 5 stars for the sandwich. 0 stars for the service. for the sake of dynasty night 2 stars total. Geez that show makes me catty
