ReviewID: 5B3U99lzzB6HMxUabCu7JQ
ReviewerID: MiivCWuxD5gm29HAjYVciQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
Well, I am now the 176th reviewer of this place. And like everyone else, I give this place praises. This was my first trip here. I've been hearing about this place since I moved down to the L.A. area two years ago. People at work raved as well as friends. I finally had a chance to try this place a few nights back. . . My reason for eating here? A musical show at the Ahmanson. So, time was of the essence to get ourselves to a show on time. The crowd inside the restaurant was sufficiently spread out, so there were many booths and tables to choose from with many empties abundant. This was nice because I had heard plenty of horror stories of how crowded this place can get. But I guess that's more of a lunchtime thing. . . The first thing I noticed was a line backing up the stairs we had just walked through. I kept hearing in my ear, "Go to the right, go to the right." I understood why. Everyone was crowded on the left. So we vied for our spot at the counter on the right. We split up to make things easy for ordering and finding a seat. My order was predestined here. It was the beef dip with lemonade or nothing else. Although the pork and lamb dips sounded yummy, and I tried to convince my friend to get me one, he insisted that the beef was the way to go. So, I left the order in his hands to acquire a table for us. . . About five minutes later, here he comes with a tray full of beef dipped sandwiches, lemonade, and a plate of coleslaw (that was for me). I have to give my friend props for ordering the beef dip. It was definitely yummy. The one thing I really liked about my sandwich was that it was simple. Just a slight dip on the top slice of bread with the meat (not piled too high). It was a manageable sandwich that filled one's tummy pleasantly. I even tried the spicy mustard on the table for half of the sandwich. It was like hot mustard but with something else mixed-in. I couldn't quite figure out what gave it that reddish tint. But it was good for what I had of it. The coleslaw was very crisp, cold, and fresh. I'm not a big fan of coleslaw, but do enjoy it when the dressing is a bit on the vinegary side like this. I'm not a fan of too much mayo in the coleslaw, so this was absolutely perfect. :) I even began having visions of adding coleslaw to my sandwich. I thought that sounded like a good combo to try on another visit.. . I'm so glad I've now had a chance to experience Philippe's. The slightly sawdust strewn floor wasn't how I imagined it from the descriptions I got from the people at work. For some reason, I thought it was be a bit thicker in covering the floor. The saw dust sort of adds a rustic quality to the place making you feel like you don't have to worry about spilling things on the floor. Very casual sort of place. A no frills, no muss place. Definitely my kind of eatery.
