ReviewID: 5cYmR6vLWn6N7ttB1cWfbA
ReviewerID: InF1h_4LvMc9hwRUMDm5QA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Nacional 27
Category: Latin American
Great, fun place for food, drinks, and dancing.  Having been informed that it was a special occasion, Nacional 27 prepared special menus for us with "Happy Birthday Wendy!" across the top.. . The cocktail menu was really extensive and everything sounded really good.  Upon the waiter's recommendation, I ordered the mango sangria which unfortunately did not taste like alcohol, and I say "unfortunately" because I downed two of them and paid the price later.  It seemed like my friends really enjoyed their caipirinhas as well.. . The prix fixe menu started with an appetizer platter of chicken &amp; beef skewers, smoked chicken empanadas, vegetarian croquettes, and shrimp &amp; scallop ceviche.  I was starving, so I found everything very tasty, especially the tender beef skewers.. . I ordered the grilled salmon for my entree and was pleased with my selection.  The salmon was cooked rare - it was flaky, tender, and had an appetizing citrus flavour.  I also sampled my friends' entrees and found the skirt steak to be the winner among the dishes.  It was marinated in their special steak sauce and had exceptional flavour.  The NY strip paled a little in comparison as the flavour wasn't as good and was oddly a lot chewier than the strip steak.  The slow roasted pork cubano was tender but pretty dry.. . Dessert was again a sampler platter and there was more than enough to go around.  Of the desserts, I found the passionfruit sorbet the best and most refreshing, though the coffee creme brulee was quite tasty as well.  The chocolate cake was a little too bitter for me and the flan tasted way too much of cinnamon (something I dislike).. . Surprisingly, all the dishes were of good size (I expected small portions like at some fancy restaurants) and we were stuffed by the end of the meal.  The only reason that I am docking off a star was because the service wasn't great - it took them a really long time to get our drinks, take our orders, and bring us the check.  The prices were reasonable for our meals - averaging to a little under $60pp.. . The dance floor opened at about 10pm, and empowered by our alcoholic hazes, we unabashedly showed off our moves.  My friend tried to teach me to salsa but I was two sheets to the wind.. . Overall, a great place for celebration.  I would definitely come back.
