ReviewID: 5dXBk-VwAbFkqfPwjCD5vw
ReviewerID: NXUdf0i5qOBo45JgXPMBTQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Eat It OR Beat It?. **EAT IT!!**. w/ caution . . So after ALLLLLLL the hype of this food truck craze, which I believe Kogi started, I knew I had to make a twitter account just to track this truck down! ... which I later found out you could just go on their website to find their next location (silly me)!. . My first time trying the Kogi truck was at The Brig in Abboy Kinney on a Saturday afternoon. I was expecting long lines but I was fortunate to only have to wait for 10-15 minutes; apparently it gets more crowded at night for all the late-nite snackers, etc. . . So before ordering, I was checking out what others had ordered and by the looks of what I saw, it was well worth my money to go for the $5 burrito instead of the $2 taco. The burritos were much larger and had more content inside than did the tacos. So I say, if you're having a big appetite, go for the burrito, if not, go for the tacos. . . Short Rib Burrito: . This was tasty and interesting to say the least. Inside the burrito were some eggs mixed in with Korean-style mild mixed veggies (similar to Kimchi but more finely diced). It was tasty, but nothing that "wow-ed" my hopes, dreams, and expectations. . . Spicy Pork Burrito:. This was a little more tasty than the short rib burrito. The pork inside was marinated with Korean-style spices (similar to kimchi spices) in addition to the same veggies put inside of the short-rib.. . CONCLUSION:. Overall, Kogi is definitely an experience and food worth trying but definitely not to die for. The flavors are intricate and innovative and understandably amazing if you are hungry or have the munchies or drunchies at 12am midnight. For many people, this is a different style of food and for some a whole new world. It's a shame that this kind of commercialization is what it takes to start the whole food truck frenzy when in fact I've always LOVED "roach-coaches"; as food trucks were once referred to as.. . If you want real tacos from the originators of food trucks, try the authentic Mexican taco trucks found alongside the roads of Los Angeles. And for all my non-Korean folks out there... please don't go around telling people or yourself that you've tried Korean food just because of this truck! If you want real authentic Korean food, go down to Koreatown! . . So, I say... "EAT IT" w/ caution (just because you have to try it ONCE!)
