ReviewID: 5g_MF8zOt2fDT-5Xa8pU_g
ReviewerID: CSloaI6OswGpKlr4DkyxEg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Yeah! Burger
Category: Burgers
Ok, here's the deal, I am not going to beat around the bush on this one.  The line to order is stupid.  It is long, the girl taking the orders is in no hurry, the people ordering are all paying separately, and I have to go back to work.  Sorry Yeah!  Missed me this time (about a week ago).  Strike 1!  . . Well, I decided to swing back in tonight for dinner with wifey and daughter.  Line was in the same spot as last time (by the door) and all the same factors were still in effect.  This time we waited it out.  I basically made my mind up at that moment that this was it, ONE AND DONE!  So don't hold back on the ordering because, this is it.  . . We finally made it to the front (read: 25 minutes to the front. REALLY!?!), got our order in and proceeded to find a table.  We have to sit outside (it's only 100 degrees today) because no tables are available in the small seating area inside (well maybe medium sized area inside).  We ordered food at 7:37pm and it arrived at the table at 7:57pm.  So forty five minutes to order and start eating.  STRIKE 2!. . I want to be fair.  The food is organic this and grass fed that.  Heady ketchup BRAH!  Quality drink options for my 3 year old, PLUS!  All good, GREAT even.  But when that quality food I just spent $35 on is not prepared up to $35 heady food standards (beef is cooked thru and flavorless, tomato and lettuce was average at best, fries were dry, $1.00 for nitrate free bacon that was barely there like bacon bits more, bun was great though), it leaves me with a bad taste in my mouth, literally.  Honestly, I could go to Houston's and spend $14 on a burger and fries and a soda and feel much better about it even though I know its not grass fed beef and H&amp;F buns etc.  . . Last thing.  If I am paying $35 for burgers, I don't want to clean up my own tray, I don't want to fill my own drinks, and I want to be able to choose my temperature (read: medium).  I mean this is heady grass fed beef DUUUDDDEE - why can't I get it to temperature?  Figo does the same line order thing and they still bring you drinks, bread, and clear your table when you leave.  For this price, it's not worth it.. . STRIKE 3, I'M OUT!
