ReviewID: 5gy2ucIS_pjr9h4TQOB5jA
ReviewerID: xBVo8v0mw64nk6K-pYgI6A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pylos
Category: Greek
"this place serves OBESE PEOPLE PORTIONS"! that is what i said to my gf as we were seated at PYLOS. context...the tables on either side of us has enormous portions of entrees. it looked like one dish served enough chicken to rebuild two chickens...either that or the chickens were clients of Barry bond's pharmacy--BALCO!. . prior to PYLOS, i liked GREEK FOOD.. post-PYLOS, i LOVE GREEK FOOD.. . as we entered the subtley shadowed/lit space. you enter a narrow curtained area that opens up to a long narrow eating space. orange clay pots (Grecian? I assume) compromise the ceiling...and give the restaurant a lowlit glow of earthy tones. one wall is lines with bottles of wine as you head further back into the restaurant, you will find the space lightens a little bit and house another row of tables along the walls---cushioned seating along one side of the table...chairs on the other side. this lighter area shows a very cozy West-Elmish touch--without the overly Asian-inspired design.  highly simplified and subtle sharpness (white with contrasts of really woody dark earthtones). very soft on the eyes and enticing. . . the back area of the eatery's space contains a slight  open look at the kitchen as well as a wine bar which patrons are allowed to order their meals at. i believe the hostess calls this the communal table, but it is hardly a table and more a wraparound bar space that you don't need reservations to be seated at.. . small space. great decor. modern romantic without the gushiness and that is still focused on the food... and then your paramour or dining companion.  . . after the femme and i were seated, i looked at our fellow diners and observed the aforementioned gi-normous portions of certain dishes. and yes while i called them "obese people portions"---they looked and smelled absolutely marvelous! . . within minutes of being seated--we got appraoched by our server for drinks (wine only). service is quick, courteous and friendly. in fact, the server reccomended a light white wine (crisp pinot grigio clone) that douse the sober flames within me.. . right after, the Pylos version of free eats...some quality bread-y substances and an herbed chickpea puree were on the table for nibbles. the femme partook i did not as i wanted every inch of my stomach for inhalation of all that glorious food that surrounded us!. . onto to appz, we opted to share the haloumi--which is a sliced cheese deliciousness known as sauteed haloumi with some sort of grape/grappa reduction...so f'ing tasty. pre-eats are definitely big enough to share by a duo and some looked like they could be shared by a trio. we went for only one because we wanted to save room for the titanic main eatz.. . next up, the entrees---the femme went with a short braised ribs and i quacked up the braised duck breast. each came with a different kind of infused/essenced mashed potatoes. i savored  the duck and it was cooked/prepared perfectly. the taste was clean and just so satisfying. the accompanying flavors of thyme&amp;honey as well as garlic mashed spuds made the dish a sight to devour. the gf's braised ribs which i partook a little of were not served in some prehistoric manner...but as delicatley as red meat can be served. the ribs melted in your mouth with ooziness of being fatty. the red wine sauce as well as the porcini mashed spuds made it a feast for the senses.. . thankfully because we didn't front-end our meals with appetizers--we were able to share a dessert without feeling like bloated balloons. i will say the sweets menu has something for eveyone. we shared the mouzo which is chocolate mousse with a shot of ouzo. sweet deliciousness without being too sweet. it is served in one of those 50s soda shop tall dessert glasses...we caffeined up with some greek java. and sadly had to bid adieu to the restaurant once the check came.. .  the wait staff is youngish, fun, and informative. the servers areand a strong command of the menu and seem to deftly handle my dunderheaded q'z throughout the night. one of the desserts is called "galaktobourekakia"--i our asked our waiter to pronounce and he did so without missing a beat...   . . i would highly reccomend making reservations for Pylos and it does book up rather quickly. there aren't a ton of table and the communal table/bar is a free-for-all. the energy of the place is constant---the symphony of spoons, forks, knives, lively conversations, the din of the kitchen, and the wait staff weaving about the busy eatery...makes for a night of great eats and more! the plus of this eatery is that they serve dinner relatively late (midnight or 1 am-ish), so you can totally make night plans and dine on fine fare like the gf and i did. . the menu has quite a bit of depth and breadth which means Pylos probably has a steady stream of repeat customers who are looking to try everything on the menu at least once...which explains the constant stream of people cominc in from the early hours to he latter end.
