ReviewID: 5h520QK_GVhT_4PWy_lPMQ
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
I had visited LA Mill a while back (but only as a spectator--accompanying a friend as she picked up coffee; I did not try anything at that time).  I am not a big coffee drinker, but after seeing recent reviews/photos from Monica W. and Raphael C. on their desserts, I had to give LA Mill a try.. . What excited me about their desserts is their relation to Providence.  Providence chef Michael Cimarusti helped design some of the menu items at LA Mill and a recent photo by Monica W. showed how similar LA Mill's desserts are to Providence.  I had dessert at Providence a long time ago and it was quite memorable.. . The decor at LA Mill is kind of a hodgepodge of different themes and styles.  Interior walls are white and red.  The comfortable chairs range from muted pastels to bright colors.  There is an art mural on the wall as well as a few chandeliers hanging from the ceiling.  Definitely trendy (maybe a little too trendy for some), but it was also comfortable with a nice vibe.. . We had two desserts.. . I ordered the espresso chocolate panna cotta.  The panna cotta came in a deep bowl.  It was topped with a pretty good-sized scoop of Bailey's ice cream that sat on some chocolate streusel (chocolate crumb topping).  There was also a coconut ravioli (some molecular gastronomy concoction that was liquid coconut encased in a thin sweet skin).. . The panna cotta was refreshing with a good chocolate flavor.  I've had many espresso desserts and I felt the espresso flavor here was on the mild side.. . The Bailey's ice cream had a great texture and a good flavor.  I would say though that I enjoy Haagen-Dazs' Bailey's ice cream more (Haagen-Dazs has a little stronger flavor to it).  The coconut ravioli was interesting but not overly wow in terms of taste.. . Overall, the panna cotta was nice and refreshing.  It was pretty gourmet for a coffee shop/cafe too.. . My friend had the peanut butter cup.  I've had fine dining peanut butter cups at a few places (like Craft) and I have often found them disappointing.  The reason is that the peanut butter cup ends up tasting too much like the store-bought peanut butter cups (that we all know and grew up on).. . The peanut butter cup at LA Mill was different.  The peanut butter cup was served in a light, crispy, flaky cookie shell.  The peanut butter cream was very refreshing (mild peanut butter taste).  The peanut butter cream was topped with fresh bananas.  It was also garnished with whipped cream, chocolate sauce and nuts.. . I liked both desserts.  I often favor whatever dessert has the ice cream, but I felt the peanut butter cup may have been slightly more memorable.  The combination of the fresh fruit with the light peanut butter cream and the crispy/flaky shell was quite good.. . The presentation of their desserts was also very nice.. . I am not in the Silverlake area often.  If I lived near here, I think I would come back to try their other desserts.  I think if you are in the area, LA Mill is worth checking out for their desserts.  For a cafe, their desserts may be a little pricey at $9 each, but the quality is better than what you will find at a run-of-the-mill cafe.  Good portions for the price too (not too big but not dainty either).. . Parking is available in the rear of the building.
