ReviewID: 5jHELk9c2EF3ixV0zPkHkg
ReviewerID: ML0rNXpMFZhz4EuEAw5NwA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
My friend, and fellow sushi lover, asked his fishmonger buddy which restaurant he would go to for the freshest fish. The answer: Sushi Gen. That was all I needed to know. Instead of heavily researching I just showed up with my friends. I expected some fancy restaurant and was caught off guard by it's location in a rundown looking strip mall. Step inside and and it's a different world. Everything about the restaurant declares: I am authentic Japanese.. . The food is a sashimi purist's haven. I came on a Tuesday night and the restaurant was bustling with patrons. You can tell they have a high demand and thus turn around for fish. The restaurant focuses on the flavor and textures of fresh, unadorned fish. No fancy toppings, sauces and preparations here.. . One of my friends and I split the sashimi dinner and ordered a few nigiri alongside. . . The sashimi dinner is an excellent value ($21) and comes with a lot of fish: lots of tuna, 3pcs yellowtail, 3pcs halibut, several small pieces of octopus, squid, spicy tuna, a small piece of cooked salmon, steamed egg custard, seaweed. The octopus was not chewy at all and I was also pretty satisfied with the tender halibut. I was a little disappointed with the quality of hamachi. It's one of my favorite pieces of sashimi and it just wasn't as soft as I've had before. There was an overwhelming amount of tuna on this platter and it was all blue fin. I wish they would have replaced even a third of this with another type of fish, even if it were different types of tuna.. . Nigiri:. Albacore tuna- luxuriously soft and melted away beautifully. Wonderful flavor. One of my favorites overall, and definitely for the evening.. Spanish mackerel- very mild and soft. topped with a few thinly sliced scallions.. Japanese mackerel- first time having this particular fish and it tastes more like mackerel than the Spanish mackerel. I think I like it better but it's fishier and not for sushi virgins.. Yellowtail- again, very good but not quite the quality I was expecting.. . One of my friends got her usual Chirashi bowl that was overflowing with various cuts of fish/octopus/squid. Portions are very generous. And the rice below was really good! It had a hint of sweetness and the texture was spot on. I kept stealing some from her bowl.. . One of our less adventurous sushi eaters did quite well, but needed to supplement all the rawness with a cooked dish: fried chicken. It was like giant baseball sized popcorn chicken you find at Boba places. Only it doesn't come with the spicy powder seasoning, and you get four large pieces instead of a handful of smaller ones. It's dark meat and really juicy.. . Lastly: service. Wow, everyone here was SO gracious. The server, the busboy, the waitress... oh the poor waitress. We had so many questions about the menu. What's on the sashimi dinner? How's it different from the sashimi delux? We even dragged her over to ask what the table next to us was having because it looked that fabulous (it was the sashimi dinner). She had to come back three times because we couldn't decided what to get, but every time she came back with an easy smile and endless patience! They didn't mind us sitting and catching up for a half hour after we finished eating. And as we walked out, they thanked us kindly for stopping by.. . A few details: . Parking is $2 with validation inside the restaurant.. They don't seat you until your entire party has arrived.
