ReviewID: 5jSHrCqZwSgDw8EmMTBU9Q
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Original El Taco
Category: Mexican
Yay to Fro-Mo's and No Mo' to "Truck Stop" sliders... Gracias El Jeffe for leaving those nasty tasting chicken muffins in Durango. This dumb down Mexi-joint is perfect for the pedestrians in this area. Although the food is fresh and decent quality, it just isn't that adventurous. It's notches higher than those oven mitt Mexi-chains but your average Joe ain't gonna want a tongue or cojones de toro taco either. They want to do the safety dance while dining "Mexican".   . . Queso Royale - Who cut this cheez? It was a little on the watery side but acceptable. The corn chips smell like my dog's paws.. . Shrimp Ceviche is rather chincy for the price. But if they threw in a few saltines on the side... Say what, it's suppose to come with them? And is this really a ceviche? . . Fried Tilapia taco is exactly what it is... A fwied fish taco. Smelled alright and it went down fine.. . Pork Carnitas taco is not bad, just keep that tortilla wrapped up because it ain't pretty inside. . . Crispy Pork Belly taco is the best of the bunch. Put pork belly in a blender and I'll still drink the hell outta it.. . Fried Chicken taco looks like the fish taco except that it tasted like chicken. Wrap a tortilla around a Popeyes spicy leg, now that would be a sight to behold.    . . Green Chili Chicken Enchiladas were surprisingly good. It looked like hamster vomit but tasted like chicken heaven. Verra tastee.. . Chili Cheese Enchiladas look like a hatchet wound from a 70's porn flick but it's passable. I guess it's better than a dirty Tex-Mex Sanchez. . . This joint is fun to grab a bite and booze with a bunch of rowdy fwends... But I wouldn't call it a dining destination, Mexican food to me is all about a dare. That damn wheel from hell can get real annoying real fast. Limit yourself to 4 Fro-Mo's tops, after the 5th one, Whiskey Richard may set in. Don't say you weren't warned.. . OLE!
