ReviewID: 5klBmt0YcAuGyKynZg8xLw
ReviewerID: 15nD50SrNJN8E5DYDa0GWQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I consider myself a very lucky man in deed. Allow me to explain... . . I am lucky to live in what I truly believe is one of the world's best cities. . Lucky to grow up in an era of technological conveniences like air conditioning, air planes and cell phones. . While annoying far too often than they should be, lucky to still have both of my parents in my life. . Lucky enough to not have to worry about basics like quality affordable health care, job security, and not gaining weight after eating from one of the four Harold's Fried Chicken (dark half, mild sauce, fried hard) joints that are within about a mile of home five times a week. . . Not perfect, but still a very lucky guy! . . Perfect example, and case in point- I "landed" my beautiful wife AND she has tolerated a year of marriage with my dumb ass... . . This alone is reason for someone like me to celebrate, but problems exist still. Main problem number one: where to celebrate our 1st anniversary in style with substance. . . With the ample amount of neo-American restaurants in Chicago (and let's face it- Chicago does this style the best and in abundance!) the decision was a tough one. . . But with conviction, and much like a year ago facing my wife in a little chapel on the south side, sweaty-faced (it was hot out on December 27th, 2008- look it up!), I can say I love this restaurant- I do! . . Very obviously the menu is seasonal, something that I appreciate greatly- a restaurant that strives for freshness and natural flavors. . . Cocktails: good, and the barman (couldn't be positive with the chatty Valley Girls giggling so much, but he sounded Australian) seemed to know his stuff and the drinks were good. . . Appetizers: much like has been proven many times before, my wife's tastes far exceed mine (except in partners- I got her beat on that). Her seemingly simple dish of seared diver scallops and black pudding was phenomenal. Perfect balance of flavors. My long-winded nature escapes me in describing this. Just perfect. So good in fact that it outshone my very well, yet simple bowl of thick cut pasta noodles served with rich duck meat. Nice! . . Entrees: Both excellent! A delicious and generous portion of short rib served with tart red cabbage and spettzle, and pan seared trout with greens and candied bacon were both familiar and yet I couldn't find flaws with either. . . Seeing it was a Sunday evening meal, I can tell you now- that is the night to go. All bottles of wine $90 or less are served at half-price. Obviously being married to a French women helps in this area considering my knowledge of wine hasn't grown as fast as my waist line these last few years. She found a great bottle for us that worked well with our orders. . . I am smitten like a kitten mainly due to my wife, but also because of this place... . . Now wipe off all that sappiness I just spilled all over your screen, book a reservation with Sepia, and await a wonderful meal!
