ReviewID: 5mdOYsMXeVw9FJ6X64yxNA
ReviewerID: m3vUL3VjVBJDEwG99W0EWg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
I have been coming to Porto's since I was in my mother's womb.  My first, second, third, fifteen birthday cake all came from this delicious Bakery on Brand Street and I'm sure I'll do it for my kids as well.  . I remember this place when it was just a small whole in the wall bakery a little bit further down the street.  Fast forward 20 years and now look at it...so HUGE they bought the Numero Unos next door to double their size!  I love that this is family owned, owned by a Cuban who left his homeland for the land of opportunity and struck gold!. . Now onto the food.. Papa Rellenas (Potato Balls)  FABULOUS!  Think mashed potatoes with a little bit of spiced ground beef in the middle.  Can't get much better than that.. Media Noche (Midnight Sandwich), Cuban Sandwich, Pork Sandwich, Steak Sandwich....any of these are great selection.  All made with Cuban or French Bread and perfect taste!. . Now the desserts.  If you want an authentic Cuban pastry then get.... Pastelito de Guayava (Guava Pastry).  Some have cream cheese in the middle.  I prefer the plain but they are both delicious.. Pastelito de Carne (Meat Pastry).  Same idea, just filled with meat.. They also have flan, tres leches and many other traditional sweets.. . Besides from that, these Cubans have really done their work and become experts in strudel, pies, cookies, fruit tarts, etc....You name it, they can make it!. . Drinks:. They have traditional Cuban sodas here!. Try the Materva - that's my favorite.. Iron Beer, Jupina, Malta are also delicious but not everyone is crazy about them. . Ordering Cakes:. People come from over 50 miles away for the Portos Cake.  Don't expect a round cake covered in white frosting that says "Happy Birthday Grandma".... like what you get at your local grocery store.  You see cakes in the shape of books (usually for communions) or how about a baby rattle (for baby showers.)  I've seen caked with full jungle themes, princess themes, ANYTHING you want!. Next time you need a cake, take my word for it and go visit Portos!  Just make sure you do it early!!. . Although the building has changed significantly since their humble beginnings, as well as the size of their staff; the quality, the taste and the prices haven't!. . I LOVE PORTOS and so will you!
