ReviewID: 5MEhVgz8Yu7Pb6nAia1Hmw
ReviewerID: 6_mt4fsRWNWqLgnhUY2AFA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Now, it could be that after a day of moving boxes into your new apartment, any brunch would taste like your first orgasm felt, but I'm excited by the thought of disproving that theory at Alcove again.. . My friend suggested Alcove as her favorite brunch spot in my new Los Feliz neighborhood and I had my reservations.  The 2 or 3 times I passed by, it always seemed to have that aspiring movie star/ indie band scene - almost as though everyone wants to be "discovered" over breakfast.. A scene I want little to no part of.  This Sunday was no exception, but I reluctantly admit, it made for some fun people watching.. . 75% of that missing lone star out of 5 (the other 15% being the scene), is due to Alcove's weekend hosting process of 1)standing in (a loooong) line to order my expensive breakfast, and 2) wait, standing mind you, for a drip coffee, before 3) being offered a seat at a table, where my cream and sugar did not exist and I had to 4) walk back inside to doctor it up (and NOTE they do not refill your cup).. . Even considering all the aforementioned... the food was absolutely worth it!. . My single cup of drip coffee was a delight. I had eggs over easy with wheat toast and side salad.  Apparently, there was some special sauce, because I don't think my eggs, toast and salad staple have ever tasted this good - drippy yolk, crisp absorbing bread, a light dressing only their lettuce knew how to compliment. Mmmm... My sister had cinnamon, peaches and cream crepes and granola with fresh fruit. I couldn't stop myself from picking berries out of her bowl! Alcove seemed to have aligned the seasons just right so that berries were ripe and sweet the morning of our brunch. Mmmm...  . . I will almost always have 3-5 stars for outdoor seating.  . . A future stop is planned for their cakes and pastries who prolongingly taunted and tempted me while I was inching in line. But maybe that was their strategy all along...
