ReviewID: 5O7MZ0divlY7xGsD-1PrFA
ReviewerID: DklL3KWmYgZTQ6X7ZSeq3w
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Craft Atlanta
Category: American (New)
Remember the cool kids in middle school? They were the ones that everyone just seemed to naturally regard as the epitome of cool and pre-pubescent hipness. And they knew it too. These were the kids that would strut around with this sense of being entitled to the super-sized regard that they somehow managed to demand from everyone around them. . . But a few years later, the same crowd that worshipped at the feet of these 13 year old deities wonders what all the fuss was about. Turns out these 'cool kids'  were just pretty average in every respect, except for their still outsize and unassailable self esteem.. . Craft is the restaurant equivalent of these kids. The restaurant is in a cool upscale part of town and is decorated in a predictably upscale, casually elegant style. The patrons are are apparently here to see and be seen, and you will be given an appraising look by both the restaurant staff and many of the patrons as you walk into the restaurant. Apparently, the cool crowd never dines in groups larger than four. When we arrived with six people, we were seated at a long table that made conversation in the loud dining area nearly impossible. I suppose this enforced isolation of each diner in a large party is intended to allow the patrons to worship the food with the appropriate reverence. It certainly gives one an ample opportunity to ogle the other diners, just as you are being ogled. Look, over there is a 60 year businessman with a pretty 22 year old girl. Hmm, if that is his daughter, he is sitting awfully close. Nope, not his daughter. Which would explain the wandering hand on her knee.. . Apparently, the waitstaff undergoes extensive training in over-officious snootiness, because you are not likely to run into this level of snotty look-down-their-nose-at-you behavior anywhere outside some Hollywood satirical movie. Ask a waiter if they have a signature entree, and you are likely to get a snippy "Everything we serve her is superb, are you ready to order?" If you push the matter with the waiter a little bit, you are likely to get an eye roll indicating your fundamental lack of coolness and another abbreviated reply along the lines of "We only use very fresh, very local ingredients prepared in wonderful way". In short, loads of attitude, but not much information.. . Okay, you've all been to restaurants that have this arrogant superior attitude, but when the food comes, you realize the truism that "If you can do it, it ain't bragging". Unfortunately, Craft does not fall into this category. The food is uniformly uninspired, and while there is nothing particularly wrong with it, there is also fundamentally nothing very right about it either. The short ribs are so subtly flavored as to leave one wishing for a can of Dinty Moore Beef Stew. The mashed potatoes when described by the waiter hold out a promise of a food-gasm, but when they go from fork to mouth, you quickly realize that they are simply, "Potatoes, mashed". A duck breast is apparently seasoned by passing a sprig of rosemary and a cherry over the meat as it is cooked. . . The food is about as interesting as a phone book.. . If this were an inexpensive neighborhood bistro, you might put up with it. But Craft styles itself as a 'destination' restaurant, and the food is priced accordingly. So for high level mediocrity, you pay high level prices. Prices so high that given the level of the food quality and the service, you may just end up leaving the restaurant angry.. . In summary, don't bother. Just as the cool 13 year olds eventually become the sad sack parked on a stool in a sports bar, this restaurant will eventually leave everyone wondering "What were we thinking?"  But for now, leave this restaurant to the crowd that wants to chat up a secretary or show off their latest fashion purchase. For people who love food, I would recommend looking elsewhere.
