ReviewID: 5oRfSeAQgGbQnaynKyCRMg
ReviewerID: H71GbHuf9VjO2HzConUhkQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roebling Tea Room
Category: Coffee & Tea
There really aren't that many places in Williamsburg where I'd order steak tartar and not wonder if I was handing down my own death sentence, but having been to Roebling Tea Room a couple of times, I've come to trust the food and took the plunge without reservation last night.. . Good decision. Delicious marinade, tasty beef, a little less minced and a little more cubed than I've seen, making for a slightly less mealy dish than you normally find, and presented slightly more creatively (and more enticing) than you find.. . My friend had the trout, if I remember right, and she was very happy with it as well. I noticed some of the same ingredients and garnishes on both dishes, which I found visually appealing -- I like a good theme and love cooks who put their stamp on things -- but wondered if it might not make for some similar tasting dishes. Which might not be a bad thing.. . The service -- and this is really the reason I wanted to review -- was great. I've been reading a lot on here about problems with the service, but I've been to this place several times, under varying circumstances, and have never had any problem whatsoever. I'd argue that its not a place you'd want to go for a quick dinner, although I didn't notice myself waiting for the food to come out. I'm sure you could make a fast-ish lunch of it, but why would you want to if you can sit on the sofas, shoot the shit, read, and have a few afternoon drinks instead?. . Bottom line, I felt taken care of without being stifled, and that's exactly the sort of service I prefer. Nothing irritates me more than servers who are down your throat every two minutes asking how it is, if I need this or that, rushing me through the meal, throwing my check at me, etc. On the other hand, I don't think we waited more than five minutes or so at the critical parts of the meal -- drinks came out without delay, food was served in a perfectly reasonable time, the table was cleared promptly when we finished, all handled with grace. . . Our server was Jess. Big ups, Jess.
