ReviewID: 5QWMA3swXawFAen7vCo-IA
ReviewerID: aH8rhX4gsh7eAQI9o3r5Lg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
We had really high hopes for this place.  The decor is amazing and the idea of drinking mojitos with spicy, high-end Mexican food was appealing.  However.... . It started off with the service.  They have understaffed by about 30-40%.  They had one guy behind a very large bar servicing the bar patrons as well as everyone else in the restaurant.  It took forever to get a drink.  The first drink we had was the Vodka mo-tini.  I think they just loaded it up with sugar and lime juice.  We ordered 4 and everyone agreed there was little to no alcohol in them.  I swear if you're going to pay $12-13 a drink, just go for a straight up Martini.  At least you know what you're getting.. . The apps: We ordered the calamari and ceviche.  Both were pretty nasty and oversalted.  How do you screw up these two apps out of all the apps out there?  One you just drop in a fryer and the other, you soak in lime/lemon juice.  It's not like we ordered fois gras or something with pastry shells.  Despite what the other reviews say about the ceviche, stay away.. . Main courses: I had the wagyu beef.  IT was GREAT.  However, I'm guessing it was more the cut of meat and the fact that it was cooked in bacon and salt - even the mash potatoes had bacon in them.  So I'm not sure this was a great test of the chef.  Here are the nasty dishes the rest of the table had: some vegetarian dish (won't review it since let's face it, no one is comingto Ciudad to eat veggie), Carnitas (overcooked), Short Ribs way too salty, Arctic Char (honestly I don't know what we were thinking about ordering this either.  It's not like there's a lot of Arctic Char in Mexico City), Chorizo Encrusted Scallops (served less than warm and again super salty).. . The deserts were really good though.  I would highly recommend both the Brownie and the Chocolate Cake.. . Anyhow, the atmosphere is great, but the food just doesn't measure up to a $1000 night out.
