ReviewID: 5vPJLo56RSuhBRDJnBbzlg
ReviewerID: 95xutKNuNjI6LuTUP1hqzA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
I had the veggie mexican chipotle sausage ($6) with grilled onions and sweet peppers.  It was ok--slightly burned on one side and kind of on the dry side.  A bit spicy for the average American, I would think, but ok for me.  Also tried the Belgian fries with white truffle oil, and they were pretty good, although sometimes oversalted.  I think I probably was unlucky in my selection of sausage--looks like most of the other choices are better, from what I can see in the reviews.  So, I'll probably want to return to try one or two other items.  In any case, it was a fun experience--you line up at the front counter, and then you walk along this long, narrow corrider to the dining room, where there are long communal tables, a handful of group tables, and a bar.  One of my friends headed out the front door after placing her order, and since I'd never been there before, I followed her, thinking she knew where the dining room was.  Eventually, as we rounded the corner, an employee happened to come out the back door of Wurstkuche and asked where the heck we were going (in a nice way).  When we said we were looking for the dining area, he directed us to the door back into the dining room, joking that they usually don't serve the food down the street.  ;). . All the employees were quite nice and friendly.  I arrived about 11:50 am on Sunday morning (10 min before opening time) to meet my friends, and I found a line already starting to form (maybe 10 people or so).. . My German friend said his bratwurst was the best he'd had outside of Germany and that it was even good enough to market within Germany.  There's a pretty good beer selection (German and Belgian mainly), with the occasional pricey bottle (there was a $250 bottle of beer).  Some interesting sodas (eg. cucumber).  There is a cucumber-flavored water dispenser at the front counter and also by the bar in the dining area.. . Parking might require some hunting around on the side streets.
