ReviewID: 5wWVLtPbLhkUJFFAjIy74g
ReviewerID: OQOcmj9UzbrLwA01cHLwIg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
I was really sad to have to give Canter's two stars, but I've definitely experienced better delies, honestly, I even feel like Jerry's deli is better.. LOCATION: okay the location is mediocre; it's on fairfax, i think between beverly and 3rd or between melrose and beverly. IT's across the street from Fairfax highschool. It's not the nicest location, but it's still okay..... the good thing about the location is that once you've eaten your mediocre, non-satisfying meal here, there are plenty of more delicious restaurants and cafes nearby like on 3rd street, on beverly, or on melrose....so you don't have to drive tooo far for some better food, but sadly i feel like almost anything would taste good after eating here.. . FOOD: the food was okay.......kinda boring. okay so i'm a vegetarian so i ordered the vegetable soup which the waiter highly reccommended. It was okay, i mean it tasted alright, but it was wayy toooo salty and it didn't have enough vegetables in it. The best part about the soup was the bagle chips that came with it, and half of the chips were burnt.....very dissapointing. The friend who i came here with ordered the corned beef sandwhich which is supposed to be famous and really good, but he said it was very sub-par. My friend just said the sandwhich was nothing special, and tasted kinda bland for meat that is supposed to have a good strong flavor. Also, everyone raves about the pickles they bring you at canters, but the pickles they brough us tasted wierd. I mean yes they were crunchy, but they also tasted funky......and they weren't salty enough. . . ATMOSPHERE: there are two rooms to sit in at canters. We sat in the lower level room which was especially dingy, depressing, and dimly lit. I felt like i was in a gross, nasty college dining hall. They other room looked a little b it nicer, it had high-edged, plush looking booths and better looking tables and chairs than the room we were in. The room that we sat in actually kinda made me loose my appetite, I think they really need to take care of the disparity between the atmosphere in the two different rooms.. . SERVICE: the service was just okay. Our waiter was nice enough, but he was kind of jumpy and hyper. He also treated us like little kids (i'm 19 and my friend was 20); my friend asked for more pickles, and the watier told us to finish our last slice on the plate before he brought us a new plate. I just felt like that was really rude, i mean my friend was going to eat that last slice of pickle anyways, but the fact that our watier ordered us around really bugged me. Also paying here is a little wierd, the waiter brings you the bill, and then you have to get up and go to the cashier to pay for your food. And then if you want to leave a tip, you have to go back to your table and leave it there or find your waiter/waitress and give it to them. This system seemed a little wierd. . . overall, I think Canter's fame is not really deserved. It's famous because it's like the oldest deli in Los Angeles, and it probably used to be good, but not so much anymore. The food is edible, so i guess if you're super hungry, and every other restaurant within a mile radius is closed, then you could come here (yeah, the fact that it's open 24 hours a day is pretty nice, but it would be nicer if the food was delicious). I honestly wish that Canter's was better, I want to like it, but i honestly just didn't. If you want a good deli, go to Langer's and order the #19, or go to Art's Deli in studio city and order anything and you will be much happier than if you came here.
