ReviewID: 5XoNstg-O-nMNH_D7hX2XQ
ReviewerID: 6EHbIv5w2I4XbXs3dG_D1Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Eleven City Diner
Category: Diners
Oh yeah, that's it.  Right there.  Mmmm...aaahhh.  The search for the perfect chocolate-malt milkshake is over.. . There's not much else to say.  Perfect thickness, perfect balance of ingredients yielding the perfect flavor.  Sure, it's seven bucks, but you are getting the full old-school soda-fountain treatment--special glass, spoon, metal cup holding the extra.  For heaven's sake, don't get it to go.  . . I've been here twice now, once for breakfast and once for lunch.  I'm not that impressed by the food, and it seems overpriced.  For example, with my breakfast I ordered a side of ham a la carte, and paid $3.80 for a five-inch oval of thin diner ham (not the good, thick, baked stuff like grandma makes).  The pancakes were great, though.  The second time, I had a corned beef sandwich (B) and white bean soup (B).  The cole slaw was subpar, and the pickle tasted like a cucumber that had been waved over a brine barrel and then rinsed off.  . . And the service...yeesh.  Inconsistent at best.  It all started on my first visit, when I saw the owner outside berating a valet.  Then he was inside playing Mr Cool Guy, offering to serve mimosas and bloody marys to the patrons waiting for tables.  The waitress that time was fine, but today's was terrible.  First it took almost ten minutes for her to show up the first time, then she compounded her faux pas by touching my shoulder and calling me "hon" (this was a young woman).  If I hadn't asked for more water, we wouldn't have spoken between her dropping off the sandwich and dropping off the check.  Notice that I didn't say "I wouldn't have seen her" because I saw her plenty:  she spent several minutes using the table next to mine to refill the little dishes of sugar and Nutrasweet packets.  All that time, and she couldn't ask me how everything was?  I also had to eat with my empty soup bowl at my elbow because nobody came by to pick it up.  Come on, it's basic--stop by a few times, clear away dishes and ask how it's going.  It takes ten fucking seconds.. . The host staff was all over the place too.  The guy running the show seemed put out that I wasn't interested in a corner counter seat, and quoted me a twenty-minute wait as if he were trying to convince me to leave.  (The wait was ten minutes, as it happened.)  But the lovely young woman who seated me was beyond pleasant and asked me if I would like a newspaper or magazine to read.  I have eaten hundreds of solo meals in all sorts of venues, and I have never heard this before.  What a nice touch.  She seemed pretty young, so perhaps she hasn't yet been spoiled by the sour example set by her colleagues.. . Then of course at the end of my meal, my waitress brought me the check without asking if I wanted anything else, which I did:  I wanted the milkshake.  Which is the only reason that I will come back here!
