ReviewID: 5y_a_EpLLGWTFNydFIogBg
ReviewerID: x8XTq_OUM03-bn4-PFhCjA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: SinBala Restaurant
Category: Taiwanese
Omagah. I love, love, love Taiwanese food. It's my comfort cuisine. Unfortunately Taiwanese cafes are far and few between..and many of them are subpar. SinBala not's perfect but they're one of the few Taiwanese cafes I do approve of. Lots of traditional Taiwanese cafe dishes to be found here... . Came here this past Sat. night for dinner and went all out chubby bunny style. Ordered Taiwanese Meatball, Spicy Beef Noodle Soup, Leeks Dumpling (with Pork), and Ground Meat with Brown Sauce Noodle (aka Zha Jiang Mein), all too share. . . Taiwanese Meatball ($2.75) - Still searching for a decent Taiwanese meatball in the US to match the ones found in Taiwan. 3 flaws to be found with it here. 1) Meatball itself lacks a lot of flavor. 2) Sauce is generic store bought sauce. 3) Personally, I find Taiwanese meatballs don't taste great unless you deep-fry the skin at least for a bit... and they don't do that here. But flaws aside, I still enjoyed eating it. . . Spicy Beef Noodle Soup ($6.50) - Appears to be a small portion, but looks are deceiving. Broth is exceptional. Probably the best spicy beef broth I've encountered so far in the US. You can really taste the star anise in it, yet it doesn't overpower the natural juices from the stewed meat. Noodles are acceptable. The beef was disappointing--dry and chewy. . . Leeks Dumpling ($5) - We actually ordered the Chinese Napa Dumplings, but they accidentally gave us Leeks Dumpling instead. Not a big deal. I really enjoyed the meat filling since there were lots of chopped leeks and leek flavors in the meat. However, I was not a big fan of the dumpling skin which was on the thick and doughy side. The dipping sauce wasn't terrible, but clearly store bought dumpling dipping sauce too. . . Ground Meat with Brown Sauce Noodle (5.50) - Also looks deceivingly small, but when you're through with it you'll be left pretty stuffed. Really good Zha Jiang Mien sauce. Noodles were ok. Not sure if I detected any ground meat, but there were a lot of chopped bean curds in it, which is okay by me because I love bean curds but I suspect this would be an issue for many patrons if they were expecting ground meat. . . Seating is rather cramped indoors but understandable since SinBala seems to always be at max capacity. . Service is really friendly and great--always checking up on us, refilling water, etc. . Prices are cheap for entrees and sausages while slightly expensive (all things considered) for snack items. Remember, cash only! . . Will hopefully be back to try the Oyster Pancake, Sausages, and Shaved Ice next time..
