ReviewID: 5zpj0XS_tElKnpIEFjafUg
ReviewerID: zqD4WFJa0Df2FT343MQKbg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
4.5. . "Yamashiro is for lovers," Hubs said upon our visit to this little Shangir-La last Saturday night.  Aptly put, despite his semi-joking tone.  There is something a little bit magical about this place, with its fabulous Japanese architecture and a hint of old Hollywood, all neatly tucked away above the LA skyline.. . The view is SPECTACULAR - really quite incomparable in Los Angeles. We like to bring friends from out of town up here to show off the City of Angles at its best possible vantage.  (As much as I love this city - and I really do -- I'll admit it's not exactly always pretty, and we'll take whatever help we can get in selling the place to others.)  On these occasions, we usually head to the bar, where you can still take full advantage of the view and enjoy drinks and light eats, without the admittedly hefty price tag of having a full meal.  I was excited to see the new outdoor bar, as this will only aid our future efforts.   . . Mostly, however, we have come here on special occasions, and the occasion for this visit was our 8th anniversary as couple. Better yet, the tab was picked-up by a gift card given to us by a friend as wedding present earlier this year. (Thanks Todd!!!)  And yes I know, we're sort of cheating by claiming two anniversaries, but I say we should all take advantage of as many excuses to celebrate as possible!. . I'd say we've been here about eight times or so over the years, and this may have been the best trip yet.  The romantic view, as stated, is the main reason for going and coming back over and over again. The food is usually good, but secondary.  This trip the food almost caught up to the view!  . . We started the evening with cocktails in the bar area as we waited for our table.  The service in this area was unfortunately a little lack luster, as our waitress took an age to realize we were even there.  However, my White Eye martini - similar in taste to a White Russian, with a hint of white chocolate - was very tasty.  (Although I didn't see it on the menu this time, usually my favorite is the Chocolate Hazelnut Martini, because the flecks of gold imparted by the Goldschläger help one feel like a princess, as one always should on special romantic occasions.)  Hubs had a rice vodka martini.  This rice vodka is kind of how it sounds - a smooth vodka with a sake flavor.. . We mentioned when we checked in that we were there for an anniversary, and once our reservation was called we were shown to a lovely corner table that took optimal advantage of the panorama.  We began with some unfiltered sake and appetizers -- Truffle Hamachi, Spicy Tuna Crispy Rice, and an Uni Roll.  Hubs and I had a bit of disagreement over which was more the delicious, the Himachi with its delicate blend of truffle oil and ponzu, or the Spicy Tuna on its bed of crispy/chewy rice - but we did agree that they were both delicious. This was our first experience with uni (sea urchin) and it was definitely a pleasant one. These rolls were delicious little clouds of flavor, and probably a good introduction to the new texture of the uni, as it was balanced by the structure of the rice.. . Both of our entrées were delicious. Hubs had the Braised Beef Short Ribs, which were tender and flavorful, and served on a bed of polenta. The polenta was a lovely creamy texture, lusciously laced with white truffle oil --- yes, we are big on the truffle flavor. I ordered off of the specials menu - Seared Hiramisa with Shiso Pistachio Pesto.  I went with a fish entrée because I thought it would be an option on the lighter side of things, given the quantity of appetizers we had ordered; however, this was about as decadent as fish gets.  The fish was heavily marinated in lemon - it might have even been too heavy if the fish were to have been served alone.  However, it was served on kale that was lightly mixed with mascarpone and the pesto.  When all of these flavors came together, the finished product was simply delectable.  . . Service was also wonderful. Our waitress, Tricia, was charming and very helpful.  For dessert, they sent out a complimentary vanilla custard for our birthday; a mistake in occasion, yes, but a pleasant surprise nonetheless.. . Finally, all trips to Yamashiro should be capped off with a little stroll along their garden path to take in the view one final time, and to bring a romantic evening to a perfect end  . . . with a kiss, of course.
