ReviewID: 63CgyVdFS6Z4gKsRM8Y-_Q
ReviewerID: OxEltbtY_LA2tPrGOTx5Kg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Shopsin&#39;s
Category: Diners
I did a LOT of preparation before coming here.  Seriously.  I read all the Yelp reviews, talked to my peeps, and wrote a detailed "what to do" email to my friend.  I also denied a third friend because I was worried about party size.. . After showing up (a Friday around 11AM) all the tables were full, so I sauntered over to the random shelf of canned foods to wait.  A waiter came over (I think Shopsin's son?) and asked "Are you waiting to eat?  Stand over there."  Terrified I had messed up, I scurried over to the wall across from the cheese shop, head down, partially covering my face.. . I'd only check my phone when I was out of viewing distance from Shopsin (sitting in a comfy chair inside the restaurant) and I kept it in my purse at all times.  Once my friend arrived, Shopsin's son seated us.  He was actually quite pleasant.  After I ordered the Nutella shake, he said "One of your friends told you to order that, huh?"  Yes, my beloved friend, Yelp.. . So we shared the shake (absolutely freaking delicious.  not too sweet, thick but not too thick to flow through the straw), Tasty 1 (butterscotch, mac &amp; cheese, smore pancakes), and the Blisters in my Sisters with chorizo.  We weren't totally enamored with the mac &amp; cheese pancakes.  I mean they were quite good (yes, with the maple + hot sauce), but I wouldn't be able to eat more than one.  The smore and butterscotch, whew, now those were tasty TASTY.  Next time I want to try the slutty pancakes for sure!  The pancake batter is perfectly fluffy and light.  AND you get real maple syrup!  But in all honesty the pancakes were so flavorful they didn't even need the excess calories.  The Blisters in my Sisters was good.  A hearty egg dish with lots of oomph.  Not so incredible that I'd need to order this again, though.. . Granted we were here on a weekday and it was not crowded, but service was pretty solid.  We never felt rushed.  I was almost disappointed in the lack of drama until we saw a random woman sit in Shopsin's seat, thinking it was a seat for people to sit in while waiting.  Ooohhhh.  Shopsin's daughter unsuccessfully tried to evict her.  Shopsin returned, asked the lady to leave, and after she refused, tried to physically dump her out of the chair.  Finally, she left after he took her grocery cart and pushed it away, all while mocking her.  Wow.  Brunch and a show!. . I think this could be a five (provided I don't get yelled at), but I first need to find a savory dish that lives up to the pancakes!. . So here's what led to my success:. . 1. Don't come with more than two people.  There are three tables of two, and room for three at the counter.. 2. Study, study, STUDY the menu online beforehand.  Be ready to order within a few minutes.. 3. Don't ask for recommendations or substitutions.. 4. Don't be a vegan.  Vegetarian is okay.. 5. Don't use your phone when Shopsin can see you while you're waiting.  Don't keep your phone out while seated.. 6. Don't order too much food.  If you do, the chef will come out and tell you "That's way too much fucking food.  I'm not cooking it all unless you eat it all.". 7. Don't come on a Saturday, unless you want to wait forever.  Don't come on a Sunday because they're not open.. 8. Don't come if you're on a diet.. 9. CASH ONLY.  I can't even imagine what Shopsin would do if you threw down an AmEx Platinum on the check.. 10.  Don't ask if they do take-out or delivery.  They don't.
