ReviewID: 63F0TIMPI8-vR245FaUKrQ
ReviewerID: -Q6Db__tGd2buBKFkvDghw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
my friends and i sat at a tealight-lit table outside, surrounded by the chatter and clinking silverware of other diners and the busy-ness of culver blvd behind us.  ford's has a pleasant, comfortable atmosphere and we had a breezy, affable server who gave us honest recommendations on dishes, checked on us and refilled our water glasses.  we felt at ease to talk and laugh freely throughout the course of our meal.. . we started off with cured meats and cheese: coppa [cured pork shoulder spiced with cayenne &amp; ground pepper], organic speck [smoked pork seasoned with juniper &amp; pepper], and petite basque [mild goat cheese from the basque region of spain].  these were served with olives in vinaigrette, dried dates &amp; apricots, caramelized walnuts, and half a loaf of french bread.  i thought the speck and basque were good, but the coppa was a bit too salty and overpowering for my taste.  . . "so how exactly are the beef cheeks...kobe?  are the cows not allowed to smile?"  . . really, the beef cheeks were insanely, no-knife/chewing-necessary tender.  i really enjoyed how texture of the meat contrasted with the creamy firmness of the risotto and the crunchiness of the toasted french bread.. . at the end of the meal, the executive chef, ben ford stopped by our table to chat briefly.  i don't know if any of us actually paid attention to what he said because we were too busy trying to catch glimpses of harrison in his demeanor.  hah sorta kidding.  he got very passionate speaking about the share our strength organization's annual event,  taste of the nation.  he was cheery and likable.. . so while there was nothing particularly disappointing about my meal tonight, and despite my liking the experience overall, the bottom line is that there is nothing spectacular or different about the food at ford's filling station.  and in a town like los angeles, where decent, even good food is abundant, isn't it all about making a splash with a distinguishing flavour, exceptional twist, or unusual presentation?
