ReviewID: 64Bb-SJkqGp9uHDN86vHkw
ReviewerID: yelWl-rX72LcFLkhj2QGXw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Hit up Wurstkuche with my girl this afternoon - about 5pm on a Sunday.  I've been meaning to drop by for a while, I was stoked to visit today.. . The place is in a funky little neighborhood with killer graffiti and bills pasted on the walls.. . Look, I'm a food guy.  I work in the industry, I eat a lot of good to great food.  I had heard of this place.  And I was born in Germany.  So you may have well have played the theme from "The Good, The Bad and The Ugly" as I walked up.  It was ON!. . My girl and I ordered 5 different wieners.  Yeah, 5.  So what?!? . . The order of the day was a Edinger Dunkelweiss, a pilsner for the lady, then..... Kielbasa, Knockwurst, Alligator Anouille, Rabbit &amp; Veal, and Buffalo/Beef with chipotle.  And just to err on the side of ridiculousness, we also ordered a small fries with the curry ketchup and chipotle aioli, too.  Bring it, Wurstkuche.. . Oh. . Mah. . GAAAAAAAAHD!!. . The Rabbit may be the single best thing I've put in my mouth this year.  Friggin spectacular.  Transcendental.. . The rest were good - particularly the knockwurst.  It was just flat-out excellent.  Perfect mustards, killer kraut.. . The Andouille was underwhelming.  Dry, and ham-handed with the spice.  Actually, the Andouille is the only reason this review is a four, rather than a five.  I love Andouille, and after having communed with the brilliance of the rabbit and the knockwurst immediately beforehand, it seemed almost sacrilegious  to screw up the "short bus" of the holy sausage trilogy.  . . The buffalo was nicely done, and a nice  foil for the others - buffalo is so low in fat, that it's hard to cook it through without being dry.  This was very good.  . . The kielbasa was an excellent vehicle by which to enjoy the Dijon and spicy brown mustards.. . But the rabbit?  The stuff of lore.  Seriously.  The yardstick by which all other rabbit will be judged.
