ReviewID: 66re8FtqSyQtBRo2flI9xQ
ReviewerID: ElYOPvW2In618xAYEnZ_qw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
Like many other foodies writing a critique of this fabulous place, we've been coming here for years. The food is always tasty and the lines speak for itself. Their desserts are lusciously decadent and the regular food are small in stature, but they are extremely tasty and surprising filling.. . My tips for people trying this place for the first time is to browse the food display cases and kind of know what you want to try, so when you get in line, you're not asking the nice Porto's employee what everything is and thus you're not holding up a line with regulars behind you that know what to order. But, the people working at Porto's are very polite and willing to answer your questions and they get your order FAST!  Second tip: if you're deciding on something, but not sure, order one piece... at least you'll know what it tastes like, and if you like it, you can order more next time. Third tip: if you know you're gonna like something, order a few pieces so when you know for sure you'll like it, you won't have to get back in line... you'll already have a nice stock of it. Fourth tip: if you're bringing some Porto's delicacies to a work potluck, a family or friend gathering, or you just really wanna pig out, call your order ahead. When you bring the food to a gathering and the Porto's virgins had their "Porto's cherry popped- *ahem*" you will get a pat on the back, and you will hear the regular "This is the best thing I've put in my mouth in a long time!" Good Luck on your Porto's Journey.. . Now, why the four stars? As mentioned before, been coming here for years and I loved the individual Mango Mousse Cake (note the past tense of "loved"). Don't get me wrong, it's still delicious, but it has changed. I don't like it when a restaurant changes something, either to save money or "make it better." It was fine the way it was. What's different? The cake I remember had a cookie base, which gave it that nice crunch. Now this cake has a regular white cake base like it's bigger brother, the regular sized Mango Mousse Cake. Second, it had a nice gelatin coating on it that gave it a sheen that only a new car in a show room had.. the shinny effect made it more visually appealing, especially when the utensil broke the surface. Third, the top had a blueberry on it. Yeah, the dome shape of the cake with a blueberry on top made it look like a boob with a bruised nipple, but I like the fruity aspect in it... the acidity of the berry help cut the sweetness of the cake. Fourth, it is a lot smaller now. With all these changes, I'm not a happy camper and will now look for a new favorite guilty pleasure. I will probably still buy it, but not in the same frequency or will I have the same youthful glee I'd have just before buying it.
