ReviewID: 68BqslJrVFDHAiwTA4dK4Q
ReviewerID: cPmg2meT269UfZRNsl0grA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Real Food Daily
Category: Vegetarian
I think I should have gone here with my brother-in-law's ex-girlfriend.  She's the only vegan I know.  She makes a mean tofu enchilada, I tell ya.  Perhaps she could have provided the guidance my husband and I  so sorely needed.. . I ordered a chopped Mexican-style salad.  It was flavorful, due to the onions, but I couldn't finish it, due to the same.  Funny thing about those onions: I woke up the next morning with them still steaming in my mouth and seeping through my pores.  Lovely.. . My husband had the holiday meal.  What can I say?  He had this look on his face.  Like he felt obligated to continue ingesting...something.  Like when your grandmother feeds you a casserole, it's terrible, but you don't want to hurt her feelings.  You chew, you swallow hard, your eyes water.  There we were, surrounded by all these vegans and such, not wanting to offend them for their lifestyle.  I could see the pressure on his face.  Something was deeply troubling him.. . I leaned over and took a bite of the sweet potatoes.  Baby food consistency but overall: yum.  It wasn't that.. . Tried the sage-infused dressing.  Now that was delicious.  Five stars.  I wanted the recipe.  This wasn't what was bothering him.  . . Then I dipped into the oddly-formed, speckled, flesh-crayon colored "turkey breast" that my husband kept forking into his mouth, with that look on his face.  There were these immediate sensations.  Crumbly, nutty, Play-Doh, slightly...chocolately?  What the..... . "Put that thing away!" I wanted to scream.  . . But I just smiled, murmured that it was awful and felt very, very sorry for him.. . Oh the guffaws and full-bellied laughter we shared the minute we walked out on La Cienega.  I'm all about experience, so that made it worth the natty dread food.  We've learned our lesson: next time, bring a vegan.  . . Unwilling to decrease their average rating just 'cause we're ignorant: four stars.. . UPDATE: Just got a note from a Yelper/vegan food connoisseur and she doesn't like their dishes AT ALL.  So it's not just us.  Call me ignorant but down go two more stars.  Plink, plink.  Every time I drive past that RFD sign, on my way to Norm's, I'll be giggling and thinking of that "turkey breast," which was Really Friggin Disgusting.
