ReviewID: 68fF79qYkgQt6gjCgq_M0A
ReviewerID: zNAjozMwnCOlBarQ59BozQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
One of my favorite hang outs in Hollywood. Its nice too see all sorts of different magicians preform. No average Joe from the street can walk in. You need to be a member or invited by one to get in. A Magician secret society . I have been here many times. I have connections ;-) But there is a secrete; If you stay at the Magic Hotel you can get in. Just ask the receptionist. Plus you still need to pay a cover to get in. You have to also wear formal attire. Men has to wear a jacket and tie. So no Jens and tennis shoes. Oh yea.. You are not allowed to bring a camera inside.  You may only take a photo of outside of the building and in the lobby where the coat check is. . . To have dinner at the restaurant you need to make reservations. The food here is pretty good. But a bit expensive for what it is. But the good thing is it guarantees you a seat to the PALACE OF MYSTERY. So its worth doing the dinner. Also for the whole experience. . . The place has a lot of fun history and novelty quality about it. When you get through the secret door by telling the Owl "open sesame" it leads you to the main bar area. It has a warm cozy feel but mysterious feel to it.  Take a good look at the paintings. Some of the eyes will follow you. I also hear that in the Men's restrooms you hear a laugh when you go #1.Another secrete; The down stairs bar my the other two theater drinks are cheaper. . .  Pretty much they have mainly 3 show rooms. When you get in you get a show schedule. The CLOSE-UP GALLERY is by the entrance. Which it consist of slight of hand tricks like card tricks. Two get to the other two main show rooms you need to go up the stairs and pass the dining area The PARLOUR OF PRESTIDIGITATION are more medium size tricks. The largest show is in the PALACE OF MYSTERY and its can be a pain to get in on the weekends and holidays if you didn't eat dinner there. Sometimes the open up other rooms for special evens. Like the circus freak show or some of the members hang out and would do tricks at an open area for the heck of it. I love the magic castle!
