ReviewID: 6bCWvNGN_SiR40MMUm6LkA
ReviewerID: gonp8uRLxapkGu8xWFctyg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Terroni
Category: Italian
i had dinner here last night with the same rowdy fun crowd i dined with at pace.  similar to that review- it is hard to separate the dining companions with the dining experience.  yet- isn't that the case PERIOD?  if you have a fab meal with your boyfriend you are having a fight with you are probably not going to tout that meal as one of your favorites.  but if you dine with fun, crazy people- eating at denny's could top your list of favorite places.  thus i am going to attempt to separate the two by giving each their own separate review.. . my dining companions- 5 stars!!!  i was the token female last night and boy was i in for it.  it's fun being 'one of the guys' because you become privy to all sorts of jokes and innuendos that you might not get a chance to hear if you were out with your girlfriends- or with an evenly mixed crowd.  last night i heard/saw it all.  i don't think i laughed so hard in quite some time.  so much fun!  and this group definitely affected my dining experience.. . my dining experience- 4 stars.  still quite good- but not a perfect 5.  we had a reservation but weren't sat for almost a half hour.  we sat at the bar while waiting and the bartender was busy but friendly and helpful.  once we were sat our server greeted us right away which was cool because we were afraid we might be missed as we were sat in the corner.  one of our group had to exit early so he ordered a pasta dish that came out pronto.  we also ordered 2 authentically italian looking margeurita pizzas and the guys loved them (i don't eat cheese- but i loved the crust!).  i had the sauteed calamari appetizer and the swordfish entree.  both were quite tasty!  but a very odd thing happened with my swordfish- it came out with some odd looking bulbous attachment to it.  it was purple/bluish and it looked like an eyeball or an organ.  it was really gross.  i asked the server about it who told me it must be part of the dish- but he went to ask the chef about it.  the chef promptly came out and apologized about it- saying that it was a natural part of the fish that should have been cut off and he graciously took it off our bill.  luckily i was able to compartmentalize that experience and continue eating.  it wasn't that big of a deal but it was definitely an oddity.  the others in my group had pastas which they liked but i don't recall anyone raving about them either.  for dessert we had the lemon sorbet (served in a lemon!), fresh biscotti (oh so tasty!  rivaling my great-grandmothers!), and the chocolate thing (whatever it was- i loved it but my dining companions didn't.  it was DARK chocolate- meaning not super sweet- which is just the way i like it.  yes- i like things dark, intense, brooding.  which is one of the reasons i like scorpios.  but i digress...).  . . all in all it was a good meal.  it wasn't average but it wasn't fantastic.  i would go back- because the ambiance is nice (very authentically italian, spacious, kinda loud- but fun for a social night out) and i'd be interested in trying more on the menu.  a couple suggestions- perhaps more than one fish entree special.  i don't do meat and i am not into pasta (i am part italian- i grew up on it and have had enough to last me my entire life i think)- and for a fish eating vegan there wasn't a lot of options.  also- i think a tasty apple tart/crumble would be a nice addition to the menu.  but that is purely subjective ;). . i will likely be back- as i can walk to this place from my house!  i will update my review if i have a fabulous experience not counting the company.  for now though i'd definitely suggest checking it out and seeing how you like it for yourself :)
