ReviewID: 6cRgWu3fE6k3kt5Oiu0Mtg
ReviewerID: FLMRT4tDE4VlM1wyDK5QGg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Korean cuisine is one of the few cuisines for which I'm still a complete and utter newbie.  I had no idea what to expect when I walked in here.  None.  I knew there would probably be kimchi involved - even the rock I've been living under has let that information in - but that's it..   . I was surprised and delighted by the grill placed smack and dangerous in the center of my eating space.  I was charmed by the profusion of small plates.  I was impressed by the way all the waiters took care of all the customers with no worries about whose table was whose.  Even though there were raw short ribs and shrimp smoking away on our grill with no specific cook dedicated to their success, between all the passing cooks/waiters, every piece was done to perfection.. . Our main waiter, the one who started us off, was well aware of our ignorance and thus took special care explaining to us what everything was and how to eat it.  Without his guidance, I would have eaten my butterflied shrimp alone instead of dunked in sesame oil and garlic pepper sauce, wrapped in rice or radish paper, and garnished with greens.  His way was infinitely better.  I tried both.  And though I'm not a huge fan of beef, I ate my share of the juicy, flavorful short ribs.. . From the side dishes, the best one was, far and away, the fish cakes.  The others: chili cucumbers, potato pancakes, bean sprouts with sesame oil, potatoes with a sweet marinade, potato pancakes, broccoli w/curd, some mystery dish that was either noodles or a very noodle-like vegetable in mayo, and of course the ever-present kimchi.  None of them, except the fish cakes, stood out as being fantastic, but they were all tasty and different.  Given a choice, I'd always, always rather have a smattering of very different small dishes than one gigantic heaping platter of one thing, even if that one thing is very good.  In that sense, this meal really agreed with me.. . I didn't like their policy of ordering two BBQ dishes per table.  I would have rather gotten one BBQ dish and one different kind of dish (as per the above preference).  The BBQ dishes are the most expensive thing on the menu, and I think for the amount of food you get, it's worth it, but to be forced to get two is overkill.. . Oh, and yes, you do smell like BBQ for the rest of forever, but I don't mind that!
