ReviewID: 6eHEUmNNr7-y7rpFGtJ-_g
ReviewerID: y1B1eZzZ6qP_yz2Tom7yRA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
Dear Diana,  . . It has been brought to my attention that you have an evening at Lola's planned, this coming Friday night. This makes me,  your liver,   rather nervous for a few reasons; allow me to elaborate on my concerns... . . The five dollar happy hour martinis. Diana, you and I know that this is a red flag.  When the martini varieties are so plentiful and inventive i.e. Key Lime Martini,  and so strong, and at the affordable price of 5 bucks each,  it is hard for you to "pace yourself".  (BTW, I laugh out loud every time I hear you use that expression... if livers could laugh.) . . I know you tend to relax and drink a bit more in spots with great atmosphere, and your history with Lola's proves as much.  I'm just happy  - well not embarrassed- for you that you didn't feel like showing off at the pool table.  Ditto for the uber hot guys that seem to be in every corner of this place.  Yeah you just sit right there at that cozy candle lit table  and talk to your friends - don't make your liver choke a bitch. . . Eat something.  The padding makes my job a little easier than dealing wiht 100% alcohol, let's give the stomach and the pancreas something to do..  For god's sake have some chicken skewers, a little pizza, or those cheesy hush puppy balls that are so good here.  MMMM. Cheesy hush puppies.  . . Last time you were here, Diana - well - we'll call it the "lost car incident" and leave it at that.  (i may be part of your endocrine system, but I can be discrete. We're not called your internal organs for nothing.  See - liver humor.  )  And may I add, the next day was none too pleasant for me, and the rest of your body was pretty pissed off, too.  We did appreciate the day off though... you call that a "detox", I believe?  . . Listen, bitch, you've put me through so much over the past 16 years your lucky I'm still functioning. Now do me this one favor and fucking take it easy at Lola's. (Home of the Sour Apple Martini)  I know a potential problem when I see it.  Now if you'll excuse me, I need to assist in digesting tonight's dinner. . . Hugs n' Kisses,  . . Your Liver
