ReviewID: 6FAJyrDQSS1HjmhTujp6xw
ReviewerID: lXBosYcopOX3woQZZj2o_A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
Hmmm. Good thing Groupon exists. I got a $50 for $25 so it made the trip worth it. Taste is pretty expensive (esp. for a college kid!).. . As for the food... it is rich. When we left, my friend said he could feel oil oozing out of his skin. We started off with the Pear and Caramelized Onion Pizzetta. This was my favorite savory dish. It was so unique! I wish I just got four of these instead of the three other dishes. The famous Mac &amp; Cheese was disappointing. I took a bite and felt like I had been deceived. That was it? I felt like I was eating pasta shells with cream. Maybe I got a bad batch. I was sad. The other two savory dishes we ordered were the Kobe Meatballs and the Kobe Burger. These two dishes can be summed up in one word: butter. I felt like Paula Deen cooked this and put in a stick of butter into each dish. And on top of everything, Kobe beef should definitely be eaten in small amounts. This was an overload. Oh well, I'll learn from my ordering mistakes and hopefully be more satisfied next time. BUT there was light at the end of the tunnel. The chocolate bread pudding with vanilla gelato is AMAZING. I love bread pudding and ice cream so, this was a perfect combination. My partner in (eating) crime had a different opinion though. He said it was practically a brownie with all the chocolate. I ignored his comment and proceeded on to finishing it myself. :). . A couple other notes:. - The waiter was nice but when we stayed for two hours (and used a Groupon) he sort of rushed us out because there was a line outside. I mean we were taking up a four person table and we were only a group of two.. - The bathroom was so small and oddly shaped. It was as if they forgot to put a bathroom in the floorplan and said, "Oh, sh*t. We forgot the bathroom. I guess it could fit in this little corner...". . Overall, Taste was okay. I wouldn't come here again for anything but the pizzetta because I feel that I could the same bread pudding and ice cream elsewhere. It was only worth the trip because I had a Groupon and ended up paying $40ish for a dinner for two instead of the $70ish.
