ReviewID: 6g1vUnC3ndAaZvaMj2UnwQ
ReviewerID: 9E-yyWmwR0tj5YTb9frekQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
Any place where you see a server wearing a hat in the shape of a garlic clove tickles my fancy in more ways than one. . . People can talk about the interior decor all they want. To me, as long as the decor doesn't affect the taste of the food I could care less about colorfully painted walls. If anything, I say color adds character so bring on the food!!. . First off, let me just say I L-O-V-E garlic. I know you're saying to yourself "Geezus, how does this girl have a boyfriend?!?!" Luckily, he loves it just as much as I do so you know I'm a winner in all respects. When we came here, we were celebrating my bro's birthday so we had an ample chance to try a bit of everything. . . Let's start off - The bread topped with garlic and herbs. It was fresh and straight out of the oven. When I tore a piece off and dipped it in the olive oil/garlic/basil(?) pesto sauce, I was in heaven. Christ! If I could live on dinner rolls alone, this would be it. I had about 3 rolls before the entrees even arrived. Man, what a bread piggy!! It was a good thing I had iced tea on hand, otherwise, I'd be dead meat. Our entrees consisted of pasta, lasagna, calamari, salads, and a slab(which looked the side of a a cow...it was THAT thick) sided with sauce and a creamy horseradish mixture. . It was all delicious. The steak practically melted in my mouth. You barely had to put pressure on the knife to cut it. For a steak that size, it was cooked to perfection. As for the pastas and lasagna, you couldn't really go wrong with either. Both were creamy and decadent, filled with garlic-y goodness and what have you. Just the mere thought of it now makes my mouth water. For dessert, we ordered the garlic ice cream which surprisingly was tasty to say the least. But it was one of those things - some people liked it, while others didn't. It had the creaminess of ice cream but it had the taste of garlic. To me, i thought the flavoring was just right. There was a nice balance of the sweetness from the garlic and the creamy texture of the cream in the ice cream.. . It was a great meal overall. . . I say try it at least once. It's not as bad or as stinky as people make it out to be. You'll thank yourself later. Trust me, I know I did.. . *nom nom nom* garlic bread.
