ReviewID: 6gNR8t33f8xC-Dt9A39QjA
ReviewerID: UHVT7jzsik6DHYj54kSRYg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
(3.5, actually) Since I was housesitting in Glassell Park, I took this opportunity to finally check this place out.  Their motto is "slow fast food," which I can dig.  I am all for expanding and getting creative with the slow food movement (despite the irony).  Oinkster comes from the Taylors Automatic Refresher business model, yuppifying fast food favorites by actually prioritizing culinary technique and ingredients over a bloated menu with too many offerings and poor quality.  If they end up sourcing free range meats/local produce to truly live up to the slow food ideals (and prices!) I'd give them 5 stars.  If they already do, it's not apparent on their marketing materials.. . I had the Oinkster Pastrami combo which landed me at ~ $12.  The house-cured pastrami was paired with gruyere and a house slaw on a soft hoagie bun.  The pastrami was thinly sliced and the cheese regrettably did not melt.  The pastrami was respectable: if not more salty than flavorful and the bread ended up getting soaked through with juices.  I'm not a soggy bun fan.  The horseradish mustard was a nice accompaniment.  I'm more of a Langer's/Katz's gal but this pastrami sandwich was fine despite the cheese/soggy bun shortcomings.  It was quite large so I could only get through a half.  As others have said, the fresh-cut potato fries are crispy and excellent.  . . I didn't get to have the ube shake but I  give the head chef props for the nod to his pinoy heritage and "local" cuisine given the area.  It's nice to see non-pinoys enjoy these things and it might be nice to see some other small creative nods in this direction for the future.  I saw the dessert offerings in the glass case with lemon bars and non-descript cupcakes but they were too much after my big meal.  They also have alcohol so that's a plus.. . I would definitely return to try out their other offerings.  I hope they find much success because I'd like to see more of these places around.
