ReviewID: 6I3WmuOAP52TNrk_n6PdRg
ReviewerID: iUD0waOgP-Dk-n0nBEqMlw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I'm a huge crawfish fan - I drive out to Westminister (Little Saigon) for the best frigging cajun crawfish. A friend of mine told me why go so far when The Boiling Crab is down the street. She said the flavors were excellent (The whole she-bang) she described it coming with corn, sausage, and onion - which is how I get it in Westminister. I was so excited, the very next day I went down there, ordered 3 lbs (my wife and I gobble down 3lbs in Westminister). We took it home, sat down, popped open some beer. The minute the both of us took our fist bites - there was a tear in our eyes. It was crap. There is no flavor - it was the worst crawfish we've ever had. The corn and the sausage weren't even tasty. We wound up trying to wipe off their "flavor" and throwing salt and pepper on it. I've had better crawfish at Todai on the weekends. That's how bad it was.. . Even the Long Beach Crawfish festival has better flavor. This is upsetting because I live in South Pasadena - and have to drive to Orange County to get GOOD crawfish.. . To those of you who love the Whole shebang - you're missing out. I realize that if this is the only flavor you've had, you'd enjoy it - but if you've had better flavors - then you'd also think this is crap. I don't know the name of the place in Little Saigon - they changed owners last year. I saved the address 15454 Beach Blvd and the number is 714-889-1580. The new owner cooks the crawfish better than the previous owner - though the previous was still better than Boiling Crab. I was just there on Wednesday. I don't think you can eat there - I think it's to go only - at least that was what it used to be. I never eat(the crawfish) there as I only go to pick it up anyways - you can eat anything else there.. . I highly, highly, recommend everyone going there and picking up a couple of lbs. You WILL not be disappointed, and you will never want to go to Boiling Crab again - well, at least not for the crawfish.. . Also - the crawfish are fresh - you can see them as they weigh them out. It's only $6.99lb.
