ReviewID: 6iCFH9yHunSd1t3HZSrGLA
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I went here for a special brunch on Mother's Day, and I had a better experience than my previous dinner here.  The outside of the restaurant is nice with a gorgeous lounge area (though the sofas weren't that comfortable).  The inside is very welcoming with a lot of warm colors and a lot of wood.  The restaurant's interior is kind of an elegant take on a business commissary (corporate casual; not really a romantic setting).. . In terms of the food, it was significantly better on this visit.  For their brunch, they offered a three course meal for $48.  The portions were good sizes (not too small, not too big).  Before the meal started, they brought out an assortment of bread--small biscuits, blueberry scones, raspberry bread, and a carrot/coffee cake.  The raspberry bread and carrot/coffee cake were the best.  However, I would have preferred they offer a few more more non-sweet bread/pastries.. . I started with the pea soup and lobster fritters.  It was okay but a little on the bland side.  The first lobster fritter tasted just like a hushpuppy.  However, the second one had more of a lobster taste to it.  For my entree, I had the crispy pork belly (which was good though I would have preferred just the top crispy; the overcooking/crisping of the pork belly kind of dried it out), pork shoulder ravioli (very good), spinach (good), and finally a fried egg (also good). . . Before dessert, we were served complimentary miniature chocolate mousse.  Very rich and tasty.  Topped with a kumquat and toasted marshmallow.  Make it bigger, throw in some ice cream, and that could have been the dessert right there.  For my dessert, I had the chocolate tart (very rich and creamy but also light) with gelatin and caramel ice cream (homemade; it was very good and a substantial portion).. . I also tried the lamb which was good and the red velvet cake dessert (very ordinary; could get it at a store; kind of on the dry side as well).  I also tasted the smoked salmon and cream cheese flat bread, which was excellent.  Warm flat bread topped with cream cheese, smoked salmon, arugula, red onion, and a vinaigrette.  It looked like a pizza, and it was something I would definitely order again.  Though very skimpy on the salmon portions.  Funny enough, the people next to us (who order right after us) were told that the salmon flat bread was no longer on the menu.  That is probably why the salmon portions were so miniscule.. . The service was okay, but it was kind of slow at times and then fast at other times (for instance, they served the complimentary truffles/accompaniments right after the main course)--almost like the server wanted to get us out of there.  To wrap it up, I would say probably 3.5 stars is more suitable for this place.  I would probably come back--but most likely for lunch (where the prices are more reasonable) and not dinner (too many other places out there I would like to try before coming back).
