ReviewID: 6JtTFE9NA9u26g09oTy2Ag
ReviewerID: Uit6vvFxthHbwOHIYI0sfQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
I had one of those experiences, which it could have been hell, but it wasn't due to all the stars aligning that night. =). First started off with French Onion Soup and Mushroom salad.. I am not a salad fan, but this was one of the best salads I have ever tasted! =p. The soup was ok, but I've had better, ie. Vie De France in SCP.. My oxtail pappardelle(sp?) was really good. I loved the never ending super wide pasta.. However SF did not like the Monkfish and I totally agreed.. It was super stinky, like bad fish stink.. This dish reminded us of cafeteria food so I made sure it got sent back.. The server handled it ok, and instead ordered the Kurabuta Pork chop, which was amazing!!!!!. The Red Velvet cocktail (with blood orange juice) was not as exciting as my last visit. =/. . The reason why I can't give this place a 4, is b/c of what the server said about the Monkfish dish.. After we told her we wanted it sent back, she basically made a statement that it can't be so horrible b/c it's one of their signature dishes.. Well, first of all we know fish very well...we're asians!!! And SF is Chinese American brought up on fish, fresh live fish as a matter of fact.. Either way, it shouldn't matter why we want it sent back.. So many things I wanted to say about the dish, but SF just said it wasn't to his liking...what a drama killer. =p hehe. . Then no management personnel came by to see if everything was ok and etc.. I come from a restaurant background of sort and it's one of things you learn in restaurant management. You always want to check back and make sure everyone is happy and they leave happy!! =D. . I'm not sure if I would be back, but I still think it's one of the best places   around this neck of the woods with a little mood set in place.. . Otherwise I would totally go for Honey's Kettle Chicken, which is so awesome!! And sometimes Tender Greens when I feel guilty.
