ReviewID: 6jyWU1acFbnWB1lokKTWlw
ReviewerID: cA-XNFjxCPo_qAn6NuaM3g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
Loved the ambiance when we entered the place, very  contemporary, comfortable feel as soon as we crossed the threshold.  We had a rather large party of 14, so it took a bit for our whole crew to assemble--so spent a good 30 minutes up front by the bar.  Appetizers ranged from surprisingly tasty (tater tots w/ mustards was excellent...) to rather bland (spinach dip didn't come with anywhere near enough croutons and wasn't much better than you could get at a good deli).  The drinks from the cocktail menu were generally strong and well made.  All in all, started off on a positive note.. . Once seated for dinner, it  started to go down hill.  Vegetarian options were very slim pickings despite assurances from the events manager that the kitchen would be more than capable of handling any special orders from our group's 4 vegetarians.  The general consensus on the entrees was basically a "not bad, but not great", especially for the prices.  The highlight of the meal was definitely the beef short ribs.  Others failed to impress.  My dessert was way over the top... a super, super thick chocolate cake paired with a sorbet so tart it'd make the devil himself pucker his ass cheeks a bit.  Very disappointing end to an evening that had started off so well.. . Stars for the friendly wait staff, decor, and great wine selections.  Minuses  for so-so entrees, an owner or manager that just sorta hovered around our table for an awkwardly long time shooting the breeze as we all stared blankly at him, and genuinely bad desserts.. . i've since come a second time since my original visit and generally came away w/ the same impression.  Great, friendly staff, good drinks and appetizers.  Decent main courses but not at the price points.  Desserts that I generally really didn't care for.. . I'd come back to chill around the front room and enjoy snacks and drinks at the bar, but never again for a nice dinner.
