ReviewID: 6lECmFeTO0tJL5aVep_qTg
ReviewerID: Q_fF04Uu5eAo0D-b3FqaYQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Does Alinea really need another review? In my opinion, YES! A few tips: 1. Do NOT think about money...don't even let the thought of your final bill cross your mind because it will completely ruin your experience. 2. Do not think about the time. You will spend 4+ hours eating at Alinea and will only enjoy your experience if you fully concentrate on the food, not the bill and definitely not if you are on a tight schedule. 3. Do not choose the wine pairing if you are a lightweight. You will get drunk and possibly puke up all your delectable food. 4. Find someone or a group of friends you can sit with and chat for 4+ hours without being annoyed or have any awkward silences. There is no music or plasma tv in sight inside the restaurant and all you have is good company to entertain you if you choose wisely. 5. RELAX! Alinea is not pretentious and the waiters will talk or even joke with you if you ask questions or joke with them. Now, onto my review: . Like most reviews, Alinea is not your typical unplanned dinner on a night around town. It is truly an experience with multiple layers that will continually surprise you throughout the night. As mentioned before, dinner was about 5 hrs (we chose the 24 course grand tour) and although I love my fiance and can talk to him about anything, you get tired of non-stop conversation and after awhile, we started to people watch in a discreet manner. We noticed that most couples/groups at the restaurant usually go through these steps when a new dish is presented to them. 1. Look at it, smile and sometimes say wow. 2. Take a picture if they have a camera. 3. Put the food into their mouth 4. Quickly look confused after the first bite 5. Munch some more 6. Start to smile and lick their lips 7. Discuss what they just ate. Very few dining experiences will take you through steps 2, 4 and 7, but Alinea does! Not only is the food equal to a true piece of art, your taste buds probably never experienced so many different explosions and different layers all from one dish. The service was impeccable as expected, although I did notice that it started to slack a tiny bit when more tables started to fill up, where I think Tru deserves 1/2 point higher in this category. I played a joke on the waiter by practicing, then folding my napkin EXACTLY like the new ones they place at your seat every time you return from the washroom. Upon my return, I could see my fiance turning red from trying his best not to laugh, it turns out, the waiter fell for my trick, but nonetheless in a very professional manner. One of the waiters noticed my trip to the washroom and started to head to our table with the real linen napkin, noticed there was another one in its place already and instead of turning around from where he came from, he paused ever so briefly and continued on the path he was already going like a fashion model. To top the night off, we were presented with individual menus...why I say individual is because I don't eat duck and my menu reflected that exclusion whereas my fiance's menu had at least 3 dishes with duck in it. Finally, we were able to sneak a peek into the open kitchen and the employee who walked us out showed us where Chef Achatz was. From that glimpse, we could tell passion truly seeps through him because it seemed like he was oblivious to everything else surrounding him except full concentration to the food he was preparing at that moment with a slight smile on his face displaying his pure enjoyment. We asked what time the Master Chef returns home and the gentleman replied "3am." Chef Achatz is definitely a chef all beginner chefs should look towards as inspiration.
