ReviewID: 6luZ6R6ZgvmD4UXNB-RIeg
ReviewerID: x6sjZBrrk_j5bI6K5-vPBA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: RA Sushi Bar Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Sometimes it pays to know people that know people... This experience is based on a "soft opening". Yes, you can call me a hypocrite, because I loathe the review that results from what I consider special treatment. I guess I feel it is OK to write this, as the issue was discussed with other Yelping Attendees and we agreed that it was a different situation. You see, in this situation, we ordered from the menu and the restaurant was jam packed with people coming and going. Really it was not different from what you would expect at any restaurant in Midtown on a Saturday night. Of course, I must admit that this discussion was over my 4th cocktail. . . The atmosphere is casual, kind of loud and fun. The decor reminded me of something from the 70's, with large dark beams, high ceilings and round ball lighting. Of course, it had a funky twist, with the globe lighting being red, rather than mustard toned, a smattering of contemporary artwork and not so subtle edgy music playing in the background. . . We were seated and ordered our first cocktails, where I tried the RA -Pleasure. It was a tad too fruity for me and I was envious of Adam R.'s, Tokyo Tower. It was light, bubbly and just a hint of fruit. Something I could sip on all day. . For Appetizers, we had the Tempura Shrimp which was ample for a party of four and from what I am told was wonderful. In fact, on several occasions that evening, I heard that it was very good. I ordered the other appetizer, which was Pineapple Chicken. I had assumed that it would be OK, since the description said it was sauteed chicken. Much to my surprise, I took a bite and realized that it had a little crispy around the meat. I guess one of these days I will stop assuming and actually ask. No worries though, Adam is a big fan of Pineapple and loved this dish, as well. . . Now, I must admit that I am a novice when it comes to Sushi and I think RA caters to people like myself. I can imagine many of my foodie friends would be turned off to the type of rolls that we tried, but I say you must take it as it is... I would explain it as being more of a fusion style restaurant and I think everyone would be impressed with the quality, creativity and flavor of these rolls. . We did not hold back when it came to ordering and tried four different rolls from the Signature Sushi section. Of course, our selection was somewhat limited, as I am gluten intolerant and Adam is lactose intolerant, as well as shy of a little heat. . We opted for the King Crab Roll, the Tsunami Salmon Roll, the Lobster Shrimp Roll and the Crunchy Shrimp Tempura Roll. . I did not try the Crunchy Shrimp Tempura, but it was Adam's least favorite. It had a crunchy beet tempura on the outside and he was not fond of it. He did pick and eat the shrimp out of the roll, though. . I really enjoyed the Salmon Tsunami Roll, which had Crab, Asparagus, Cucumber and was topped with slices of Salmon on top. It was really good and I think I ate all of it, except the one bite that Adam tried. . The Lobster Shrimp Roll and the King Crab Roll were very delicious, as well. We managed to clean our plates, aside from the remains of the Shrimp Tempura Roll. . . After dinner, Adam ordered the Tsunami Punch Cocktail and was informed that it must be shared. Naturally, I stepped up and agreed to take one for the team. . The cocktail was 60 ounces and served in a footed fishbowl with two straws. I guess it was a blend of Sake, liqueurs and fruit juices. It was pretty tasty and one would expect that you would catch quite a buzz from it, but we both agreed that it was a little light on the alcohol. . . Most people would probably stop after the Tsunami Punchbowl, but we opted to join other Yelpers for another cocktail and I tried the Blushing Geisha. It was a combination of Lemonade, Raspberry flavored vodka and raspberry liqueur. It was really tasty, but again I question the amount of alcohol that is actually in the drink. Of course, it could possibly be that I just shared 4 different rolls with only one other person and that rice was soaking up the alcohol. . . Other than my suspicion of weak drinks, this place was fantastic. A great place to come with friends, because there is something on the menu for everyone, the food is awesome and the atmosphere very energetic. I will be back soon and this time I will not need someone that knows someone...but, of course he is welcome to come, too.
