ReviewID: 6QKtpOkZShZNmdJRzcrjQw
ReviewerID: jNsPTMmg9EcqY7q2Q-Rm6A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
My friends wanted to try Pink's for the longest time. So last Friday while we were in LA, we decided to venture out to Pink's. When we got there, the line was to the end of the block, which was supposedly short compared to the usual busy time. Pink's looks like a regular old hot dog stand, but with a bigger line than other places.. . When we got in line, we were prepared to wait awhile, so we grabbed a bright Pink menu and decided to see what we wanted. After waiting in line for almost 45 minutes, my friends had changed their minds a couple of times on what they wanted to have. I guess that's what happens when you wait a long time - everything looks good! The menu is definitely very unique with about around 20-30 different types of options with various hot dogs and lots of different toppings. . . Luckily (or unluckily) for me, I am a vegetarian, so I only had one option. I got the Veggie Hot Dog which came with guacomole, tomatoes, onions, &amp; cheese (which I added) on top. My friends got chili dogs, Planet Hollywood dogs, and Spicy Dogs. They didn't really think the chili dogs were much better than the ones at wienerschnitzel, but loved the Planet Hollywood dogs &amp; Spicy Dogs.. . As for me, the veggie hot dog was a bit plain. And just because it's vegetarian, it doesn't mean that it has to be plain. There is a lot of very tasty vegetarian food out there. . . Anyhow, a few great things about this place is the wide variety of options they have. Also, parking is free here and they even have a parking lot attendent. pretty cool. Lastly, one thing I really noticed that was great about this place is the way it's organized. First, you get in line, then order your food. After you order your food, you pay at the cashier. Then, you have the option of taking your food to go or eating there. But if you do eat there, all the toppings, straws, forks, knives, napkins etc., are right there after you get out of line. Then, there is plenty of seating inside and outside. This way, people don't have to order and pay for their food, and then squeeze back through the people in line to get out. Instead, the flow of the restaurant goes in one direction and smoothly through. . . Overall, I definitely thought this place was unique. I would also bring people back here who haven't been when I'm back in LA.. . Notes: Cheap food, CASH ONLY! and they're open till 2 or 3AM depending on the day.
