ReviewID: 6qUvJARY4nBLmglNMkjgyQ
ReviewerID: vIAvOGxfCfod4OzpQaJekw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Oh look, another Griddle Cafe review. How original.  (OK, now that I've gotten that off my chest, I can proceed...). . Breakfast is sacred to me. For some reason, I've been unable to find that perfect breakfast that fills me with that feeling that I've both indulged my desires as well as fueled my body for the day ahead. . So, after reading the countless reviews of Griddle Cafe, I dragged my wife out of bed on an early Saturday morning and trekked over to Sunset. I wanted to get in early to avoid the crowds. Nothing is going to hinder my experience of griddled foods. And after suffering the constant barrage of old-man quips and swooping eye rolls from my non-breakfast loving spouse, we finally arrived to a moderately busy restaurant. Plenty of tables and no waiting. Just the way I like it.. . I stayed relatively safe and ordered the blueberry pancakes, while my wife stayed boring and unenthusiastically ordered plain ol' pancakes. I warned her that portions were big and there'd be no way that we weren't leaving with leftovers. After a short wait and some delicious French press coffee, our mountains arrived. It was overwhelming. I was up to the challenge, but still- that's a crapload of pancakes. . . And that is where I deduct one star. . . While everything tasted fabulous, and was exactly what I was expecting, there truly is too much of a good thing. In these eco aware times, it seems that Griddle Cafe is doing nothing more than wasting food. Who really wants to eat pancakes for three days straight? Not me. And why not bring breakfast back to it's variety. Cut down on the pancake size and maybe add a side of sausage or bacon. Since when did breakfast become just pancakes? Or just Eggs and Bacon? Where is my variety? Where is my cornucopia of griddle cakes, fruit, bacon, sausage, jellies, and eggs? Why is always an extra side now? I can't reasonably justify ordering 17 pounds of blueberry pancakes and then tacking on a side of sausage. That's just plain excessive. . . Oh well. It seems that my quest for the perfect breakfast continues, but Griddle Cafe definitely earns it's namesake.
