ReviewID: 6s4HiyFt7yMnWSNqnT_elQ
ReviewerID: 3uJootQ876cXOb4Q2H39IQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I've had hospital cafetaria food all week.  No worries, not as a patient.  I work there.  And it's UCLA's Ronald Reagan cafetaria, which is spanking new and fraught with yummies, so again, not the worst thing to happen to a gal.  But, it's still a cafetaria, hence gets boring.  Pizzeria Mozza sounded like the perfect antidote with its unique play of toppings and cheeses.. . First of all, they need to do something about that clusterf*ck at the door.  After putting down my name for a party of two at the bar, I spied an empty bar stool and asked the front gal if I could please have a seat and enjoy a glass of wine while I waited for my friend.  She said no due to their policy of seating only when all the members of the party arrived.  Fair enough.  I went outside and perused the menu nailed by the door.  Then I squeezed into a spot on the bench.  A little uncomfy so I went back inside and just stood by the doorway.  It got increasingly crowded and a little gentleman at about 4 feet saved my life by opening the door.  Air!. . After a 30 minute wait, they called my name.  Hurrah!  Good seats at the end of the bar, we met Bartender 1.  Humorless fella who discouraged us from ordering the margherita.. . Thus, we ended up selecting the squash blossoms and burrata as well as the fennel sausage and scallions.  The squash blossoms pizza was the ultimate disappointment.  First, it was cold.  What the hell, who serves cold pizza?  Take a pointer from Pitfire, burn that sucker if you have to.  Pizza only tastes good cold in the morning after a hangover.  The burrata was nice, though not the best I've had.  The kicker was that the squash blossoms were literally squashed against the top layer.  Ridiculo.  No comprendo.  Scratch that, nosotros no comprendemos.. . The fennel sausage was better.  That sausage was mighty tasty and nicely seasoned, breaking apart with the ease of a fork.  It, too, wasn't hot, though.  What's going on?  Heat lamp?  =/. . On a brighter note, the salad with parmesan and anchovy dressing was delicious.  And those thick chunks of bread buttered and toasted oh-so-intelligently did the marvelous trick of coming at just the right time, right before I accidentally ate the silverware housed in paperbags, mistaking it for breadsticks.. . The wines were a'ite.  I'm not a big fan of Italian vino unless it's uber expensive, as I find that with Italian wines, there's a huge differential with price point.  For example, an expensive amarone or barolo is divinity!  But, the chianti and amarone you find at, say, Trader Joe's, suck donkey balls in comparison.. . Now for the service.  The people here are not the friendliest bunch.  Bartender 1, as said, was a humorless, smug chap.  The front girl replied to all questions with textbook sincerity.  This, my friends, is irony.  They all kind of have their nose vaguely in the air, conveying no personality... except Fernando, Bartender 2.  He was a peach.  Offered us several tastings until we were happy and made our experience as best as it could be.. . Last but not least, let's talk money.  Our bill came to about $95 before tip.  Two cold pizzas, a salad, some bread, and 3 glasses of wine.  An arrogant fleecing is what that is.  And the valet is a screeching-halt $10.  Gotta hand it to them, it takes balls to charge $10 for a pizza place.  Providence is $8 if memory serves.  No, my car did not return freshly hand washed, waxed with blindingly shiny rims.. . Note to Pizzeria Mozza:  Get over yourself!  You'll find me at Vito's and Mulberry's until my pizza cravings can bear it no more and I move back to New York, or god-help-me, New Haven.
