ReviewID: 6tUJu6MW-tbaR0O8L5Hxlg
ReviewerID: lf1m4CbheuUR7fFZoLGRvA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bacchanalia
Category: American (New)
Oh Bacchanalia how I have fallen in love with you! You greeted me like an old friend.You and your staff treated me like family. You must have known we needed a nice, low key, relaxing evening. Even though you had about four or five people waiting on us, you would have never known this to be true, very smooth orchestrated service delivery, much appreciated!. . The servers were amazing, you explained everything in glorious detail, sometimes twice to my comfort. Without the attitude that normally comes with a place of this caliber!. . The decor was warm, understated, elegance. The chairs, tables, spacing was well thought of. Even though there were people right next to us, you would have never known! The tableware, silverware, glassware all appropriate for the occasion.. . The wine selection was spot on, I liked the half glass full glass options, well done! The mixologist did a great job on the Martini's Delicious!. . The 4 course prix fixe menu was perfect! With the chefs additions it turned into 7 course meal! Thank You!. . Risotto a perfect blend of flavors and just the right amount! Dover Sole was the best I've ever had! Thank god it was recommended and I got the last one of the evening! The add on Cheese Selection from Star Provisions was unbelievable, the cheese monger took his time in explaining each one and he was spot on in his recommendations! The mulled Cider and shortbread cookie was a perfect choice to cleanse your pallet prior to dessert! The Chocolate Souffle was perfect but the real star is the Mint Ice Cream it's as if I was eating a mint leaf pulled right from the plant AMAZING! . . Ron the Matire D was gracious, friendly and appropriately conversational. The gift from the hostess on the way out capped off an incredible evening with friends.. . Now the piece de resistance are you ready, are you sure: $75 plus additional $10 for the Cheese Selection per person! Best price I've ever seen for an experience like this. I have and would pay nearly double in other cities and have been treated worse. WOW!. . And of course I have two things I would recommend to the management!. . 1) A dark napkin for my dark clothing!. . 2) Recognize a left-handed person and adjust the service delivery to accommodate this highly superior individual trait! LOL!. . Great Job! I Love you Bacchanalia!
