ReviewID: 6VbOH-OcoSxCWABlh44m5A
ReviewerID: wAQ25wMBKxtRmBaFBRq5wQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Einstein&#39;s
Category: American (New)
3.5 stars. . went for a friends birthday.. . restaurant itself is very nice inside though i was a little put off by the face that it was Friday night and the restaurant was hardly packed. most of the patrons were sitting in the outside seating area, but we chose to sit inside (where it was less humid and temp controlled). the inside of the restaurant was VERY nice and i really liked it. i think it would be great for drinks :). . positives: . -the chicken under a brick is SUPER DELISH!!! i think the chicken was deboned and meat was very moist and juicy. paired with the tomato something sauce, garlic mashed potatoes, and veggies it was very yummy. i would def get it again.. -my friend had some trouble with her salad and the manager/owner was very generous and took it off our bill. and gave us a free dessert (though he said it would be free anyways since it was a bday dinner). -we got the key lime cheesecake which was very nice too. topped with mixed berries, it was a little tart and sweet at the same time. i brought the leftover slice back home. -my friend got the chicken burger (which apparently replaced their turkey burger). i thought it'd be dry and flavorless...but when i tried a bite of the patty, BAM! so flavorful!! tastes like the filling of chinese dumplings/potstickers. yyummm. nice size portion too.. -calamari had good flavor and a good dipping sauce.. -they were very good about splitting the check! which i love!. . negatives:. -the service....was.......interesting. maybe it was just our server, but he was a weird guy. his jokes/comments were not amusing, and he didnt handle my friends problem with her salad very well. also, one of ther other servers kept wanted to take our app and app plates away before we were done...he asked maybe 2-3 times. maybe he was trying to be efficient, but it was quite annoying.. -the calamari. like i said earlier, it had good flavor and good dipping sauce, but was overly greasy and too many 'tentatcles'...which i understand is a personal pref, i dont like tentacles haha. -parking was a pain in the butt. they dont have a lot/any designated parking/complimentary valet. so....its either circle around 10-11-12th/piedmont street for parking, or pay $5 for parking. annoying either way. . all in all, a positive experience. i would definitely go back to try it again. maybe for the monday $14 mojito pitchers/$5 burgers!
