ReviewID: 6VchUY5lC0lMLkzmEKfyZw
ReviewerID: h25vnXfrFPckqCGqFLe3oQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
C'est comme ci, comme ca.. . I first learned about this restaurant through an article in the NYT about the chef's quest for The Perfect Burger (. http://www.nytimes.com.... ). As an aspiring burger connoisseur (I'd probably go vegetarian if it weren't for a good burger) and a fan of sandwiches in general, it was on my list of places to go. . . Due to schedule changes we made a last minute reservation @ 7pm which they still had available on a Friday afternoon, and then due to the infamous LA traffic we were running a little bit late, which they happily obliged. Upon arriving we must have passed by the place a couple of times, the restaurant front is deceivingly small (the interior is much more spacious). Unlike most other LA restaurants which block off the front for Valet, they have spots available right up front, which I'm happy to I got one. (They do have Valet just about 25 ft past the restaurant front). . . My date had read that the restaurant can get pretty loud and she requested a table in the quiet area, which again they happily obliged. Unfortunately it wasn't all that quiet, but I suspect that the rest of the restaurant had it much louder. Other tables weren't so close that you could hear their conversation, it was just the general volume was very drowning. Otherwise the general ambiance was nice, contemporary but not so minimalist and overall comfortable.. . Now on to the food! So as I alluded to before I came for The Burger. I had commented to my date how in the article the Chef has spent so much time and effort into his creation, taking into account the very specific cooking time, lean meat percentage, and going through several iterations until he was satisfied. I was very excited to try the burger and when the time came I ordered it without hesitation, medium rare.. . Unfortunately I think I may have hyped myself up too much on it. The meat I felt was under seasoned and didn't have a lot of pizazz. Overall, it was just ok. It wasn't bad, but wasn't really memorable either. My date had the maine diver scallops, which I tried some. I was actually more impressed with the scallop dish and enjoyed the combination of the grapefruit, frisee, scallops and I believe it was pureed celery. . . For dessert we shared the =Pot au Creme du Chocolat. Having forgotten most of my french I was expecting something more than pudding. A rich pudding and pretty good pudding, but its still pudding. Yeah... . . Well overall the experience was ok. I found it difficult to talk with my date, having to constantly strain to hear and ask her to repeat things; makes me look like I'm not a good listener, which according to ex girlfriends I'm sufficient at portraying that myself. I don't need a fancy restaurant to advance that image for me. I'd consider giving the burger a second chance but... there's just so many more places out there...
