ReviewID: 6VOzFKiKYyFS8JVImwJVMg
ReviewerID: YDNRUAGWTPZfT5emfO3gIQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Great place for a nice prime rib dinner.  Went there for our 2nd time last Saturday. . . Showed up for our reservation 30 mins. late (bad traffic), though we called from the road letting them know we would be late.  We were expecting to wait for some time as they probably already gave up our table (reasonable expectation).  Got seated within a couple of minutes - in the back however - but got seated nonetheless.  Very nice. . . Got a glass of the Lawry's Cabernet.  I was the only one drinking in our party, and didn't want to order a bottle or anything expensive, especially as I wasn't hosting the dinner.  The wine tasted like a merlot, though it was still fine (Lawry's Merlot by the glass is also available on the menu), but who's to say my taste buds are that accurate?  Didn't want to raise this issue, again because I wasn't hosting.  Best bet for ordering wine here is to get a bottle so you know what you're getting. . . We all got the Beef Bowl cut.  Great prime rib.  Compared to The House of Prime Rib in San Francisco, a tick below in quality, juiciness, etc., but still great.  Great sides, too.  Buttered peas are a nice option not available at The House of Prime Rib.  . . We shared a couple of lobster tails.  A little small and dry, and maybe not worth getting here, especially for the price.  Prime rib is what they specialize in, and that's what you should focus on.  . . It's the Holiday season, so they have a pumpkin cheesecake with fruit compote and cinnamon whipped cream on the side.  Get it if you still have the appetite.  The cheesecake still had a couple of clumps of cream cheese (should be mixed/creamed together for a little longer), but that wasn't too distracting.  It is a special, seasonal dessert, so you would expect more attention paid to it.  . . Would have given 5 stars if the beef was a little juicier, the cabernet a little more like a cabernet, and a better blended pumpkin cheesecake.  Would still recommend to anyone who likes prime rib.
