ReviewID: 6VRWCjCCZaNNKYPDlkmT_g
ReviewerID: jT2Aqf9q_jfDWUnF8fifCw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
a 5-Star date for sure! . . I was taken here last September on a fancy-pants date. The 10-course degustation at Tru is something that I've always wanted to do, so the dude really couldn't fuck up taking me here. I'm not going to go on about how amazing the food was; I think others before me have covered that base much better than I could! . . So I was the only person under 35, and possibly the only woman, in the whole joint. And wanting to make a real splash I had chosen to wear my sexiest red halter dress &amp; 4.5 inch Kors heels. I left my hair down; I definitely stood out . Now you should know that I love to laugh and smile and I certainly wasn't going to tone down my joy on a night I'd been waiting for for years! . . I def stuck out like a sore thumb. For a second, I feared my wanton exuberance would cause us to receive bad service and make my date angry with me. But my fears were assuaged at our first interaction with the staff. Everyone was so polite, thorough, attentive, knowledeable--and somehow pulled off this service expertise while making us feel completely comfortable and welcome. . . Some courses were strange but everything was splendid and exquisitely presented. Something that really sticks out to me: At the end of the meal our maitre'd rolled out a cart full of housemade sweet goodies and encouraged us to try one. And me, being a complete glutton--but a charming one!--sweetly asked if I could have one of each. I expected him sneer at me with disdain, or even say no. But instead he excitedly said, "Yes, please try them all!" And you bet I fucking did. . . My only complaint was that the remote controlled vibrator my date had inserted in me in the cab on the way over had lost it's shit on course 4 and just went off willy-nilly with no rhyme or reason. And I was even more upset when it died completely at course 7. . . Oh also, after you eat a goddamn 10-course meal you are definitely gonna be too fat to fuck when you get home.
