ReviewID: 6XfqQUfPsWxO2537UtFsxA
ReviewerID: 5uLDXlf_JC483HSBVprzAg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
I guess like my Dim Sum Express review, Crustacean might serve Vietnamese food, but not to the same crowd that eats Vietnamese at Pho "insert number here".  There's a different purpose here.  You go to a "True" Viet place to chowdown..regardless  if the fork is to the left, right, clean, or unclean.  At Crustaceans, some dude personally comes and hands you chopsticks like it's Excalibur in King Arthurs hand and deshells your shellfish.  Don't get me wrong, I love both.  Minus the ridiculous price, the garlic noodles if tasty as well.. . But something that really gets me is (maybe b/c I'm Asian) An's Secret Kitchen.  Supposedly, the employees are not even allowed back there to see what the SECRET is.  It's a kitchen inside a kitchen.  Like a keebler's house... C'mon, give me a break.  An's secret recipe is garlic lobster.  Shit, you can get that shit from any Chinese-Viet seafood house.  But the mystery is the hype about Crustacean!!!  My clients were ENAMORED over it...  I'm bet Chef An (probably a Mexican dude) is laughing his/her ass off when people tell this story... leading people to believe its like an oriental sexual position...something outta Tantra book. . . This place became a scene after 9pm.  Let me digress... When I walked in at 630, they said they'll check if we could stay past nine at our table(b/c it was going to become a club).  I was like WTF!!!  In my mind, I was saying, "Don't make me bring out my Chinese voice".  I told him "this is one of my biggest clients and it's his bday"..what a chump...he said if we wanted to order food after 9pm, it'll cost us 50 dollars for each dish.  I seriously wanted to hit him.  What a dick.  Anyway, "don't sweat the small stuff" right?   We went along since it was my clients choice for bday.. . Anyway, I won't be coming back to this place.  Why 2 stars?  B/c I might be forced to this hell hole from some clients.  A celebrity scene...but mostly of posers.
