ReviewID: 6xjzFgIou3BOHeh3NWSSOw
ReviewerID: UHm2auqzAq18Du8Dz2EjMg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Brazzaz
Category: Steakhouses
Brazzaz comes in at a respectable 3rd among the Bermuda Triangle of All-You-Can-Eat Brazilian Steakhouses; Fogo de Chao &amp; Texas de Brazil representing the other two "corners". . . It's the poor Brazilian Man's version of Texas de Brazil minus the sushi bar.. . What is there really to say? We all know the deal: eat as much charred hunks of skewered meat as humanly possible. Green means bring it on! Red means I've stuffed myself so badly the mere sight of food is giving me nightmares.. . Chef Max has developed a little Churrascaria scorecard with the following attributes:. . 1) Quality of Meat. 2) Selection of Meat. 3) Seasoning of Meat. 4) Frequency of Visits. 5) Salad Bar Selection. 6) Desserts. . Here's how Brazzaz scores:. . Quality of Meat- B-  I'm judging by marbling, texture, and flavor. The meats here were a little lean, tough, and modest in flavor.. . Selection of Meat- B  Brazzaz does have a respectable selection, but nothing blew me away.. . Seasoning of Meat- B-  This is where some proper seasoning can go a long way---especially when the meat quality is average. Unfortunately, the seasoning was inconsistent and often bland.. . Frequency of Visits- A-  At Brazzaz, they know what you came for and that is beef, beef, and more beef. The servers come frequently to your table with smiles on their faces. In fact, you'd think they had bonuses tied to how much beef they can convince you to eat.. . Salad Bar Selection- B  Okay. If you are foolish enough to waste your appetite on anything uncooked, then you really need to rethink your strategy. The salad bar at a churrascaria is like having a gorgeous hotel room in Vegas. It's nice, but you are probably not going to be spending much time in it. Yeah, I guess the salad bar is decent; not that I would know...=). . Desserts- C+ If you actually have room for dessert, then you need to email me your secret at . MaxisaPig@gmail.com.  (not a real email address). I could tell that I wasn't missing too much from the dessert cart; mostly Casino/Cruise Ship Buffet type desserts.. . If you live in River North or the downtown vicinity, then you probably get the BOGO deal from Brazzaz. That coupon makes this place a worthy visit. Otherwise, I'd give the other two a try.
