ReviewID: 6XwgLSBJcJkkG5GYIsykVQ
ReviewerID: 49uIvrvYOx0roSnhccaKeQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
With all the press and praise Pizzeria Mozza has gotten, my hopes were fairly high going in. A friend and I decided to go there for a late dinner on Saturday evening and despite not having a reservation, we got seated right away. Service was very good, menu is interesting, atmosphere was decent (despite being seated next to a guy who was coughing like he had advanced TB - come on, douche, if you're sick, stay home).. . I don't know that much about wine, but the two glasses we tried were good. The food is much more gourmet than it is pizza. We ordered one Margherita to get a baseline for comparison to other places and one squash blossoms, burrata &amp; tomato pizza.. . The fancy pie was pretty good and the Margherita was decent as well, but they don't seem to really be going for anything special. The Silverton touch seems to be to take the hard crust of La Brea Bakery bread and apply it to pizza. To me, if you're going to have a wood fired oven, you might as well try to make a soft, chewy, Naples style crust.. . If they brought the temperature up a couple of hundred degrees and cut the baking time down, they'd probably end up with a nicer pie. The crust also didn't seem to have any flavor which leads me to believe they're using commercial yeast rather than a natural starter. It was hard to tell though since the crust mainly consisted of large air pockets and hard shell. The toppings were good and oddly (and sadly for me), this seems to be their focus. The topping ARE great, though, and if you enjoy fancy salami and stuff like that, you'll definitely find a lot to like.. . Pizza, for many of us pizza fanatics, falls into four main categories: Neapolitan, New York, gourmet and crap. When I heard "La Brea Bakery," "Mario Batali" and "wood fired oven" I thought we might have a melding of the gourmet and Neapolitan category. Unfortunately, despite the breadigree of one of the owners, the crust/bread aspect of the pie leaves much to be desired. Mulberry Street Pizza in Beverly Hills has softer and more flavorful crust and they're just using a standard pizza oven.. . So what is Mozza? I guess it's just another foofy place that makes a gourmet pie. Maybe the appeal is that it lets us guys look (feel?) sophisticated while still eating our staple. CPK does that already and does it better (and I'm not really a fan of CPK). Pizza geeks, take it from one of your own, Mozza isn't for us.
