ReviewID: 6yGrcHmZYaBVmS3XVchQ8Q
ReviewerID: Lgs1F6IK7-djvpJfjvMStg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
***Awesome experience, great shows, so-so food.***. . As you have read from the previous users' posts, the place is a club, and you need to be a member to get in, or get invited by a member as their guest, or get invited by a performing magician there.. . I was lucky to obtain the contact info of a magician who performs there, so I wrote to him why I really, really, really wanted to go, and he was kind enough to send me an invitation. It's very hard for anyone who's a member or a performing magician to invite people they don't know because it's an elegant exclusive club, with a very strict dress code and certain standards of behavior need to be met. Some magicians have experienced inviting random strangers who don't want to follow the club's dress code or who'll get drunk and make fools out of themselves, risking the member's membership or the magician's gigs. So of course, they're very reluctant and warn you about not screwing up, which I think preserves the quality of social interaction and others' experience and enjoyment. I didn't get it at first, but now I do. It's a very fun, unusual, special place.. . The experience of the shows is amazing!!! Very funny performers with wonderful skills, real pros. And the castle has a very cute English-mansion-meets-cabaret decoration. There's valet parking @ $8, entrance is $20 per person for non-members who get an invitation, and the place is just lovely outside as well as every little corner inside.. . Now, for the food... I ordered a pasta with shrimp scampi and it really was nothing to write home about. The sauce had a lemon base that kind of ruined it for me and it was watery; it barely had any cheese and the shrimp were a little dry. In general it just had no flavor, very bland. However the salad with balsamic vinegarette was okay and the bread is divine, because it's a little sweet and they serve you whipped butter with it. My bf had the same entrée as me, so I only got to taste that plate. So perhaps there's other better plates on the menu, but not the shrimp scampi pasta. Their cheapest entrée was the NY strip steak w/ mashed potatoes @ $14 and the pasta was $24, cappuccino was $5.50+/-, you get the idea. But amidst the pasta not being great, I'd still love to return and try something else from the menu.. . It was a very nice experience!
