ReviewID: 6yuS_ebjS6CW0tcUntkLRw
ReviewerID: tYsXEs-GchKoIsjvNJpPEQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: New Wave Coffee
Category: Coffee & Tea
When New Wave first opened up I was very excited to see an indie coffee shop in Logan Square.  My first impression was that although the place was very unattractive (looks like 'The Max' from Saved By The Bell) it still served great coffee and food without any snobbish coffee-douche attitude. The attitude has certainly changed over the months and since they fired my favorite morning barista, the coffee-douchness has become a huge problem. . The one person who never gave me guff for wanting a dry cappuccino was gone!  (She was awesome). Yes, I understand that to the elite of the elite, a drink like that is "wrong", but I don't care, it is what i want to drink! Here's my money! Take it and please make my coffee! I will tip you! . Please don't be a jerk, I don;t deserve it. It is time to realize that not every person walking into this shop is a jaded hipster who hates the world as much as you do. Some of us are nice people and deserve to be treated that way. As a veteran of the service industry I can tell you that this holier-than-thou front is bad for business. If you care so much about impressing industry types and are going to try and live by your convictions or your credo of "We Won't Put It On Ice Because That's Just Wrong" (written on the menu pertaining to iced espresso), then it might serve you well to at least spell cappuccino correctly on your menu board.. Get it? . . Further more, it's easy to get over the lack of focus on what I can only assume is an 80's theme, the corny names for sandwiches, and other cringe-worthy aspects of New Wave, BUT the sheer fact that this place can have such a cruddy attitude towards the general public makes it worthless to me.. I can easily take my business elsewhere and not say anything at all, but I feel the need to make these critiques public so that anyone else out there about to open a coffee shop can take them into consideration. Not being a jerk goes a very long way...
