ReviewID: 6ywH7hojBLy2fqBTbtCssw
ReviewerID: xmNxfsWLBZlUw2tyoiaN-g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
During our first visit to Newport Tan Cang Seafood, my husband and I chose to forgo the House Special Lobster in favor of the crab.  We went back to the new location last weekend.  As a party of four, we had no excuse to pass it up again.  . . It was a cold, gray afternoon, so we were pleased to be presented with complimentary Hot and Sour Soup.  We ordered a small lobster (about 4 lb.), and ate every last bite of it (except for some of the abundant roe).  The dish itself is quite a sight to see, golden fried pieces of lobster with chunks of garlic and chopped green onions.  The meat was mild-flavored and tender; the garlic and green onions, crunchy, fresh, and bright.  In addition to the lobster, we ordered the dishes all Yelpers recommend: French Style Beef,  Clams with Basil, and Sautéed Pea sprouts,.  The peppery beef is nothing short of spectacular, especially when combined with sliced raw onion.  The clams were meaty (scoop them up with plenty of sauce).  I always order a vegetable dish at Chinese restaurants.  I love these pea sprouts.  You may want to try them before the other dishes though (the flavor is more subtle).  . . Overall, servings are quite generous.  Two of these dishes (clams and pea sprouts) were from the lunch specials menu, priced at $5.95 each.  Not bad.  The lobster was by far the most expensive item of the meal ($15.95 per pound).  I don't think I will be having it regularly!  Instead, I am curious to try some of the fish dishes and "sizzling plates."  . . Service was fast and efficient.  The wait for a table was perhaps 15-20 minutes (not too bad for lunchtime on Saturday).  We were initially seated at a huge circular table (for 8-10), but were moved to a booth upon request (by then, the lunch crowd had started to thin out).  This new(er) location is definitely a step up from the previous one.  Even the wait area is comfortable and pleasant.  It is a great lunch option, especially if you are meeting up with family or friends.
