ReviewID: 6z1-vaI22QmdxqSrZ13sjw
ReviewerID: qjkOmSEFFEeWVTtsIl0aAw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cafe 28
Category: Cuban
It's true, I've been known to exaggerate once or twice in my life.  But you must trust me on this--Cafe 28 is totally, TOTALLY fan-freaking-tastic!  Justin and I wandered in right as they opened yesterday at 5:30 and were seated right away--a good thing, too because over the following 15 minutes, the entire restaurant filled up--and this is no 10 top restaurant, either.  The space is much larger than I realized, with exposed brick, nice lighting and interesting art and photography along the walls.  And they have a patio (hurry up, warm weather)!!  I loved the lively Cuban music and after a delightful pina colada with chambord (delish!), I found it somewhat difficult to refrain from dancing.  Yeah, that's how I roll.  Justin had a margarita--very fresh and nicely balanced with a punch.  I think we will have quite a few more of those, hopefully on the patio this summer!  . We ordered the Taste of Cuba appetizer, empanadas de picadillo and chicken and ham croquetas served with a saffron sauce and plantain crisps.  I loooove empanadas and these were definitely very tasty.  For the price ($6.95 or something), you get a big load of food, which is always nice--but in this case not really necessary considering what we ordered for dinner.  I had the almond-crusted halibut which apparently is not always available, but it was my lucky delicious day!  The fish was flaky and nicely complimented by the seasoned almond crust; the jalapeno-mashed potatoes were creamy and flavorful and the fresh vegetable (green beans last night) were tender-crisp, just how I like 'em.  I ate like I'd never seen food before and cleaned my entire plate.  Justin wasn't able  to do the same, but not because the food wasn't fantastic.  He ordered the honey jalapeno pork chops and when our server brought out his dish, all the heads in the restaurant followed.  Eyes widened, jaws dropped and I cracked up when they put his plate before him--two (two!!) ENORMOUS pork chops nestled on a pile of the most delicious sweet potatoes I have ever tasted.  The pork was tender and juicy, sweet and spicy--and those sweet potatoes.  Oh Lord, they were so damn good.  I would totally go to Cafe 28 again (hopefully to sit on the patio) just to order a delicious drink, a side of sweet potatoes and one of their tempting desserts.  And I would be very, very happy, indeed!. So we ended up bringing home a whole chop and what little of the potatoes I didn't steal from Justin's plate... and it just so happens he's headed to STL for the Cardinals game today--he'll be a lucky man indeed if there's a single trace of those taters when he gets home.  The remaining pork chop is large enough that it could last two more meals, so he might just get more of that. :). I took one for the team and ordered a scoop of the burnt caramel gelato--it's actually really just ice cream, but man, is it GOOD!  I left waaaay too full, but so happy.  The food was fantastic, our server was very sweet (not to mention gorgeous) and all the staff we encountered at Cafe 28 were very friendly and accommodating.  I would go back in a heartbeat--there's so much more to try, the prices are excellent considering the taste and quality of the food and service...  I don't think it's an exaggeration when I say Cafe 28 is my new favorite restaurant in the city.. . *Edit*  I just realized I made a gross oversight while writing my review.  I did not mention the delectable butter!  Yes, it comes with bread when you are seated and seriously, I pretty much inhaled it all.  Well, except for that slice that Justin took out of the basket and placed next to his utensils so I couldn't get to it...  The butter, oh the butter!  I could eat it for dessert and be overjoyed...
