ReviewID: 7-Dy3UcD5xpSz4J6ETSpKQ
ReviewerID: SEC9M2eVOXdQ69moGNv3YA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
How do I say I'm sorry?. . I wish I could attach a picture to this review because if I could, I would attach a huge, motherfucking Lisa Frank-esque picture of a kitten next to a glass of spilled milk with the words  "My Bad!" underneath.   Actually it would be more like "Your Bad, Kinda!" or "Your Host Dude Sucks, But Everything Else Is Awesome!".. . As you can see, I initially left a bit of a scathing review for this place based solely on my interactions with the asshole host who is a total ShamWow/Slap Chop commercial guy look-a-like.   I'm not deleting the review because I'm not sorry about that and I don't want to take it back.   I meant almost every goddamn word, but I am sorry that I didn't go about expressing my dissatisfaction in a more sane fashion.   That sort of thing isn't really my style.   . . While I took a more jerk-off approach with my reaction, my better half decided to actually call the restaurant and ended up speaking to the general manager at some point.   She was entirely sympathetic about what happened and mentioned that the douchenozzle host in question was actually problematic.   Too much information?   Somehow, we ended up with a V-Day reservation which I'm sure wasn't easy for the restaurant to arrange and was entirely too gracious of them. . . We made sure to arrive EXTRA early this time.  ShamWow/Slap Chop wasn't "manning" the host station so that was a huge relief.   The hosts, the servers, and everyone else were all incredibly nice and attentive.   The restaurant really hooked it up and made the night special and magical and boner-inducing.   We had 5 appetizers, 2 zas, dessert, Lambrusco, a bottle of wine, Moscato--it was bona fide fat status all over our table.   The food was delicious--fried goat cheese with umbrian lentils, caprese salad, and amazing charcuterie were some of our starters.   I devoured my clam pizza like I was some sort of deranged sea otter.   We had the butterscotch budino with caramel sauce, whipped cream, and sea salt for dessert which I am pretty sure made me squirt--another sorry to the diners sitting next to us, send me your dry cleaning bill!. . Pizzeria Mozza is delightful, delicious, and delectable but please make reservations ahead of time and don't be late or else you might have to battle the host in a no-holds barred steel cage match to the death.
