ReviewID: 7-yctgdVGd1Y3WxyfIgkUg
ReviewerID: j_xdpXxPdSVhlwTJ7roKag
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I don't know, I'm wavering between 3 and 4 stars on this one.  Maybe I'll be nice and say 4 because it's really like a 3.5 for me.  . . I've been dying to try Sepia for a while now, so when Chef Week came around, I jumped at the chance to go.  The ambiance is great, very classy, but still lively.  Perfect.  Our server was friendly and helpful.  I appreciated that the entire experience was leisurely and that we were given the opportunity to enjoy.. . I started with the cocoa old fashioned, which was very tasty.  Especially the brandied cherry at the end.  Mmmm.  We ordered one of each dish from the Chef's Week menu, but, after reading the rave reviews, decided to try the applewood smoked bacon, pear and goat cheese flatbread.  It was very good and probably the highlight of the meal.. . The Chef's Week menu was just ok for us.  We started with the cream of mushroom soup and the squash salad.  The soup was decent, but I guess there's only so much you can do with cream of mushroom.  A can of Campbell's would have been just as good.  The squash salad was better and surprisingly tasty.  For entrees, we had the skirt steak with risotto and the cod with collard greens.  The skirt steak was delicious, but the risotto was just ok for me.  Crunchy.  Interesting.  The cod was not so great, the sauce was over the top lemony and overall, not a fan.  . . For dessert, the restaurant had run out of the bread pudding, so they offered anything on the dessert menu.  We ordered the chai creme brulee and the flourless chocolate cake.  I was so excited about the creme brulee, that I was seriously sad when the creme brulee was more of a soup brulee.  The flavor was good, but it was really watery.  Yikes.  That just ruined it for me.. . The best part of the evening, though, was when we left.  We walked out the door to get our car and...no one in sight.  We waited for a minute thinking the valet was probably going to get a car or something, but when no one came, we went back inside to ask.  The hostess said something to the effect of, oh, these must be your keys and handed them to us.  Nice.  It was 10:55 on a Friday night.  Guess the valet had a hot date.  Hilarious.. . So yeah, maybe 3 stars after all.
