ReviewID: 70li4EYn0WxQx1tchH-vsA
ReviewerID: eq0mBuvPMni9Z4hjrQPfqA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Alinea is definitely the next most memorable dining experience next to Joel Rubochon in Las Vegas, which is saying a lot actually because Joel Rubochon is the shit.. . Anyway, my boyfriend took me here for my birthday and it was perfect for the occasion.  Alinea is definitely one of those places that the dining experience is so unique and overwhelming that it almost overshadows the food.  Don't get my wrong though, the food is super unique, innovative and delicious but I think what really made it memorable was the intrigue of waiting for the next course (they like for their 10-course meal to be a surprise so you don't know what the next course is going to be) and acting like food critics (more like trying to figure out what we were eating) with my boyfriend as each course came along.  You get a lot of courses (10 or 15 depending on which one you choose) and they come in small portions - each course is quite heavy though so I was pretty full 2/3 of the way through.  Some courses were better than others but they were all consistently delicious.  If you don't want to get the wine pairing option, you can order wines in smaller portions to sample and pair with the different courses.  The servers were very professional - not exactly the type that makes you feel super comfortable - but they were knowledgeable and attentive.. . Unlike a lot of restaurants in Chicago, Alinea has a very roomy dining room.  Tables were spaced out far apart from each other so conversation never clashed from table to table.  The decor is modern but elegant, chic but not overly trendy.  It wasn't anything super special but the vibe fit well with the food.. . At the end of dinner, they brought out 2 truffles and a cup of hot liquid chocolate - they poured the hot chocolate on the truffles to "unwrap" it, as a way to wish me a happy birthday.  It was a nice touch.. . I'd highly recommend Alinea for an occasion or celebration - it's just not one of those restaurants you'd go regularly (not only because of how expensive it is, but the value-added of the whole experience would decrease exponentially if visits are overly frequent).
