ReviewID: 77fkBG1b26LdZfZtRYwGQg
ReviewerID: mDNgZdZ30LUNlQYr_nP6yw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
I live in the neighborhood and have been eating here for almost two years now.  It's always good.  Don't think I've ever had anything bad.  Kamil, the owner is a good guy and a great chef.  You can tell he cares because he's always there but more importantly, you can tell he cares in his cooking.  I've talked to him about dishes and it's obvious that he loves to cook and he loves to put dishes on the menu that he wants to cook.  I've eaten many items on the regular menu, but it's been a long time since I have.  Now, I look to the specials.  Kamil gets new ingredients or an idea for a different combination and runs it for a week or two.  They're great.  Some of the items are a little costly due to the ingredients (you get something with salmon for instance).  But, if you get a $9.99 breakfast item off the brunch special menu or the other specials menu, it's going to be awesome.  It just is.  I had the Huevos Tapitio last Saturday and it was so great.  My roommate had the Hangover Scramble and it was terrific.  Lunch items are great.  And he's known for his soups.. . I haven't been to the Bistro Nights yet, but they're every Friday night.  Each Friday is a different theme (recently had South American night from recipes he culled in travels through Bolivia and Peru - this weekend is French Bistro night).  I walked by one night around 10 or 11 and there were tables of people sitting chatting having clearly finished their meal long ago.  Bottles of wine littered the table.  (there's no corking fee).  To me, that's a great experience.  Kinda the euro thing.  Again, I haven't done it, but I'm excited to soon.  That's the only night they're open for dinner.. . Honestly, looking over what I've written, it sounds very homer of me, but I don't have any affiliation with the restaurant.  I just like to see it succeed.  For the prices and what not, it's that nice spot between high-end and diner.  Which seems tough to maintain a lot of times.  But, the food will win I believe.
