ReviewID: 7_wqcQA0lIQFoW92417D8A
ReviewerID: U3t2_ig8-ec8BpxBNmWjiw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cho Sun Ok Restaurant
Category: Korean
I've been coming to Cho Sun Ok since I was a young girl. This was one of my grandmother's favorite and became a family tradition to come here everytime we came to Chicago to visit (about twice a year). Now that I live in Chicago, this is the first place I think to take my parents, friends and co-workers. The ONLY reason to come to CSO is for the "cha-dol bae-gi" which is thinly sliced brisket. Chadol is a fattier part of the cow so you'll notice the fat creates a marbel-like pattern. . . I've noticed some of the reviews (complaints) about poor service and minor incidents of "racism." Really people - Koreans function better when asked. The concept of "service" is very American - the only country where people tip the way they do. Anyway, this will be more of a Korean BBQ 101 rather than a review.. . Once you order, the waitress will come out with a stone grill and a large assortment of traditional side dishes. They'll also bring out side dishes which are meant to be eaten with the meat like the green onion salad, marinated onions, and oil/salt/pepper dip. In addition, they'll give you a bowl of cold greens - I've been scolded many times for not touching the stuff. The waitress tells me each time that it's good to eat with the meat to ensure that the fat and cholesteral come out of your system (I wouldn't WebMD her on that). . . Once the stone grill is nice and hot, the waitress will come over and start cooking some of the meat. For the more proficient (or the regulars) they'll usually leave you to your own devices - especially if you look like you know what you're doing. Just a note, when grilling Korean bbq - remember it's the one-flip rule. Cook well enough on one side, then flip over and cook on the other - none of that flipping over 5 times to make sure it's done on both sides. . . If you're running low on side dishes, it's okay to ask for more. Actually, it's encouraged - the waitresses will act annoyed, but it's a compliment to them because you're letting them know that the sides taste good! After you're done with the meat the waitress will come by and ask if you'd like stir-fryed rice (bokkum-bap). This is the BEST part. She'll mix in all your left over side dishes along with rice and butter. She'll stir all the ingredients in and let the rice simmer on the stone grill until it's ready. Then, take your spoon and dig in!. . I've had the bulgogi and galbi at CSO. Doesn't compare to the chadol baegi. I've also had the naegmyun and soondooboo jjigae there - not so great. Just stick with the chadol baegi. $20.95/2 person serving. They give VERY generous portions.
