ReviewID: 7A4uu6cqOhDf0A2MSLW_qg
ReviewerID: nz7CcAFxJg9NlMd3WQsSYA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
...I can't figure out if I just had beginners luck or what.  Went to this place for the first time - and there was NO wait.  Odd with all of the other reviews.  It was a Friday night, and not to mention it must have been around 5:30pm when we got there.  . . Ordered:. 2lbs King Crab Legs (The Whole Shebang, Medium). 2 Lbs of Shimp (Butter &amp; Garlic / The Whole Shebang, Med.). 2 Ears of Corn. 1 Coke. 1 Corona. . Total Bill:  $68. . Is it me, or is that kind of expensive for 2 people?  The king crab legs were $18.99/lb, and I started to wonder whether or not we got 2 lbs (per our bill, it was actually 2.3 lbs) of it, as there were only 4 pieces, and surely they weren't 1/2 lb each.  We were tempted to order the lobster, but having a whole body of anything, including a lobster, kind of freaks me out; and not to mention I'm not paying 50 bucks for a lobster.  Besides, I'm not much of a pull &amp; eat meat kind of girl - I'm sheltered.  . . We sat by 2 ladies that were kick ass.  They asked us if it was our first time and admitted it was their first time too.  She offered us some of her basket of fries.  Totally awesome!  The shrimp w/butter sucked, but the one with the whole shebang was darn good - so we threw the buttered shrimp in with the whole shebang and tossed it around!  Of course the crab legs were the best.  They could've just thrown a bag of corn &amp; crab at me and I would've been a happy camper.  . . Service was mediocre.  Server came right after we sat down, so I asked for a few minutes to decide what to order.  She didn't come back after at least 15 min, so we had to flag her down.  She didn't give us 2 sets of the crab leg crackers (can't remember what it's called!) &amp; those little digging forks (and never gave 'em after I asked for 'em).  She didn't even serve us the food - another waitress did... or should I say another waitress came and threw a couple of bags of crustaceans at us.  Dude, she didn't even give us paper towels like they give everyone else - I had to ask for them.  Boo.. . So now that I got my bitchfest out of the way, here are the key points:  Pretty good food, a little on the expensive side for the crab, bad service &amp; you smell like you crapped yourself for the duration of the day.  I still smell!  Beer was decently priced at 3 bucks.  If you're not looking to break your wallet on a dinner, I would stick to the shrimp, crawfish, oysters &amp; beer.  I would maybe go back, but would never wait more than 20 min.  It's not worth a 2 hour wait in my opinion.   And now if you'll excuse me, I need to put some hydrogen peroxide &amp; neosporin on my hands from being stabbed by those crab legs.  :)
