ReviewID: 7aB7zNNzqHP3tyQ5241fQA
ReviewerID: WbqMdZRi5FeBJHKvwtNhwg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
So there's been lots of buzz about this place and I'm a burger fanatic. As soon as I read the reviews I was determined to immediately check this place out. I called the girls and we were ready to burger down. . . Even though the parking lot is pretty small, it's relatively easy to find street parking on La Brea or on 9th. I found parking on La Brea, directly across the street from Umami. . . We arrived early on a Friday night -- 7ish. We were seated immediately. I wouldn't say the decor is upscale, but it's uber nice. Upscale for sure for a burger joint. Absolutely the kind of place you could take someone on a date (unless he or she is money impressed whore). . . The menu is simple, I appreciate that. They literally only serve burgers and sides (fries, chips) and cool sodas. My Mexican girl got the Mexican Coke -- I've never heard of such thing, but it's heavenly sweet. Sugary goodness. We ordered 2 spicy chili pepper burgers, 1 pork burger, onion rings, fries and sweet potato chips. Burgers were $9 each and the sides were $2.50 or $3. . . Chili pepper burger: I enjoyed my burger, but it didn't taste like a beefy meaty burger. I generally don't like my burger on the pinkish side, but it didn't bother me. It was soft -- the burger that is. There was a delicate essence to the burger. My bun was equally soft and pleasantly sweet. The chili peppers were actually quite nice and spicy. But here's the thing, I was so not full after eating this burger. And I don't consider myself a hippo that needs to stuff her face. But I was definitely still starving. . . Triple Pork Burger: My girl loves pork, I mean loves it. I took a bite of it and it was really rich. Not in a good way. She felt ill afterwards. But there are tons of people who are super into very fatty pork, but that's not me. . . Onion Rings: It's tempura style and crazy greasy. I wasn't a fan. . . Fries: Yeah, there's not that many. But here's the thing, they're triple fried and heavy. Ya really don't need that much. Crispy and nice and salty. The grease factor didn't bother me, the fries absorbed the grease well. The fries are awesome. . . Sweet Potato Chips: Save your money. They're not anything special at all. Blah.
