ReviewID: 7DICuAUK1to0uTc_MaVb6g
ReviewerID: -_r4S5VwlcDQMWIxB8JM8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cameli&#39;s Gourmet Pizza Joint
Category: Pizza
Let me preface this review by stating that I do not like pizza or the murder Kroger parking lot.  However, I will let that go since I had totally forgotten how awesome this place is. Sadly since it is so tucked away and in such an awkward location it is easy to do. . I adore their "monster slice". it is in fact fuggin huge. It looks like they precook the giant assed monster pizza crust, then dress them and send them back through the oven. Which is fine by me. I find most pizza revoltingly undercooked. I had the monster cheese slice. it was AWESOME. Slightly charred thin crust ,that is just crispy enough. A nice mellow sauce, not too sweet. and a thin evenly melted layer of finely shredded cheese. Fold it or eat it with a fork. it's the jam. The side salad is also pretty darn big. But sadly no one has good tomatoes this time of year. The vinaigrette was slightly thin but very tasty. But then again I love to drown a salad in vinegar. The freshly grated Parmesan on top was a nice complement.  My dinner companion started with the 'bread sticks'. It was a crusty big chunk of bread topped with freshly melted, gooey cheese and a side of red sauce. It was terribly good. I could make a meal of the bread and a salad. She also had a calzone. It looked awesome. She said it was really good and took more than half home. It looked like a bread bra ,my guess, a 38C? On Wednesday it is the special, two 'toppings' and drink for 6.50. We sat at the bar and it looks like they have a large variety of liquor,bottled or draft beer.And, of course, cans of PBR , it is ponce.  . . The space is cool. They have televisions, and a digital jukebox. Bar space, booths and funky little tables. Everyone is nice and the bathroom is remarkable clean. I think I'll be back ,often. I like it. It's chill, there is great food and everything reasonably priced. It reminds my of Ponce 15 years ago. Please don't ruin it. :)
