ReviewID: 7eDAYZfwNM5-LK9E0yG30w
ReviewerID: n-YioJ-sLiw-ogzyA7vv3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
We had dinner for 5 last Saturday May 16, and it was a really wonderful experience. The service was impeccable, starting with the friendly and accomodating hostess, to the bubbly and capable waitress. The staff is always there to provide us with new plates after every few courses (we had 15 !).  The ambience is great, and the minimal corkage fee is even better. . . Since we ordered 15 different dishes plus 2 deserts, I won't go through everyone of them but here are some of the highlights:. . Flatbread with mushroom --- great ( a little salty at parts ) but it was a simple and delicious dish.. Sweet potato fries --- you can't really go wrong with this dish. Bacon wrapped dates --- SIMPLY STUNNING ! My favorite dish of the night. Crunchy sweet dates wrapped with bacon and ham on the bottom. Perfection ! . Asparagus --- perfectly grilled with a smoky flavor. Jamon serrano --- perfection with apple and arugula salad. Ham and eggs --- Another perfection with jamon serrano and eggs. Skirt Steak --- soooo tender and juicy. Mussels --- Amazing broth and nice, small-ish mussels. But very good nonetheless. This and the dates were the 2 best dishes. We actually ordered 2 of each. . Soka cakes --- Sweet and savory, with goat cheese on top. But maybe it might work better as a dessert. But I personally enjoyed it.. The others that weren't quite as memorable were the spinach (with an asian peanut dressing --- or at it least it tastes like it), the roasted eggplant, and the wild mushrooms. The chicken we ordered was delicious but nothing impressive. The tiger prawns were also delicious, but for $16, I'll order 2 more portions of the dates. Or go to a Chinese supermarket and get the prawns for $8 per lb.. . The chocolate churros was a little underwhelming, but the vanilla flan was exquisite --- creamy and delicious in a jar, to be scooped up and layered on top of a piece of crispy bread. Yum !!!. . All in all, this is an amazing restaurant. Definitely the best tapas I had in LA. and I would definitely come back to eat here again !
