ReviewID: 7gCoXPfvOBkx-ANKLinobQ
ReviewerID: l0_9uO9HSlhuMuMI95VASg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Gene &amp; Jude&#39;s Red Hot Stand
Category: Fast Food
For what it's worth, the place does have a rich history (pun intended, the owners are millionaires), having been around since the late 50's. My dad went there with his buddies when he was a kid. . . Here's the skinny: As for the hot dogs themselves, they're great. The menu, perhaps what has made the place infamous, is quite simple. All they sell are hot dogs, fries, tamales, and drinks. Nothing more. (No beefs, hamburgers, Italian sausage, you get the hint). A hot dog and fries is $2, which is a nice bargain. The fries come piled high on top of the hot dog and are wrapped up with it. In my opinion, the fries aren't all that great, but some people love homemade potato fries. They can be soggy and although you can reheat the hot dog later, the fries usually are just mush and I throw them out. . . As mentioned above, the place is a goldmine and is open long hours, usually to about 1am. When I say there are lines literally out the door, they can literally be out the door. I have seen upwards of 75 people (give or take) in a line once. The line usually moves quickly, but the massive amounts of people inside can irritate you, especially on a hot day. . . There are no places to sit inside, they have some window "tables" where you can stand and eat. I recommend either getting the food to go, or eating it in the parking lot. Which leads to this... . . The place, over the years, has also become a "hangout", a lot of high school and maybe college kids just standing around eating in the parking lot and basically loitering and looking for trouble. Especially being open late hours at night - do the math. This may be a turn off for some people. I'm in my 20's, and I have gone there several times with friends just to get food and have come out walking past dozens of younger people loitering, smoking, or girls just looking for "attention." This is usually only in the later hours of the evening though.  . . The place has great HOT DOGS and I'd recommend overall. . . Pros: Rich history, great HOT DOGS, economic prices, nice hangout (for younger crowd). . Cons: Long lines, kinda dirty/messy inside, average fries, and a 'hang out' at night.
