ReviewID: 7GHCJpzszkb5bp0PC3tJ0A
ReviewerID: a9JeahzYDt8bM4Ey69zPAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Shed at Glenwood
Category: American (New)
I like the restaurant atmosphere just fine.  Nice bar area and an open kitchen with an eating strip right up front of it, if you were so inclined to sit there.  . . The strip of buildings around the place need to be occupied to have some more things to look at and do before and after dinner without having to go anywhere else.  That detail is not the restaurant's fault but I do believe it impacts their business directly.  The location is just out the other side of a very seedy area; and that is really the only thing about it I didn't care for.  I do not find it shiek or trendy or cool to drive through, be in, or hang out in "the ghetto" or rough area of town.. . I decided to try the chicken hearts since this is the chef's pet dish.  I had them occassionally back home growing up; but I have never been in any restaurant that served them and prepared in the manner in which they were.  They were presented with a sunny-side up egg, in the middle of some Texas toast (eggs in a basket).  This appetizer was quite tasty and a treat.  I recommend it, especially if you have never tried them before.  Hearty, steak-like, and yes, they do taste like chicken.  And they certainly beat chicken livers, but there and again, what doesn't?. . I can also say the beets and goat cheese was also a tasty appetizer.. . I then had the free-range, pan seared chicken with sweet potatoe puree.  It was a very tasty dish with the skin seared just right and the main wing bone left on the breasts.  The sweet potatoe puree was good though they may want to consider removing it from the blender just a bit sooner, as it is very pureed...  Everyone else also seemed to have enjoyed their dinners.  The trout was evidently very good and the pork dumplings received kudos as well.. . The only thing at the table that did not go over well was the homemade ding dong.  No one raved and only said that the cream in the middle was good.  The rest was nothing special at all.. . Our waitress was very friendly and the service was good.. . The crowd on a Saturday night seemed a bit slow.  We were there from about 8:15 to around 10:30 or so.  While several couples trickled in, it never really got what I would consider to be busy.  I'm puzzled as to why this is other than purely its location. . . Get the word out and give this place a chance.  While it is not fine-dining and is not presented as such, it is a very nice restaurant, especially for date night.
