ReviewID: 7IPDhCDr79X7eyum7bbMyQ
ReviewerID: aEGy13uGCMQVf00QZYn1Vw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
Eight Yelpers met here today for a lunch organized by the wonderful Love C.. . My first impression upon walking up with Aimee was, "What a charming place!" There's a cute and cozy outdoor covered patio at sidewalk level and a small flight of stairs leads up into the restaurant. To the right, there is an airy room - a lounge or private dining room, I guess? - and to the left, the main dining room, which is bright but very small.. . We were seated directly in the middle of the room next to another large party that was against the wall. There wasn't much room between our tables, and despite me moving as far up against the table as possible while still being able to breathe, the waitresses and busboys bumped into my chair repeatedly...without saying excuse me.. . I ordered the Taste Club (chicken breast, avocado, chipotle mayo, lettuce and tomato on country wheat) with pommes frites. The club was okay, nothing spectacular. I think a club is perfect for a light lunch, but this was more like a hot chicken breast sandwich on toast, not really ideal for a mid-day summer meal. The pommes frites were good, though, very thin, well-salted, and crisp. And the mimosa ($6.75) was really wonderful.. . Love and Fran ordered the Crab Cakes Benedict, and the eggs were obviously overcooked and there was barely any hollandaise sauce (Love had to ask for more.) On the other hand, Kevin ordered the Kobe beef hamburger and said it was amazing.. . Obviously, the food reviews were mixed, but what pushed this down to a definite three-star for me was the service. Our waitress looked crabby and our empty drink glasses languished on the table, waiting for refills that didn't come until we were essentially done eating.. . Upon overhearing us rehashing the meal and talking about what we'd write in our reviews, the owner came over and asked if everything was okay. Love told him about her overcooked eggs and the problem with the drinks. He told us to wait and came back with cards for a free dessert on the next visit, which might have helped redeem him if he hadn't brought three cards for eight people. He handed one to Love, one to Fran, and then left the other one in the middle of the table, saying we could "fight over it." Classy!. . There are definitely items on the menu that I am sure are fabulous - the grilled cheese Lauren had looked great - and it's not a pricey place. I just think eating at a restaurant is an experience, not just a meal, and the experience here was underwhelming almost completely because of the service. Thank goodness for great company and post-lunch Scoops to make up for it!
