ReviewID: 7Is0MVhhWR5Ttx3_ZbWV4A
ReviewerID: YEk-6rfOCLmEA7Cu-u8xmw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
I did my tour of duty at Friendship Chinese last night for the Yelp Eats promotion.  I was told that Yelpers love their Friendship Chinese, and I can see why!  Friendship Chinese totally caters to the Yelp crowd.  Hell, they even have Yelp pens (which I promptly pocketed) at the cash register.. . If you are reading this review and are planning on heading to Friendship for Yelp Eats, bring an empty tummy.  The portions are HUGE.  I have leftovers for the next 2 days.. . I ordered the seafood lollipop for my appetizer.  It was more like a shrimp roll; an absolutely delicious shrimp roll!  Crunchy, not too greasy and surrounded in a spicy sweet and sour-ish sauce, it was a great way to start the meal.  Course Two, or should I say Round Two, was the soup course.  Unfortunately they were out of the lobster corn chowder, so we were told to order any of the soups off the regular menu.  The won ton soup was good, not great, but let's be honest: When you're anxiously waiting your wok tossed beef tenderloin, you want to save some room.  So I sampled the soup and pushed it aside.. . Now for the main course... the exceptionally tender beef course served with bok choy, mushrooms, pea pods, carrots, and what we initially thought was a veggie, but turned out to be discs of VERY potent ginger.  I thought the appetizer and soup courses were big portions, but they don't have shit on the main course.  I believe this is a direct quote from one of my friends after seeing the quantity of red meat that was brought to us: "It's like they just put five cows on the table!"  We happily dug into our meals and found everything to be wonderful.  Our server was very gracious and upgraded some of our plain white rice to fried rice free of charge.  . . Dessert was kind of a let down for me.  Friendship was out of the passion fruit granite, which would have been light and refreshing, so we all got the flourless chocolate cake.  After a meal as hearty as the one I just ate, I would have liked something a bit less heavy.. . So there you have it!  Next time I'm out in Avondale (so THAT'S what neighborhood I was in...) I'll be sure to stop in.  I made sure to check out the regular menu as well.  Lots of choices and very reasonable prices.
