ReviewID: 7J5L2mBga28YSzW5cHH8aA
ReviewerID: 1Edd8rwruLx-_m6LVRc0Yg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Excuse me.... *clears throat*  ....my throat seems to be clogged with fat!. . Cutting to the chase I would have given CUT a 5 but I thought $160 for an 8 oz ribeye steak is too much.  If I'm going to pay that much I would want my left AND right socks to be knocked off while I am experiencing the most foodgasmic experience.  Don't get me wrong.  I had a wonderful experience here.  The food was divine but in a more mild tasting way.. . Japanese wagyu:. I tried it for the very first time today and talk about the fattiest steak I've ever had.  I was fair warned of it's fattiness but I had to try it at least once in my life and what better way than take advantage of an American Express gift card that I received for my birthday.  . . The best way I can describe how the steak tastes like is that it's not heavily seasoned at all.  Just the basic salt, pepper, and butter while the marbling just really speaks for itself.  Each bite has a burst of fatty juice and butter that fills the mouth and makes it's way down your throat.  The outer layer of the steak is thin with not too much of a crisp crust.  The overall taste is mild where I had to take a moment to concentrate on the steak while chewing slowly to savor it.  I wasn't exactly wowed by this steak like it was the best that I've ever had but I know that I will be forever ruined by its softness and melt in your mouth ability.. . Complimentary:. Gruyere cheese balls: Man... I love these little suckers!!  It was like a cheese puff with a kick!  I had to request more and they are made to order.  . . Bread: The pretzel bread is good like everyone said.  It was soft and buttery.  The other bread with the onion on it was really good too.  No need for any butter spread on it.  It was fantastic alone.. . Appetizers:. Bone marrow flan: Much more mild in taste compared to all the bone marrow I've had and doesn't taste fatty at all.  I think it's mixed in with yogurt or cream or something.  When I first tried it I only spread a little bit of the bone marrow flan because I had the preconception that it's gonna be pretty fatty. The best way to eat this is to slab it on.  Then you will get more a full body taste.. . Pork belly: At first I thought this was too tarty and was not impressed but once I ate all the elements together it was pretty good. The pear and greens canceled out the tarty taste.. . Asparagus, poached egg and bacon: This was interesting. This also needed to be eaten with all of the elements together to experience the full effect. I liked it.. . I thought the appetizers were all good.  I can't really pinpoint a favorite because they were all so different.  I liked the fact that they were clean and not greasy and it was plethora of different ingredients put together to create nice tasting dishes.  I am all for creativity and non-greasy food.. . Side:. Fingerling potatoes with bacon: I thought this was ok.  I should have chosen a vegetable side to try to cancel out the fatty steak.. . Service:. We had so many servers serving us.  Our main waiter was really cool.  He was more personable and not so fancy schmancy where talking candidly was easy.  The service here compared to Mastro's was a huge difference.  One point for CUT in this regard.. . Atmosphere: They play really upbeat music so it makes the environment very comfortable.  It has modern decor with huge portraits of Obama, Cate Blanchet, Robert Di Nero, and Speidi.  Yes!  Spencer and Heidi!  I thought WTH?  Haha.. . The night wouldn't have been complete without a star sighting.  Vera Wang walked in the middle of my dinner with her entourage.  That was pretty cool.  She's pretty small in frame in real life but for the most part she looked just like how you would see her in television.  I freaken love her wedding gowns!!. . Recommendation:. Look at Tiffany N.'s review on how to order.  She helped me a lot along with my friends.  For dinner for just 2 girls we went with 3 apps, 1 steak, and 1 side.  We were so full that we didn't even finish the side.  . . Cost: Total with tax and tip: Under $290.
