ReviewID: 7j7ymMK_Kj4iPQgFFw91FQ
ReviewerID: 56ao_CDMVcVTTBOqVuF4Ng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
I'm in love with Joan.  Who knew?!. . I felt like a kid in a candy store: the salads and meats in the glassed case were calling my name, let alone the desserts in the OTHER glass case, and then the individually wrapped candies and cookies in their cute, little cellophane baggies. I'm a sucker for adorable packaging.  Anyway, I digress.... . You join the long line at the counter, decide from the oh so many items, and then try to steal yourself a table (self-seating... ug!  Joan's only fault, I found). I had spotted someone eating THE most AMAZING-looking grilled cheese when I entered, and had begun salivating immediately; I ordered that, with tomato and (the devil's food) bacon. OMG. Such a happy happy Chelsee H.  I didn't even care that it then took 3 girls over 10 minutes to filch a table from other patrons.  . . We chatted giddily and eyed those around us who were eating.  All the sandwiches looked especially good.  When our food came and was tasted, we were so impressed. The grilled cheese was nothing less then fabulous (perfectly crispy, thick bacon, fresh tomato, on soft white bread -- probably smothered in butter!). One friend had the maple rosemary chicken breast sandwich on a baguette; it had this fabulous, homemade honey mustard caper sauce and the bread was so delish!  I ate most of my sandwich, then half of  hers!!  Joan called me a pig later, but I didn't care.  She'll love me even if I'm fat.. . My other friend ordered the Chop salad; also good.  Don't go with the baby field greens salad.  We ordered that to split but it was pretty basic/boring: goat cheese, pecans, and vinaigrette.  There just wasn't enough dressing on it, I think.. . Could we possibly leave without trying a dessert?  Of course not. Joan would NOT have that; this is why she makes it so convenient to pick up her sweets at a counter separate from the one surrounded by the gaggle of lunch goers.  I picked up a chocolate chip cookie and a snickerdoodle to go; the latter was great, the former not as good as mine.. .  : ) . . Sorry, Joan.  Maybe I can give you some pointers later. That is, if I can move after my enormous, delicious meal.
