ReviewID: 7jBG2TF_Q5gBBTrmhx3Hbw
ReviewerID: xwGQDwmWMRuzy2TxLKPXRA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I was a regular at the original Montana Ave. FO for many years (yes, before Sang Yoon took over) until the hordes made it too much of a chore to visit. The opening of the Culver City location was much welcomed and eagerly anticipated, and I've been there a few times since its April grand opening.. . The space itself is nice; classy if nothing spectacular. An interesting touch is the communal sinks by the restrooms ("Sons" and "Daughters"? Oh, right...FATHER'S Office, I get it). The 72 beer taps (alas, 36 beers times two, not 72 different ones) look great. The burger is still one of the best in the city, though I'm not sure if it's worthy of the Best Burger in America title bestowed upon it by Esquire. The sweet potato fries are outstanding and downright addicting. One friend vouches for the lamb skewers; they looked fantastic, though I didn't sample them myself. Personally I don't miss the ketchup, though the lack of substitutions probably annoys some patrons. As expected, the staff is very knowledgeable, and they do a good job in the absence of table service. Their beer suggestions are pretty much spot on, although one server recommended Tripel Karmeliet (fantastic) and some sage-infused beer (horrible) to us; my friend chose poorly, LOL.. . My initial visit was the first Saturday after its opening night, and at 5:30pm the line to get in was already forming. By the time we left (around 8pm) the line was nearly to Venice Blvd. On another Saturday visit my friends had to wait (at 9:30pm) but by the time I arrived at around 10:15 I strolled right in. In fact, FO was half-empty by midnight. We went this past Monday for an early dinner and grabbed one of the coveted outside tables. By 7pm, FO was bustling and small groups were sharing tables. Sang Yoon, the Man Himself, stopped by to check in and sample from the taps. He seemed to be in good spirits, and why not? If my bar was that busy and energetic on an early Monday evening I'd be pretty happy too. The grand opening hype may have subsided but FO can still get crowded; the best bet for now seems to be an early or late arrival, whether it's a weeknight or the weekend.
