ReviewID: 7M2DhYEvhRw5Sz1ZXW2b7w
ReviewerID: wchjqt5xvVaPAO_d1pGlwQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Sura Thai Bistro
Category: Thai
I'll start with the review in brief:. Food's mediocre, the all-you-can-eat sushi deal is not that great a deal when compared to Coast (on Damen in Wicker Park), the drinks are mediocre compared to Rodin (on Milwaukee in Wicker Park), the decor's quite interesting and funky (good), the service is good, the management is unhospitable (see below).. . If you're vegetarian the sushi deal is worthless. Don't waste your time with it.. . Ok, on to the detailed review.. . The Good:. The decor is very interesting. It's sparse, in a Japanese love-hotel kind of way. It might be considered cold by some, but I think it's sufficiently hip that it would make for a good date place.. . The Bad/Mediocre:. The food is slightly above mediocre. The all-you-can-eat deal is not such a great deal. I suspect that the reviewers who thought it was an outstanding deal have not really done a fair comparison with other places. IMHO Coast beats out Sura hands-down, especially since they're also BYOB, which means your money goes to the food rather than the booze. We did a comparison between what we ate and what the equivalent might have cost at Coast. The difference was $5, including booze ($35/person).. The a-la-carte menu (if you opt not to go for the all-you-can-eat sushi deal) is decent. The food is slightly chi-chi pan-asian. The flavors are decent, but the presentation is really very good. Given that Sura's neighbor is Bamee, which has some outstanding noodles and other thai dishes, I'd expect Sura to do a lot better for what they're offering. The closest comparison for me is Rodin (Wicker Park), which has more interesting and creative dishes at about the same price.. . The Ugly/Intolerable:. The management at Sura is probably my biggest issue with this place. I went to Sura with 4 other people. Two of us were vegetarian. I did not realize that Sura had a policy of not allowing a mix of sushi deal and no deal. I vaguely understand this policy given that restaurant goers are all thieves and cheats (yes, that's sarcasm). Once I was told this by our waitress I told her to get the manager so that we could try to explain to him that we were vegetarian and that they had 2 veg options on their all-you-can-eat menu. She said he was on the phone. I watched as he got off the phone and did not come to our table. So I went up to him, tried to explain our situation, and basically asked if he could make an exception in our case. He said he did not have the authority to do this. I asked if he was actually the manager, and he said yes! I re-iterated that basically what he was saying is that we were welcome to stay for drinks but could not eat because we did not wish to participate in the sushi deal which was worthless to us. He said that if that's the way I saw it that's how it was and he could do nothing about it!. . So I acqiesced, went back to the table and said that my wife and I would only have drinks since this was their policy. My wife decided to take up the challenge, went back to the manager, and essentially convinced him that we would move our table apart from our friends' so that there was no confusion about there being any food stealing. He agreed as long as the tables were 1 foot apart.. . Given that there was virtually no attempt made by the manager to make us feel like we were in the least bit welcome, and that the food was not by any means outstanding, I really can't imagine why I would either recommend or return to Sura. BTW, the waitstaff is very pleasant.
