ReviewID: 7mD3fcZY2aWO1Fr4sjhGgQ
ReviewerID: _e3X3aoUWwI38Znm09onAQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Clarke&#39;s
Category: Diners
I used to go to this place ALL the time when I was in high school and home from college during the summer. Heck, being a minor, it was the only 24-hour place I could hang out at with my friends after a day of punking it up on the north side.. . I used to pretend that I was a regular and that I really liked the place, but let's face, the food isn't that great. Seriously, it kind of sucks sometimes. I usually just stuck to breakfast food or a plain ol' cheeseburger because everything else on the menu has the tendency to really blow. . . There are a couple of things that Clarke's does excel at: chocolate chip pancakes and milkshakes. . . Let's start with the cc pancakes. To tell you the truth, I'm not even sure if the actual pancakes are really that good because they're disguised by 3/4 of a bag of Nestle chocolate chips gradually melting atop the cakes in a pool of pads of whipped butter and whipped cream---WAY satisfying after a sweaty night at the Fireside Bowl.. . The shakes are perfect diner-quality milkshakes--right down to the whipped cream and a cherry.  Pair a plate of Clarke's cc pancakes along with a chocolate shake and you'll be set for the weekend.. . Some things that blow at Clarke's: the beer chili. This was a special once when I was there. Gross. It was more like beer soup. I'd like to know what stoners were in the back kitchen that passed around the j and came up with this soup du jour. Maybe they didn't even make it. I seriously think that some hungover hippi in the back hurled up a night's worth of Old Styles and a chili dog from Flash Taco and served it as the special.. . Also, since I've grown up a little, I've realized how phony-boloney all the 'hipsters' in Clarke's really are. That's right, cool-looking waitress, I'm talking to YOU. I don't care IF you have cool glasses frames! I can tell that you don't have any lenses in them! Who are YOU kidding?
