ReviewID: 7NCWJN9UXWQviQ5y5Q7nIA
ReviewerID: bgmVgGxKqhWei48Iq71O9A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
I came here last night for our 3 year Anniversary with my boyfriend. He's been wanting to try this place for a really long time so what better way to celebrate &amp; he loves his garlic. We made reservations for 7:30 and valet parking was $4.50.. . We got seated in a small area where there's no privacy and I feel so claustrophobic. I was not comfortable at all, and the curtains should of just been closed lol my bf and I were joking. It's always awkward and you can hear everyone's conversation.. . The bread with the garlic spread with olive oil is AMAZING. It's so addicting and your mouth is full of garlic flavor. The rolls are hot and we got some to go :). . We started off with calamari as our appetizer. We got a small which was more than enough. It was lightly battered and tasted pretty good.. . Then we got our seafood soup. I liked it because it was full of seafood such as muscles, fish, 1 crab leg and lots of calamari and small little balls of pasta. My boyfriend said it tasted like spaghetti-o haha I'm sure he was just being picky and lots of that left over...well some left over since it got spilled :( ...you'll have to read that for my other review.. . Anyways, finally after waiting for a long time we got our food. I got the prime rib which was HUGE. The portions were right. Everything from the mash potato to the spinach and meat was good. The prime rib was really juicy and tender, but I ate only like 25% because I filled up too fast . . The bf got the 40 clove chicken. He said it wasn't anything special and I agree, but I did really love that sweet sauce they used. It went well, but next time we'll order something different.. . I was disappointed that our waiter didn't know it was a special event because he asked if we wanted dessert and I told him it was our "Anniversary tonight" and he said say no more. I did write a note on my reservation or a reason. Anyways, we got our garlic ice cream. It was SO good. We really didn't know what to expect and it was delicious! :) I wish they sold the ice cream because I'd definitely buy it.. . Overall, my first experience was pretty well. I think they need to remodel the bathroom because it looks kinda of tacky. I took a picture with piggy lol &amp; the candy did not help because I still had garlic breathe the next morning -__-"
