ReviewID: 7ntTrPoR2CAQAweoyLc9uQ
ReviewerID: 1R-28uSxyiLTIyoh8lStlw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
I actually liked this place.  It did not get a 5 star yet because their dogs arent that great to me, but the decor and the environment of the place is awesome.  You order in the front of the restaurant and then go around back to where the seats are.  The seating are is arranged with a few benches that you can sit on and share with everyone else.  There are also a few small tables on the sides of the room, while there are tables outside if you want to have outside seating.  They have condiments, but you share them with everyone also because theyre just on every table.  Some tables will have mustard, while yours doesnt, but you can always ask them for it.  . . The menu:. When you order a dog, you get to pick 2 toppings with it.  You can choose from Caramelized Onions, Sauerkraut. Sweet Peppers, Spicy Peppers.  Me personally, I ordered the Caramelized onions and sweet peppers, but next time, just caramelized onions.  . . Their dogs werent all that great to me.  . A few reviews say the alligator is good, but to be honest, I did not see anything special about it.  It tasted like cardboard to me... it had almost no flavor and it was very tough.  . . My girlfriend and I also ordered "Rabbit, Veal &amp; Pork Seasoned with White Wine", did not like this one bit.... the flavor was... no bueno... . . Luckily, my girlfriend ordered "Kielbasa".  This was good.  I only ate the others still because I bought it and ate it unwillingly, but the Kielbasa I ate happily.. . I didnt order a beer but the lady friend ordered Floris Apple Ale.  I had some of it to try it out and this is pretty good.  Tasted like juice, nothing at all like beer.  I mean, I would not order it to chill with a beer, but it goes well we food... . . I would come back and try the other beers they have and order the kielbasa again.  I like this place because its a nice bar.  Its spacious and has a nice vibe.  Come here if you wanna just chill with a few friends and have a beer in hand.
