ReviewID: 7PeY_5ncDNOfIetqHEEYTA
ReviewerID: y80788j8cq_WZu3AmR68Gg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Four stars for allowing guys that know nothing about anything to fake like they know something.. . I am here to save you from your life of action figures and late lonely weekend nights of World of Warcraft.. . You're game is seriously lacking.  You're crushin' all over this girl, but can't seal the deal.   You want to hit dem skizzins' and do the EW-CHEE-WALLEE-WALLEE-SHABANG-BANG, but she's showin' you NO love and you're not getting any play.  You're basically like a Tuesday, you have no game scheduled.  Bring her to Yamashiro.  You can fake the funk here and fool the low rent Holly Madison wannabe you've been wanting to make your Mrs. Smith.. . Ok, I'm all for authenticity and not for trendiness.  This place is definitely the latter.  Lots of smoke and mirrors here, but that's ok.  It didn't really bother me.  I enjoyed myself here.  Really that's all that matters.  Their sign outside read Cal Asian Cuisine (whatever that is) and it did not claim to be a sushi, teppan grill, izakaya etc etc. (keepin' it real, +1 star).  The name Yamashiro may indicate otherwise, but whatever, I'm not going to split hairs today.  I have a feeling this place has never been Japanese owned.. . At first glance, the architecture kinda reminded me of my relatives house back in Kyoto . http://www.yelp.com/us....  .  The inside did too, with the trailer home wood paneling (classy).  Before you walk inside, slow your role turn your @ss around and enjoy the view from the hill.  Though not the prettiest of cities, the sight is still something to be enjoyed. . http://www.yelp.com/us....    Ok stop wasting time, go inside now.  Show the girly girl the Koi garden.  Score some much needed points here.  You are now on your way to having her unleash *cough*  moisture *cough*.. . You hostess will lead you though what seemed like a maze me to your table depending on if you requested a view or not.  Go with the view . http://www.yelp.com/us.... .  Show your date that you're not all about staring at her overly exposed chest.  Let others do that for you.. . You will be handed a wine list.  Bypass that and head straight to the Sake list.  They did astound me a bit with their selection.  Order a bottle of this . http://www.yelp.com/us....  and after she has a couple of glasses, you will go from Kevin Federline to David Beckham in no time.. . Order the Wagyu beef  . http://www.yelp.com/us.... .  It's not really Wagyu, but more like Wagyu style.  But hey, neither you nor her know the difference.  Just explain that it isn't Kobe beef if it isn't solely from Kobe, Japan.  She will be smitten with your knowledge and be ready to National Geographic you.  Keep going.  Tell her Wagyu is the cattle they raise for Kobe beef (you can thank me for that tidbit later).  I liked it my meal, so you will too. Recommend the broiled seafood plate to her . http://www.yelp.com/us....   This will show to her that you care for her well being.. . Both of you will be impressed with the attention and service you get from your server.  You don't get this type of treatment at the Coco's you frequent.. . After a night of wining and dining her, hopefully you've fooled her into thinking that your some cultured sensitive man of the world, that is unlike the rest of the Ed Hardy wearing scumbags she's gone out with.  Remember to talk about all the things she's into like puppies and sunshine.  Do not, I REPEAT DO NOT bring up your collection of Teletubbies memorabilia while conversating.. . If you've done everything correctly, she will fall in love with you.  You will marry, have sub-standard children, and share many of these with her . http://www.yelp.com/us.... . . Cue the music:  . http://www.youtube.com.... 
