ReviewID: 7pTPto-Yf3osVcFTsauByA
ReviewerID: qcdJh9Sh1uowWBgQqSlQDA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
It all began with the wine, well actaully it didn't!. we began our meal waiting for our table in a crowded restaurant the day after valentines day (sunday night 9pm).  as we waited for our table i ordered a bottle of alsatian wine from the barkeep. Our table was ready before we were served our wine so i asked the hostess to send our wine over. as a frequent restaurant diner and also restaurant owner myself i like to play a little game called how long does it take.. . i like to wait and not complain about mistakes , i like to see how long it takes for anyone to notice their F-Up. Well 30 minutes passed and our waitress notices we have not recieved our wine.  we also have not been asked if we wanted to even order till 35 minute mark.  u would think that she would be able to get it herself! Nope Not Here, only the Sommelier can pour wine, bull crap i say! We got our bottle poured for us and since the tables are so close together the sommelier opened and poured it behind my back. i could not fully hear or see him as he poured us. he does say thank u for ordering such a fine wine. . . ok so i notice as i drink my wine there is a slight taste difference that im not used to. I grab the bottle and notice it was a different bottle than the one i ordered. thay poured me a 90 dollar bottle instead of the 35 dollar bottle i ordered. so as the sommelier tries to be a salesman he offers the wine at a discounted price, i pass and ask for what i initialy wanted, ok done deal and i am happy getting 2 glasses of  higher end wine for free. only problem the 35 dollar wine was superior to the 90 dollar bottle.. . next goes the food, moules frites were great almost saved the day, fennel garlic cream sauce &amp; aioli rocked. frites sucked balls. ever been to in-n-out. traditional but inferior in my book.. . Sweetbreads were ok but the components of the dish missed bad. the sauce was overly bitter and reduced to far and the amount of smoked bacon was over the top. smoke flavor was intense to the point that i almost sent it back.. . beef stroganoff  was rich but mutted, needed some paprika or something to provide some acidic zing. underseasoned and overpriced.. . seafood bouliabaise 50 bucks. was expecting more. mussels good, shrimp was really good, lobster overcooked, and the sauce was to damn strong. the broth was reduced way to much. i did fix it by adding 1/4 of my drinking water and some salt to make the dish way better, sorry guys but i had less than stellar experience. i do see tons of potential as things that were wrong were minor but just to abundant.
