ReviewID: 7qop7jotm42lNGLs1vcPbg
ReviewerID: DS0Idr2XDhz5e7ZfSy0dYA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
On Thursday just a few strokes past noon, my flight touched down on the scorched earth known as Southern California, literally over 105 F on average these past few days. It was a matter of life and death to get out of the airport and into shelter right away. My stomach was growling as well, and time was running short. Luckily traffic was light, and within 20 mins I made it to downtown LA by the edge of Japantown to check out one of LA's finest ramen-ya's.. . The kanji for Daikokuya loosely translates to "Big Black Family" or "House of Big Black". What's big black? Hmmm.... better not be a male bear schlong! But it could also be representative of the black pork (kurobota) they use for the chashu in their ramen.. . The interior of Daikokuya looks a bit run down and the location's age/history has everything to do with it. The place was not crowded as we walked in on the dot of 1:30 pm, and grabbed the 2nd to last booth seat. The counter seats were empty.. . I like the fact that Daikokuya offers only one broth, which is their signature shoyu tonkotsu ramen, one size, with bean sprouts, chashu (black pork kurobota), menma (bamboo shoots) and to be politically correct, a f**kload of scallions (negi). Would have been a nice touch had they used Tokyo Negi instead, but I'm sure costs had to be cut to deliver that bowl.. . I got a bit greedy and got a combo, much like what Ed M. did (also visitng from Northern California). Except I settled for oyako-don (chicken with egg and onion) instead of pork chop. It arrived in a humble sized small bowl, about 1.5x the size of a typical bowl of miso soup.. . The oyako don was supremely delicious. It was cooked the way it should have been, although a tad bit sweet. Not a big deal though, and it actually tasted like a good suikyaki (especially the way the egg and onions melded their flavors together). They used Japanese rice, not the crap that most other places serve in Northern California. For a ramen-ya to nail down oyako-don is quite an accomplishment! Then again you Southern Cal people have it great with so much variety. Literally your shizzle is my shiznit, even if you think their verison is just average.. . For those who know the SF Bay Area ramen scene, will surely know the North Pole presents guy ramen (just kidding), Santa ramen. Yes they are famous for their Hakata style tonkotsu white broth ramen, but it has so much MSG in it that it is no longer appealing. Luckily Daikokuya's shoyu tonkotsu is not only light and fresfhing, it doesn't make you feel glutton, naughty, and evil after eating it. In fact it was almost a sin not to finish the broth. While it did not have too much depth, it was still a good flavor and perfect. Just as well, as I didnt' want to walk back out into 105 to 110 weather and then drop into a MSG induced starch coma right away on the street, then turn into a piece of aka maguro and melt into the scenery.. . Got a side order of the gyoza as well. As Ed M has so eloquently put it already, freshly made and presented. I like the fact that it was molded and folded to look anything unlike the traditional dumpling/gyozas. In fact when the plate of gyozas arrived at the table, I thought I was in a dim sum restaurant, as the plate looked like those Cantonese style chu cheung fun/rice vermicelli plain rolls/banh cuon! Luckily they were not. I also appreciated that they layered the gyoza's with a f**kload of scallions, good stuff. The waitstaff provided small plates of gyoza dipping sauce, and there wasn't a need to add any help yourself minced garlic, it was already quite flavorful.. . One pet peeve of this place....the ramen noodles were curly/wrinkly, a bit on the hard side, and reminded me of the famous Korean packet instant noodle, the spicy kimchee Shin Ramyun. That was a slight turnoff.. . Well to be fair there is some MSG in the food here. Though the after effects by itself aren't that bad. However it certainly didn't help that I almost overate, and it was 110 F or so, which had a snowballing effect. Starch coma + MSG attack + heatwave makes for a very interesting experience. If you can survive this you can eat anywhere and come out a survivor (then go back in for more). . . But overall I had great vibes at this place. I'd love to come back again next time I'm in LA. Sadly I had to overhear three banshees from Hong Kong at the booth behind me, talking their usual gossip of when to go back to Hong Kong, exams and school/college stuff. I wish they kept their volume down so I could hear myself enjoy my meal (slurp slurp slurp, munch munch munch, god I'm so full, crikey it's so hot I'm sweating my undies are sticking to my ass, I dont' wanna go outside to get the car in the heat, I'll melt and look like a piece of toro)
