ReviewID: 7Qwc_1aKYuh0Ed7xtRqmMg
ReviewerID: fF96J8EaHKFoIecd2MHmnA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
Deliciousness :). I visited Lala's for the first time last night and loved it! A friend and I were out and about and couldn't figure out what we wanted to eat. BBQ? Sushi? Sandwiches? Italian? We couldn't decide. Like an epiphany (haha) my friend says let's go to Lala's! I had never been here, but she said it's somewhat like Versailles and Gaucho Grill so I was definitely interested!  . . When we got there it was just starting to get a bit crowded and we were lucky to score a corner "booth" (the patio had a better ambiance but was completely packed!). After getting seated they brought out bread and this olive oil and herb dip that was DEE-lish!  I checked out the menu and was pleasantly surprised at the variety. Upon perusing the menu my stomach, was super excited to see that their appetizer offerings included Provoleta! Those that haven't had this, it's provolone cheese cooked in a cast iron skillet until it melts and gets a bit crusty/burnt on the bottom...it is so YUM!! You must try it! I ordered one of the Lala's Specials, Suprema Napolitana- chicken breast, lightly breaded and fried with a tomato basil sauce and melted cheese served with a side of mashed potatoes. WOW! First of all the serving was huge and the chicken not dry and over cooked! It was seasoned perfectly and the chicken was still juicy inside. The tomato basil sauce, chicken and cheese was just heaven! I loved it!  Of course between the Provoleta and bread and oil dip I had filled up a bit and wasn't able to finish my dinner, however that didn't stop my friend and I from ordering a dessert recommended by our server. The Panqueque De Banana Con Dulce De Leche. MM MM Good! This dessert was a light crepe filled with bananas and a caramel sauce and topped with sugar that they caramelize right before bringing to the table so it creates this "creme brulee" type topping. Sooo good! . . The service here was great, our waitress was very friendly, prompt, polite and checked on us regularly. The place was PACKED and we never had an empty drink and our food came out quickly and hot! Love that! . . The only down side? The parking. We were lucky to get there early and valeted the car. However, the valet w/validation is still $5.75! The restaurant is located on Melrose and parking is a pain to find, I would suggest the valet simply to avoid the aggravation of having to hunt for a spot. . . I'll be back soon, there were a few other dishes that I would like to try and I know I'll be craving that Provoleta soon!
