ReviewID: 7r4qT-AwD7u45Oew8b-l-g
ReviewerID: nvfbQ6C5d04zQVCZ4S31AQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Buttermilk Channel
Category: American (New)
Update: 2/20/2010. Last night we ventured to Buttermilk after getting hour long waits at Frankies and Prime Meats.  Boy did we make a good decision.  Again, Jennifer, the lovely hostess at the front was more than accommodating and gracious- we sat at the bar for dinner.  . . I really feel like something has changed here, the energy was different and the food was spot on.  We started off with the baby back ribs - a dry rub, scented with tarragon and served with a simple slaw.  The meat was tender and flavorful.  Vegetable tart was ridiculously buttery and very tasty as well as the bacon.  For the main course we had the Skirt steak cooked to the chef's liking (always do this folks) as well as the fried chicken and cheddar waffles. Simply divine take on the Southern classic and incredibly delicious.  . How could we walk away without having a couple of desserts? We had the Pecan pie sundae; I believe I got one bite in before my comrades finished it off.  As well as the Bread pudding - you won't be able to stop eating this.. The staff, the food, the scene (jason schwartzman was there) was fabulous. We could definitely call this a regular spot for us. . . Original Review:(Summer 2009). Buttermilk Channel - for some reason, the name makes me think of a viscous-sour-yellowish river with fried chicken floating down... but I am from the south, so of COURSE i'll think of fried chicken, or buttermilk biscuits... ok, enough of the diatribe!  . . Since we're new to the neighborhood, the top of the list is to find the best food haunts and I read some good reviews on this place. Unlike my interpretation of the name, the place is named after the real Buttermilk Channel . http://en.wikipedia.or....  - so, i'm not too far off in my imagination!  . . The crowd is definitely a mix of people grabbing grub after a day of work to young hipsters with kids and then the yuppy crowd too.  I tried one of their Signature cocktails; the blackberry something of the other - take my suggestion and skip this one; it's bland and boring.  . . The hostess was amazing and got us in an hour early, it might have something to do with that we figured out we have the same last name, but regardless, she was super friendly!  The menu is simple, american fare with lots of local grub from Caputos up the street.  I opted for the Mozz with bread and pesto - it's.. boring and the bread is larger than the mozz - so , skip this.  My husband had a green salad with dandelion greens and beautiful turnips - a great summer choice.  For dinner, husband ordered the bacon wrapped trout and I had the Beef.  It was SOLID good food, not overwhelming portions but after a couple of glasses of wine, set us back a good $100.00 or so.  . . I'm not really sure the food constitutes paying $100, but you could tell that BC uses great ingredients and they pay attention to the food, which in my opinion is a MUST.  . . SO, will we go back? Yes, we'll try the brunch one of these days - but the price range definitely makes this a non-regular haunt for us.
