ReviewID: 7TlqBHSYxk4gzpQv1bRnVA
ReviewerID: WcBmK5DYh1lhxSBqJGVgNA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
3 words come to mind when I think of my Porto's experience.  Oh. My. God.. . It all started out on a quiet Friday afternoon when I went to visit a good friend, and one of my favorite partners in crime in the food department, in LA.  We were originally going to get sushi, but upon adding Ikea to our list of errands for the day, my friend vetoed sushi and said that we HAD to go to Porto's, which was nearby, describing "potato puffs filled with meat" that were to die for.  I'm not going to lie, I was a little disgusted since let's not kid ourselves, that doesn't sound at all appetizing, but, as I generally trust her taste in food, I went along with it...  What ensued was 1 hour of unadulterated foodie bliss.  . . Porto's is a decent-sized bakery with a fairly large parking lot, but it was near impossible for us to find a spot, since hordes of people kept arriving.  That should have been my tip-off. . . Since my friend had been raving about the potato puffs, which are mashed potato balls filled with seasoned ground beef and then battered and fried, I decided to try one.  We also shared a pastry puff filled with feta and spinach, and we got turkey croissant sandwiches.  Bye bye girlie figure, hello flavor country!  Everything we had was amazing!  It was the kind of amazing where you stop talking and say, you guessed it, oh. my. god.  . . The potato puff was truly delicious.  The beef was perfectly seasoned and not at all overpowered by the mashed potatoes.  The feta and spinach pastry was pure bliss as well.  The crust was flaky and buttery and the filling was the perfect blend of spinach and cheese.  The croissan-wich was also delicious (though in all fairness, a croissan-wich would be fairly difficult to mess up).  . . The best part?  Porto's is RIDICULOUSLY cheap!  My entire meal came out to $5.10, and I was absolutely stuffed!  Should I find myself in Burbank any time in the future, I will be sure to loosen my belt and head straight for Porto's!
