ReviewID: 7uempKGJlj4mM2nf1KVBPQ
ReviewerID: k9MJz3cA5cTzhfdtO5-IKg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
This review is probably not fair. Oh well. Out of 550 reviews, how much difference could it make anyway?. . Ok, lookit. I'm a hot dog snob. Or at least a really picky hot dog eater. Frankly, I don't like much on my hot dog except mustard and fresh chopped onions. And not honey mustard either. YUCK! I hate New York street dogs because of that crappy cooked onions/ketchup junk they pile on them. DOUBLE YUCK! No Chicago dogs either. Too many toppings.. I do like a good chili dog either plain or with cheese and chopped onions. Maybe even a dash of Tabasco!. . The bun has to be airy and firm but not hard. Not doughy.. . One night we got out of a show or something over by Melrose and Pinks was nearby so we figured, "What the heck!" We got in line for an iconic, obligatory-when-in-Hollywood, Pink's Hot Dog. And we waited. And waited. It felt like the line stretched all the way to Hancock Park and it definitely wasn't moving. After about 20 minutes of this jazz, we went to Carney's. . . We finally got a gen-u-wine Pink's Dog when they started serving them at the movie theatres in the new Sherman Oaks Galleria. We thought they were pretty good. Lotsa snap in the weenie. Not more than Carney's, but just as snappy. I got a plain mustard/onion dog.We thought they were OK. I don't think they sell them there anymore.. . The next time we ate a Pinks was at the Aladdin Casino in Las Vegas. Pinks had an outpost there. I know I had a chili dog. I know I hated it. The "New" Aladdin Casino has now gone the way of the "Old" Aladdin Casino. Coincidence? Maybe. Maybe not.. . So last Sunday we were at the Pomona Classic Car Swapmeet... lo and behold there was a Pink's trailer along food row. Only a person or two in line. We decided to share a plain mustard/onion dog. $4.75. We got a Pinks chili dog instead. I guess the cooks are on autopilot all day and when they hear "Plain" they default to "Chili". . . Worst dog ever. Maybe second worst. The chili dog I got at Weinerschitzel about 35 years ago that gave me rampant diarrhea was probably the worst. . . The bun was like a premature thing that didn't spend enough time in the oven. Like a Wonder Bread bun. As soon as it's in your mouth, it reverts back to its primal dough form and just sticks to your teeth. You literally have to stick your finger in your mouth and scrape the goop off your teeth in order to swallow it. That square of cheese is just tacky and doesn't really add one bit to the flavor of the dog. The chili is digusting. I think they make it by feeding a bunch of dogs beans all day. It's a shame, because the weenie hiding inside is a glorious thing. Super snappy, well-spiced, juicy and tasty. . . But, it seems that whenever Pinks sends their dogs out into the wild to compete with other dogs, they don't sell. That seems to indicate that the phenomenon going on at Melrose and La Brea is just that... a phenomenon... a fluke... an anomaly. Mass hysteria, even. . . So, while I've never had the privilege of eating at the original location, I've had a few Pinks dogs and judge them lacking. One star for the weenie hidden inside and one star for managing to fool the paying public since 1939. Like I said. This review is probably not fair. Maybe if I'd brave the line and actually get my dog handed to me over the hallowed original Pink's counter I'd get it. . . But I don't get it.. . I'll take Carney's over Pinks any day. I'll take a polish dog at the cart outside Home Depot over both of 'em.
