ReviewID: 7uZ-YKcmMSkcnsOJeIG35g
ReviewerID: OlMjqqzWZUv2-62CSqKq_A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Best Fish Taco in Ensenada
Category: Mexican
The world is in the middle of a global financial crisis; one of the most significant elections in American history will be going down in about a month; global warming is of continual concern; I was recently subjected to a test of the emergency broadcasting system -- while watching something even less entertaining -- and I walk up to Best Fish Tacos in Ensenada on a weekday night wondering how many tacos I should eat.  Welcome to my life.  I figure, if anything can get my mind off all of this global calamity, it's tacos.  With wanton disregard to world affairs, I opt for 2 shrimp tacos, 1 fish taco, and some mental blinders to the craziness that resides outside of my personal space.  . . After countless of recommendations, and careless promises of me visiting it "soon," the stars had finally aligned for my first walk-in visit to Best Fish Tacos in Ensenada.  I write "walk-in," because my other trips were met with me staring at the menu, from the outside of the store, like an over-enthused tourist from another country.  There's no hours posted, and when asking the owner -- while opening an unlocked door, past closing hours -- about the store's hours of operation, his response was "Whenever we decide to close."  . . Oh, really?  . . Well, I guess I'm bad at playing the guessing game, since every time I've shown up to see what the fuss was regarding these much-bandied about tacos, they happened to be closed.  There have been many nights spent at the bars in the surrounding areas -- such as the Dresden, Tiki Ti Lounge, or the Good Luck Bar -- where I felt a couple of tacos would round out the perfect night, but instead was shunned by by a place seemingly out of my league.  Afterall, you wouldn't believe how many times I heard "You gotta check this place out!", so it would make complete sense.. . And this is the problem with Best Fish Tacos in Ensenada, it is not out of my league.  As a matter of fact, if you allow me to use baseball analogies, it's not even the minor leagues.  It's little league tacos.  A packet of grape-flavored Big League Chew out-classes this place.  I'm all for simplicity -- $2 for shrimp tacos, $1.50 for the fish tacos.  However I'd rather spend the $5.50 + tax I spent on my visit towards tacos that don't claim to be the best, but instead modestly tastes so.  The tortillas resemble wilting flowers -- void of its perkiness and the beauty that give it its cosmetic sustenace -- and tastes underheated and bland, leading the way to the world's biggest letdown.  Of course, that is, aside from all of the other important global stuff going on around me.. . The sight of their 5 different salsas -- all with variations of pineapple, mango, hot and/or mild -- did have me excited for as long as Kimbo Slice was famous, but of course it all subsided once I took a bite into the uninspired tacos.  I will don the nice nice guy hat for a second and say that their shrimp tacos were not bad.  It's just that for a person, such as myself, who's lived solely off fish, shrimp, and chicken tacos for so long, I've tasted a lot better.. . As Public Enemy once sang, "don't believe the hype."  What you should do is believe me instead.  Drive a mile east of Sunset, and up Alvarado to find yourself to Taco Zone instead.  With all due respect to Neil Diamond and Mikey Dolenz, I thought perfect tacos were only true in fairy tales -- meant for someone else but not for me.  But once you had a taste of the Taco Zone tacos, there'll be no doubt in your mind that you're in love.  You couldn't stop eating those tacos if you tried.. . Perhaps I've set the bar too high.  Maybe this is an isolated incident, in which the pitcher didn't have his best stuff on this particular day.  Although, it's always a shame when you write a review about a taco place, and then start talking about superior tacos instead; but such is the fate of the so called Best Fish Tacos in Ensenada.  The place is like being on the losing end of a shut-out...in a Little League game.
