ReviewID: 7wGC0o0VGbTPcELYGjD7qQ
ReviewerID: PcTKD5172Yer60ZBiev4rg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Noche
Category: Tapas Bars
Go.  To.  Noche.  Seriously, right now.  Go check it out.  The review will still be here when you get back.. . ... Did you go?  Did you?  Wasn't it AWESOME?  We have to talk about how awesome it was!!  Ohmygodit'ssoawesome.. . 'Twas many a year ago when my boyfriend first took me to Noche.  I had only had tapas once before, at Cafe Babareeba in Chicago, and was eager to try it again.  Noche was not then, and has never been, a disappointment.. . The atmosphere is lovely.  The patio is heated, so even when it gets cold (even as cold as it's been lately), you can dine al fresco.  The bar area is tiny and cramped, but people gather in the hall outside to smoke and wait for tables.  The section in the back is more for dining in.  It's smallish, so unless you like crowded bars or waiting, I'd make a reservation.  . . The fare is an interesting mix of Spanish and Southern, with a static menu and daily rotating specials.  (I've never had the all-you-can-eat Mondays, so I can't comment.)  However, I've never had anything that wasn't completely delicious.  . . Things at Noche that will blow your mind:. * Spanish fried potatoes, little spiced chunks of potato served with a delicious, light and creamy roasted red pepper dipping sauce. * Grilled chicken quesadilla on a spinach tortilla with fresh guacamole with a kick of lime, roasted corn pico de gallo, and a drizzle of aioli. * Tender, flavorful grilled skirt steak with a balsamic-reduction-jus and a mound of thin, crispy onion strings (which soak up the tangy jus and OM NOM NOM oh my God tastegasm). * Pulled barbecue pork on corn cakes (he eats the pork, I eat the corn cakes, which are tender and delicious). . I could go on.  We returned to Noche for V-Day this year, as it is a favorite of ours.  We always get the queso fundido with tri-colored tortilla chips and two kinds of salsa (the tomatillo salsa is wonderful), and this time also sampled the spiced almonds and marinated olives, which are just as great as they sound.  . . The service is prompt, tapas come out as they're made, which makes for a leisurly dining experience, and the sangria here... wow.  It is wow sangria.  Even people who don't like boozy drinks can appreciate it.  . . Something I don't understand:  People are complaining about how expensive it is.  Yes, if everyone at your table gets a few of the fried lobster tail tapas, it's going to be expensive ($9, the priciest on the menu.)  However, they have a good selection for $4 or $5.  To put that in perspective, a Quarter Pounder with Cheese (sandwich only) will probably run you just under $4.  Yargh.. . For a nice dinner for the two of us, including tax, tip, and a pitcher (yes, pitcher) of sangria, dinner was under $50.  Do you people just have a skewed perception of  what "decent" is?
