ReviewID: 7wxr-NiE9KfDyQNajywxUw
ReviewerID: kHTRI8Xbbu2yXjsQVmGG9w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
This is where Shabu shabu all started for me and there is only one other place that has given me the same satisfied feeling after I'm done with my meal. Ive been eating here for years and it hast changed one bit. If you come here after 5pm then plan on waiting an hour or so because the seating is limited and even more for large parties that wanna sit together. . . So a TIP come before 5pm and sign up on the sheet thats gonna be outside on the stool so that you wont have to wait an hour or wait for the 1st batch of people to be done. . You guys prolly know all this but ill talk about it anyways.... . You walk in and sit down with a burner with hot water in front of you and they ask you what size portion you'd like for your meat... i usually order a medium cuz i eat more veggies than meat that they bring out. they have it cut in thin slices so that when u dip it in the water it cooks in a matter of seconds depending how done u like your meat. But anyways with that you get a plate of veggies with napa cabbage, carrots, green onion, tofu, mushrooms, seaweed, and some other greens which im not sure the name of and Udon noodles and some glass noodles. . . Most important part PREPARE YOUR PONZU and PEANUT SAUCE that u use to dip all the lovely goodies in front of you.. . How do i like it?... . . My Ponzu=  LOTS of daikon+ green onion + garlic + Seseme oil + lots of nanami togarashi (chili pepper mix) . . My Peanut Sauce = green onion+ nanami togarashi . . I've been to a few shabu shabu places and this place has the best sauce ( in my opinon of course) and the only place thats had almost the same or if not the same sauce is the Shabu Shabu House here in San Diego on Convoy.. . Sit down prepare your sauce and eat away!... oh and please eat fast cuz there hella ppl waiting and watching you eat to see whos gonna be done next. Boil ur meat and veggie piece by piece... dip it in the sauce put it over your rice to catch the sauce drippin off then put it all in your mouth.... YUMMY!!! So simple but yet SO GOOD!.... I usually save my udon noodles for last cuz their my favorite but thats all up to you.... hahaha. . When your done if you got some room left, order an Ice Coffee or head to the bakery on the corner by the Shabu Shabu House for some desert. =)
