ReviewID: 7X8urlMp4WfbbHU4OYfvdw
ReviewerID: 8_GSnrTYzuS1GqHkkahTMQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
The first time I tried eating here with my boyfriend back in October, we got lost looking for the place. We had just watched a movie at the Arclight and I had heard some good ratings about it. Thirty minutes of walking around and after asking several people, we finally found the place. . . It isn't easy to find since it's tucked away in a nondescript, dark 'alley' across from the Borders. Alas, we weren't meant to eat here that night - the place was packed and the waiting list was at least two hours instead. We consoled ourselves by eating at the Arclight restaurant instead.. . The second time around in December worked better in our favor. It was one of those rare December evenings where the rain was pouring strongly. We were able to get street parking on Vine right beside the Borders and we rushed to the restaurant to avoid the downpour.. . For those that don't live within walking distance to the restaurant, park in The Borders parking lot below. Or park at the Arclight garage. There is some street parking, but those spots are fare and few between.. . I noticed there were some brave souls eating in the small outside patio, but I was not about to eat outside in a cold and rainy night. I am soooo not into dining al fresco even on a sunny day. At first they said they said they didn't have any tables inside, but after a minute or two, the waiter said he would give us a table. He said he was taking a risk but expected some of his reservations to cancel due to the inclement weather.. . Upon entering the restaurant, I could see why reservations take so long - the place is tiny. Too many people and a small place equals RSVP in advance! The interior lighting is moody like a bar. The furnishings were okay - I like the minimalist look. What I liked best were the dark brown t-shirts uniforms of the staff - I liked the feline design on it and I'm not even a cat person.. . I wasn't too hungry that night so I ordered the sage lemonade and clam chowder. My bf isn't a fan of seafood, so he ordered the burger. I liked the lemonade - the sage complimented the fresh and tangy lemonade. The clam chowder was really disappointing. It was very watery, not thick and creamy like how I like it prepared. It was a good thing I wasn't hungry that night because I didn't think I would have been satiated by my choice for a meal.. . My boyfriend's burger looked a lot better and I liked the fries. They almost reminded me of how sweet potato fries are cooked, but I think these were just regular potatoes prepared and cooked in a good way. My by liked his burger and seemed satisfied with it.. . The prices for the appetizers were moderate to slightly pricey. Not enough to make you go bankrupt, but enough to make you more critical of the food and service if you pay that much for it.. . The restroom situation is interesting - it's behind the back of the restaurant and it's a shared restroom with the other future tenants. There was some construction going on covered by drapes. It looks like several small stores are being built in the same building area as the Hungry Cat. When they are built and ready for business, it will help pass the time better if you are waiting for a table. . Next time, I'll try the peel your own shrimp appetizer.
