ReviewID: 7xOD78SznvJVWZG1kr408A
ReviewerID: dkrvwEFX6_2EC3_zALOUqA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Feast
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Upon arrival the texting hostess barely looked up to seat me.  Her apathy and indifference was almost shocking- but then it became apparent that she almost wanted to make this a bad experience by seating me in a booth seat literally 25 feet from the nearest person and away from the readily available 6 open tables by a window and other humans.  I might understand if this were Trotter's and I showed up in chucks, wrangler jeans and a dirty hoodie but I was dressed in dress casual and frankly this is still a bar as well.  She was back at the podium texting away before I could protest.  After a speedy pass and glance from the waiter he came over took my order like a member of a NASCAR pit crew and walked away just as fast.... dude, you have 2 tables, one of them is me, slow down.. I got up to use the restroom and after I walked in I wished I hadn't.  I haven't seen a bathroom that filthy since I went to a college party in Whitewater.  Granted, this is a restaurant AND bar, but damn people, bleach and a scrub brush can be your friends.  As I walked back to the table I peered into the kitchen and noticed their cleanliness as well- or the lack of it.  I almost considered leaving when I got back to the table but my amphetamine waiter dropped off my food and ran.  It arrived and I was happy to see, smell, and experience something good about this whole thing.  I ordered Eggs Portobello and a cup of Intelligentsia coffee (dark roast).  At $14.37 with tax I would say it was worth it.  The grilled tomatoes were very nice, eggs done just shy of perfection, the portolello crust was crisp and Delicious, the potatoes were very crisp (needed salt and smaller portion) I would have liked more hollondase but it was good, and the spinach was cooked perfectly.  Overall it was a hit!  I would come here again only to sit at the bar and eat expecting no service what so ever.  To the cooks- good job guys (but pick up a sponge and clean).  To the front of the house- may your apathy subside.
