ReviewID: 7YfFZ1FOsIKpxz3_I0PXcg
ReviewerID: 9HyAuq4Vfv7JRsQrGj2etA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
We went to Little Door on Valentine's Day so I presume the prices are a bit inflated. The final bill came out to over $460 for two of us and for $460, I expect a little more.  This did not surpass our experiences at Melisse or Providence.. . First, it should be noted that the majority of the seating space at Little Door is a smoking section.  Everyone was smoking around us.  Because the place was so booked, we couldn't move to another table.   So, all of the food we tasted was interweaved with gales of smoke. So, make a note of this when booking your table.. . Second, we had to wait over 20 minutes past our reservation time for our table.  I should also note that the bar serves only wine and champagne, which is fine but just don't expect to have some scotch before your meal. . . When we sat down, the table was nicely decorated with rose petals and candlelight. The ambiance is the main draw here -- very romantic and subdued -- it felt very much like Europe, especially with all the cigarette smoke.  . . A moment later, a server dropped the amuse bouche on our table and left without explaining what it was.  Not the most impressive way to begin a meal. In our case, it was a little hummus in a crunchy shell served with almonds, garbanzo beans and minced red pepper (which seemed to find its way onto every dish served except dessert.) The hummus was decent but hummus as an amuse bouche at a French restaurant?  Meh.. . The Valentine's menu had four choices for both appetizers and main courses.  For appetizers, your choices were poached lobster, fois gras, shallot &amp; beet soup or a blood orange salad.  My wife ordered the soup, which was very good.  It looked like a beautiful white and pink yin-yang -- almost like borscht and sour cream. I ordered the lobster which was a little fishy and overwhelmed by the bitterness of endive.. . Main course choices were: chicken with blood oranges, crab meat-stuffed loup de mer, roasted root vegetables, or filet mignon. We both ordered the filet mignon.  The filet was very tender and flavorful (we both ordered it medium-rare).  . . Here's what pissed me off though: the menu noted that the filet came with truffle pommes anna potatoes.  In my experience, pommes anna are served sliced and layered.  These were straight up mashed potatoes -- and there was no hint of truffle -- no truffle specks, flecks, truffle oil or truffle essence.  So I asked the waiter if I misread the menu.  He said:  "They are 'truffled', meaning mashed."  What?!  Truffled means mashed?  In what restaurant does truffled mean mashed? Why not just called them "mashed potatoes"?  This seemed like some kind of ruse -- like they ran out of truffles or pommes anna and just stuck us with plain old mashed potatoes.  I know I'm beating a dead horse here but I have to call bullshit on this one.  I think the waiter tried to pull one over on us here and for $460, I want some fuckin truffles.  That's right, I said fuckin truffles.. . Dessert choices were uninspired.  A white chocolate parfait, pistachio cake, macaroon and some kind of fruit thing.  Notice anything interesting about this list? No chocolate.  (White chocolate doesn't count.) No chocolate on Valentine's Day?! Why? I beg of you, why.  I had the macaroon which was totally meh.  My wife had the pistachio cake which was so blah she ate only a quarter of it.   Our coffee was served at room temperature. We asked for hot coffee and 15 minutes later, as I was settling the bill, received more room temperature coffee.. . An 18% gratuity was mysteriously written on the tip section of the credit card receipt when my card was returned.  Say what? I've never seen this one before.  The waiter explained, "I calculated the tip for your convenience."  I see a lot of people saying that the service here is top notch but you've gotta be kidding me with this.   I usually tip 20% anyway so the guy actually saved me a few bucks but I really thought that was pretty cheesy.  Also, just want to point out, valet parking is $7.50.. . I'm not a big stickler or complainer -- I know people who constantly send food back and complain about everything when dining at a place like this.  In fact, we had a very romantic dinner and wouldn't allow ourselves to be put off by these things but for me, this place did not live up to the hype.  The atmosphere was great (even with the smoke) but the service was horrendous and the food was just okay (a notch below Patina) but not in the same league as Melisse or Providence.  And I feel like they owe me some fuckin truffles. I am unlikely to return.
