ReviewID: 82PEg-55sSJPXcsNzqQ0Pg
ReviewerID: D1A7kHqdlgzVWGiCfA59FA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Right next to the infamous Osteria Mozza - I say - Pizzeria Mozza is BETTER than OM and easier on your wallet too.  You can't go wrong with any of their antipasti, insalate or the pizza.  Favs/Must haves:  mozza caprese, fennel sausage pizza and caramel budino.  Also popular was the squash blossoms pizza.  No resi needed for the bar seating and much more fun too watching the open kitchen.. . ( I should wonder why I should be writing a review to a place that has 800+ reviews...I do think they have one of the best gourmet pizza in LA using the freshest ingredients).  . . Ambiance - classy, fun and cozy.  Much more casual than Osteria Mozza next door.  Came 10min b4 12 for lunch and there were already several people ready to eat.  The doors to the place is quite tall and pretty opaque-looking that you can't help but do double-take that you're in the wrong place.  Trust your instinct - open that big yellow/orange door, that is - unless they're locked it until opening at exactly 12pm.  . . Food - . Antipasti - Bone marrow (2-3) served with roasted garlic, parsley/celery leaves salad, salt flakes &amp; crostini.  You'll like this if you like mushy decadent goodness.  The butter on the crostini was bit much and overpowered the bone marrow but nonetheless prepared well and much flavorful.  Meatballs as well as fried squash blossoms with ricotta seemed popular as well.. . Insalate - Mozza caprese is udder perfectness that has me reminiscing about Italy.  Fresh, gooey, milky, cloud-like burrata over brilliant green basil pesto and roasted-on-the-vine baby tomatoes.  I could just eat the whole thing in one bite/swallow.  Heaven~. . Pizza - Fennel sausage, panna, red onion and scallions.  Perfectly light and earthy crust brushed with olive oil, house made fennel sausage, red onion/scallions that are julienned in slivers and sprinkled with fennel seeds powder.  A waitstaff's tip - mash up the fennel sausage so that all the savory goodness oozes out throughout the pizza and you get the awesome sausage in every bite.  Not too heavy and one pizza's enough to share between two.. . Dessert - Per everyone's recommendation including our waiter - had the butterscotch budino (a pudding).  Served layered in a clear "shot glass" over whipped cream and flakey/crunchy Maldon sea salt - a wonderful way to end the meal.  . . Thumbs up and will def recommend for repeat visits.  Can't wait to try more dishes on the menu.  Also have daily specials thruout the week.
