ReviewID: 83M3eloUQlfzMB35S721EQ
ReviewerID: QNSL8oCbpiukOFIiX4cwmQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Part I: It's difficult for me to write a review of Alinea. One cannot put into words what a meal at Alinea is like. One can share pictures and attempt to describe the meal in words, but neither can convey the depth, artistry, and profundity that is Alinea. . . The entrance to the restaurant is unmarked, and when you enter for the first time, you may be surprised--I won't spoil it for you. Don't miss the tactile moving art structure. When you enter, you are immediately greeted by the hostess, who was very friendly. She asks for your name and then you are promptly seated. The restaurant's architecture is stunning: designed by Steve Rugo. Also of note is the interior design, especially the chairs which are the most comfortable restaurant chairs ever designed (Tom Stringer). I am jumping the gun here, but in the same category are the plates and implements (Martin Kastner). Part of the experience at Alinea is how the various sensory aspects of the place play off of one another, and the dishes and implements (avant-garde devices that deliver some of your food and off of which you eat some of the courses) add to the amazing experience. More on this aspect later.. . Alinea offers two price-fix menus: a 12 or so course called tasting and a 24 or so course called tour. Note that Alinea is not cheap, but ever penny is worth it, I guarantee it. You can find the prices and sample menus on their Web site (. http://www.alinea-rest.... ). A few things to note: because of it's popularity--it was, after all the top restaurant in the US voted by Gourmet Magazine, 2006--you need to have reservations a few months in advance, so do call. There is a dress code: men need jackets, though I wouldn't say the restaurant is at all stuffy. In an interview with the chef/owner Grant Achatz--who is quickly becoming one of the top chefs on the planet--I learned that Alinea strives to make the dining experience comfortable. So, as you are eating, especially if you feel intimated at first, just relax and prepare for a gourmet experience that you will never have anywhere else. Do you get the sense that I was taken with Alinea? Also, in terms of reservations, you can state any dietary restrictions: gluten free, vegetarian, vegan, fish, etc. So whatever you desire, they will accommodate that desire. . . Because you are eating on a fix menu I think the experience is even more profound. You don't have to make any choices, other than if you want the wine pairings and what type of water you would like to drink. Four paragraphs in and I am still on the water. This could be a longer review. How can one describe Alinea? It's not a culinary experience like any other. Some would call it "molecular gastronomy," thought I read that Achatz doesn't like this term. Molecular gastro looks at the artistic, scientific, physical and chemical aspects of food and cooking, resulting in dishes and preparations that you have never had before. A classic example of this is looking at the effect of temperature on the egg. While cookbooks may discuss the key being the cooking time, molecular gastro reveals that the time is irrelevant--the temperature is the key, thus revealing the scientific aspect of the discipline. Harold McGee once described the idea of molecular gastro as "The scientific study of deliciousness," and I think that is an apt way of looking at it. What makes this form of culinary artistry so special is that you cannot do it at home. Yes, you could use xanthan gum to thicken a sauce, but what Achatz and his team are up to is truly a scientific revolution of the kitchen. One example is an "anti-griddle" (. http://www.cuisinetech.... ) that takes food to -30 F. Pretty amazing! If you are interested in the technology, just search for molecular gastronomy on the Internet. Oh, the food!. . Yes, since the food is based on devices that you have never heard of or seen before, and since it is served on remarkable aesthetic devices, what would you expect. Basically, in a few words, it is as if you have never eaten before. After eating at Alinea I tried to compare it to ever other meal I could think of, and I could not. In culinary terms, Alinea is an undefined term: it simply stands on its own and it pushes all boundaries that can be previously tapped into the semiotic categories: "food" and "restaurant." It is the culinary equivalent of Jacques Derrida's dismantling of philosophy and literary theory. It deconstructs everything that we have come to know about what goes into our mouth and then it reconstructs our senses at the table. We are told, not with a hammer to our heard as so many restaurants do to our taste, but with a whisper, "Don't you wish that all food could be this way?" . . I had heard from my college's culinary arts professor that Alinea has a guest-to-staff ratio of 15-1, or something like that, and I am still amazed that they can pull off every course and every bread pairing without flaw.
