ReviewID: 87ABk8x6b19TV3ynJvLlCw
ReviewerID: 1MvdBIcPSzREkAgSYFXpzA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Wow, wow and wow!  They say never trust a skinny chef, so I guess I'll have to mark that down as fact.. . I've been to a couple other Batali places in New York and I've liked it, so I had some modestly high expectations for this place, but really - haven't we all had top end pizza?  What else could really enhance the experience?. . In my mind, the pizza was the least of what I consumed and it was pretty damn good.  Started with the bone marrow appetizer - holy s**t!  It's like a little bit of yummy heaven in your mouth.  Step 1 - smear roasted garlic in olive oil on your toasted baguette slice.  Step 2 - hollow out that joint of it's marrow flavor and smear on aforementioned toast.  Step 3 - add sea salt and celery leaves (not sure about what it actually is, but it looked like celery leaves).  Step 4 - joyously consume and repeat.  Honestly, I could have had another serving of this then just gone straight to dessert.. . Entree I had the fennel sausage pizza with scallions and red onions.  The sausage makes the pizza.  The onions add a bit of sweetness to the overall pizaa, so if you don't dig that, then order something else.. . No way I could tackle the butterscotch bundino for dessert, but the waitress did talk me into gelato to go (I have no willpower).  Three flavors - greek yogurt (tastes like Pinkberry without the after taste), banana (awesome), and olive oil (they put some salt on the top to enhance the flavor, but it tastes like a really creamy vanilla).. . If you go with a group, it's harder to get seated, but you would get to try more stuff.  There's a ton on the menu that you will want to sample.. . The little quarter carafes of wine they offer are about a glass and a half of wine, so the pricing is about the same as a glass any where else and . BTW, guys, for some reason, the ratio on this Monday evening at 9PM was 3-to-1 men to women.  Don't know if more women are foodies or what, but the place was packed with stylish lookin' ladies.
