ReviewID: 88Wot_Oia2MmE1IPjaYkpw
ReviewerID: rdh_5Am70sAf5fNMKpJUSA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
The space is intriguing and feels like an art deco bar in Manhattan. The vibe and energy were fantastic. We arrived 30 minutes early for our 8:45 Saturday reservation and settled up at the very cool looking bar for a drink. Our cocktail waitress was incredibly nice and helpful as she gave us multiple tastes of wines to make sure we picked something we liked and despite being very busy she checked in multiple times to make sure we liked what we got and that we didn't need anything else. We each had a carafe (250ml) and they ran $16-$18 each. . . Despite being warned that they were running a bit behind schedule, we were seated just about on time (less than 5 minutes late). Bread service was prompt (though they never brought olive oil) and the server was prompt, friendly, and very helpful (he did a fantastic job helping us select our meals by asking about our general preferences and discussing suggested menu items). . . I'm rating our dishes 1 - 10 (10 being amazing). . (4) Chef's Complimentary Dish $0. Stuzzichino, mozzarella with sweet basil leaves, dried tomato and olives and olive oil. Nothing special, but a nice start.. . (5) Burrata with fennel and olive oil $15. It was good, but not amazing as parts were a little tough. Surprisingly huge portion. I would recommend trying something more unique from the cheese bar. . . (9) Grilled Octopus with potatoes, celery &amp; lemon  $16. This redfines octopus. The consistency was amazing (not chewy at all...almost like steak) and the taste was fantastic. My wife does not usually like octopus, but was practically orgasmic over it. This was the highlight of the meal. . . (9) Gnocci with a meat ragout $18. The gnocci itself was the perfect consistency and the sauce was a fantastic compliment. . . (5) Guinea Fowl Crostone with liver pancetta sauce  $26. I've heard this is a must have dish (along with the pork), but I was not impressed. The guinea was very good (dark meat) but the liver pancetta sauce was overwhelming at times and definitely dominated the meal. I like it, but it tasted like something I could get at the local deli. . . (8) Cioccolato  $12 . I am a bittersweet chocolate fan and this was basically a bittersweet flourless chocolate cake down very very well! Great end to the meal. . I've read reviews complaining about the price and portions, but I disagree with both. I rate the overall experience an 8.5. It was a great meal in a magnificent environment with superb service. The amount of food was perfect too and the entire bill came to about $160 including tip.
