ReviewID: 8axNDkhL0y9XLpNbq6QFGQ
ReviewerID: xmNxfsWLBZlUw2tyoiaN-g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
My husband and I became regulars at Father's Office in Santa Monica soon after Sang Yoon took it over.  I still prefer that location better, but this one can handle the crowds.  Everything is more stream-lined.  The bouncer and even some bartenders wear headpieces. The busboys are fast, so fast they rarely make eye contact (on a side note, they could avoid using Windex right in front of bar diners).  The wine by the glass (four options for reds) is now on tap.  And the hand-written specials board has been replaced by printed, framed menus placed in front of several cash registers.. . I am not a beer person, and I am somewhat disappointed by the limited selection of wines by the glass.  Last night I had a very young (2007) Melville Pinot Noir.  My husband had a Russian River Perdition beer (which coincidentally, is used to cook the pork belly dish).  I wish they would bring back the Granny Smith apple cider.  Currently, they offer a Woodchuck apple cider that is sweeter, but still crisp.  . . We ordered frites ("á la carte," although the cart is now a basket), deep fried brussel sprouts, Sobrasada, and the pork belly.  The fries are still the best, crunchy on the outside, soft on the inside, salted just right.  I have always loved the aioli on the side; it is sooo garlicky and with just the right tartness.  As for their Sobrasada, it is presented as "montaditos": thin bread slices with the red sobrasada sausage on top, covered by melted cheese, and topped with raw red onion.  They are very tasty, but also on the salty and heavy side.  The brussel sprouts were a pleasant surprise.  The deep-frying off-set their natural bitterness.  They were topped with crispy jamón serrano (which, again, was on the salty side).  I should probably mention that we found a hair on this dish (it was promptly replaced).  The pork belly was not quite tender, but it was still very good.  It was served over brown lentils in a tomatillo sauce which, for some reason, reminded me of curry, and topped with a small salad (my guess is shredded cucumber).  It was a good meal and very filling.  It is not the kind of meal that I can have on a regular basis however (I still felt full this morning!).. . The bartenders are as knowledgeable as ever, and they will let you sample to help you select a drink.  They are efficient and usually friendly.  The space is modern and sophisticated; the music, Sang Yoon's iPod playlist.  Our bill came to $52.50 before tip.  You could really get by paying a lot less, though.  We usually share a burger and a basket of fries, and have a drink each (for about $35).  There are other items on the menu that I am curious to try: a duck salad, the much-lauded bone marrow, and a lamb dish.  Overall, I would say it is a fun and reliable option for a weeknight dinner.
