ReviewID: 8CME67qokM93GLrmYhRiFQ
ReviewerID: xj90739Dd0rhRWcKTAqIvQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: B Bar &amp; Grill
Category: American (Traditional)
B Bar and I got off on the wrong foot immediately upon entering the restaurant. A friend and I had decided to go here because it was a simply gorgeous day outside, and we wanted to have dinner and drinks under the sky. A co-worker recommended it, and we decided to go downtown to B Bar.. . Upon entering, we were waiting for about 10 minutes to even be seated. Finally, the hostess shows up, asks us where we want to sit, and instead of actually leading the way, she answered the phone call, bitching to the caller about how busy it was. . I asked my friend, "Is this a sign?". Then, another woman came and whisked us away from Ms.Complainy-pants and got us a table. (Note: this place has an outdoor patio, but you cannot eat out there, and you have to get your drinks yourself) We dined the garden, which is technically indoors, but has a clear wall around it. . Fast forward to the meal: I got the Fish and Chips, but wanted to sub the fries for a salad. For fourteen dollars, it seemed pretty steep, but I figured it would be good considering the tons of people eating there already.. Food arrives, and I am severely disappointed . I was looking at a basically empty plate, besides the four small sized pieces of fish, and fries that I did NOT ask for.. the staff gave me a free salad to make up for that. Fine. . My friend chose a chicken burrito, that looked okay, but still, not worth 12 dollars. . . After dinner, I wanted a cocktail, and I hesitantly asked for a ginger martini. Like I had suspected, the drink was teeny tiny, and I felt like I was drinking ginger flavored syrup, hardly any alcohol. For once, ice was an improvement. . The outdoor patio area didn't help the mood at all, and I found myself smoking frequently to fill the void I was feeling. . I know that I may be being hard on this place, but there was really no good things I could say. The food was OK, not really worth the cash, drinks were also, no worth the cash, the service was somewhat terrible, the toilet paper in the ladies room was virtually non existent, with the exception of the two stalls that did have paper and the crowd seemed very yuppy-like, with fancy older Manhattanites and needy chicks in groups gabbing away.  . I wonder if this was just a bad day, or if this place actually operates like this on a regular basis. This place was so irritating, even one of the waiters who helped us before, saw me again 30 min later and asked me... "Gosh, are you still here?"
