ReviewID: 8E-kOrbUT0ExKoBhWqR6Qw
ReviewerID: pFMEqX7pn0QU8Z00bTOfuA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Rathbun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
Rathbuns, tucked away inbetween Cabbagetown and Inman Park on Krog street, is what I call a perfect restaurant. We have eaten here at tables, at the bar, with friends, at 5:30, 8:00, and at 11:30 (when it first opened!), and it is consistently excellent. On several occasions the chef is there walking around meeting folks (though he is probably busy with the new steakhouse now), the drinks are always strong, the service impeccable, and the food out of this world. We must have ordered a million small plates and never was there a wince from the waiter at our lack of "second mortgage" purchases, as Rathbun cleverly calls them. Of course our wine and martini consumption probably made up for that. . . Rathbun's has a fine dining attitude that treats all its guests, no matter how they are dressed, what they order, or how silly they behave (I was worried for a moment about the general groaning and gastronomic moaning coming from our table.) like the most important people in the world. The place feels comfortable, and at the same time special. Dining at Rathbun's is always a special treat. What did we have? Let's see:. . Mediterranean Mussels, Smoked Garlic Foccacia Garlic Chive Brodo . Pan Fried Kefalotiri Cheese, E.V.O.O. &amp; Lemon . Chicken Livers A La Plancha, Grape Molasses . Roasted Bone Marrow, Fleur de sel, Buttered Brioche &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp; Radicchio Marmalade . Thai Rare Beef &amp; Red Onion Salad, Cilantro . Lamb Scaloppine with Pancetta, Goat Gouda . Brown Butter Cauliflower Mash . Cabbage Carbonara . Hand Cut French Fries with Blue Cheese Fondue . Sardinian Flatbread, Carmelized Vidalia Onions, Local Golden Beets, Gorgonzola . . We had a great wine, great company and great food. After dinner we adjourned to my friend's loft for port and gingered chocolate. She was a perfect hostess. A PERFECT ending to a nice weekend with the family.. . Yay Rathbun! Definitely ***************.
