ReviewID: 8EoJYGU5vYG9_l1l2cQz4w
ReviewerID: V-XGzCkrvNVypkAm69X9rw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
First off, I would like to say that their new location is a lot better for when you need to get up to go to the bathroom.  Also, now when you're waiting, you're "front row" for some Thai Elvis crooning rather than outside where you perhaps might have been waiting at the previous location.  . . I normally stick with fairly normal type of orders since I like to compare them amongst places, things like: pad see ewe, pad thai, yellow chicken curry, shrimp fried rice...  for these foods, this place is decent.  I also like the salt &amp; pepper chicken.  If you like spicy food, they make really spicy tom yum soup (i think that's the one...), almost inedible type spicy if you're up for a challenge.  I've never really been blown away by the food.  Their bbq beef yields quite a lot of meat, definitely one that's good to take home for leftovers.  One thing that I think everyone should try is the Trout with Mango Sauce (unless you're allergic, obviously); I believe it is #101 on the menu.  The reason I remember this is because I recall that they showed a picture of it on the menu but on the wrong page because the page the picture is on stops at 100 and you have to flip it over to get to 101.  Sherlock Holmes, holla at yo boy.. . Another thing to be cognizant of is the trade-off in parking from the old location to the new one.  While the old one was in a very small/cramped parking lot, this new location has valet for $2.50.  Street parking is hard to come by, so I don't even try (anymore).  . . One thing I noticed is that the servers tend to place entrees on a certain side of the table for their convenience.  So, if you happen to be on that side be prepare to move the plates over.  This goes for an open, standard 4-person table, not a booth or anything.  I understand what common sense dictates in the case of a booth.  The servers, to their credit, seemed to have improved on their drink (i.e. water) refills.  That has delighted me a great deal.  . . Speaking of drinks, why not close the meal with a nice, refreshing chrysanthemum tea?  It's quite delicious with a good amount of sweetness.  . . When I go to Palms, I don't usually expect to be completely impressed by the food, especially since I've gone so many times, but I generally get full, have a good time, and enjoy my meal.  I think that's what counts since I'm not really a snob about it.  So... 4 stars.
