ReviewID: 8h3o5ddY4bjrvSUk4pgcoQ
ReviewerID: iV53zjVVdILWQjmLpp_S5A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Le Colonial
Category: Vietnamese
I don't get out much. I mean, not to swanky places like Le Colonial, at least. But tonight? I was in Chicago for work, without the 3 yr. old in tow that usually keeps me from going to places like Le Colonial unless I've hired a babysitter, and I decided, what the hell. I'll splurge on calories and $. I'd been here before, but it was years ago (in the late 90s to be exact), while I was actually living in Chicago. My FAVORITE French/Vietnamese place was Pasteur (RIP), but Le Colonial was a close second.. . The restaurant itself is lovely. A very romantic, transporting setting. The service was very good (although, not great). And for a Wednesday night, this place was packed. . . So on to the food:. I was with two co-workers, and we started with the Bahn Cuon (steamed ravioli of chicken and crimini mushrooms, in flat rice noodles with lime garlic sauce), Tom Cuon Ram (shrimp/chicken beignets), and Banh Uot (grilled sesame beef rolls in flat rice noodles with cucumber, luettuce, basil and lime garlic sauce). Yum, yum, and freakin' yum. Everything smelled, looked and tasted phenomenal. And the rest of the appetizers on the menu sounded just as good as these three, so I don't think we just got lucky.... . Entrees: Tom Xao Sate (sauteed shrimp/asparagus), Bun Thit Nuong (bbq pork over angel-hair noodles) and Vit Quay (ginger marinated roast duck). Again, aside from the duck being a tad on the dry side, everything was bursting with flavor and absolutely gorgeous to behold. The portions were ample w/out being obnoxious. . . And believe it or not, we ordered desert:. A lemon tart with shortbread crust and a banana tapioca pudding. The tart was excellent--perfect texture and (no pun intended) tartness. The tapioca was okay, but was not a good consistency (too runny) and was less flavorful than the rest of the meal had been.. . I had a lemongrass martini that was also heavenly.. . Yes, it's pricey. But I'm willing to splurge on such wonderfully prepared and presented food. . . The reason Le Colonial doesn't get 5 stars? The dining room is too crowded. The waitstaff and busboys were practically having to do Cirque de Soliel moves to keep from tripping over one another as they tended to customers and delivered food. The closeness of the tables is an unfortunate distraction to the otherwise beautiful atmosphere. I mean, if they removed even two of the smaller tables and rearranged things, it would be better.. . Also, our waiter was a bit absent at times. But perhaps he was in the back, practicing his contortionism/ninja skills so that he could get through the crowded dining room without bumping into anyone or anything.. ------. Update: Oops! I TOTALLY forgot to write about the sides. Holy crap, I should be spanked for that omission. The three of us each ordered a side, however, we could've gotten away with ordering only 2 dishes, as they were ample servings. What we ordered: Ca Tim Nuong (grilled eggplant in a spicy basil lime sauce), Rau Xao (Stir-fried pea shoots in a light sauce w/garlic) and Mien Xao (celophane noodles w/crabmeat, tree ear mushrooms &amp; cilantro). They were all fantastic, but the standouts were the noodles and the pea shoots. Seriously, don't skip out on these sides when you order.
