ReviewID: 8i8je9hqnQRxi6ysiGHnOg
ReviewerID: 0Xqp-Kljujg1iVpoEzxuiA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I know there are a bunch of FO haters out there. I live down the street and have frequented the place since it's opening. Used to occasionally make a trip to the SM location. I'll tell you the truth.... . The velvet rope &amp; "bouncer," no ketchup, huge crowds. It's all true. . . Even still, I love this place. . . If you go at the right time, you never have a problem. It's loaded with some seriously good beers. The bartenders actually know their stuff. If you want a bud light or some other piss beer, please don't go here. They also have some wines tapped straight from the barrel. A few cool classic cocktails, mixed with more obscure liqours. They use Rye Whisky in their manhattans, etc. Ask any of the bartenders about "beer pairing," don't be ashamed about not knowing what to order, it's a bit overwhelming initially. There are TONS of beers.. . The Burger here is truly incredible. Always cooked perfectly to order, only real menu option, as far as the burger, is how you want your meat cooked. I dare you to find a better burger in LA.. . Yes, yes, they don't have ketchup. They serve their fries (both potato &amp; sweet potato) with some great aiolis. I'm not too big on ketchup anyway. If that's your deal breaker, again, then just don't go there. . . I would not recommend showing up during the evening rush. It's every person for themselves and their group. It's a BAR, not a restaurant. Just a bar that happens to serve great food. So seating is wide open. You hover until you see something open up, and swoop. Can be irritating, so if you aren't into that, don't go during "dinner" hours. No table service, you order your food at the bar.  The "bouncer" at the door is there simply for crowd control. It's pretty intense inside during the rush, I can only imagine the insanity if there wasn't someone at the door. They aren't jerks, usually pretty cool.. . My overall feeling about some of the negative reviews for FO is this, It's just not your type of place. Go back to Silverlake. . . I love Father's Office. Simply for the burgers and the beer.
