ReviewID: 8iccHcqnI-qkotL0x9kWsQ
ReviewerID: E2Pkt6bFKgtTM--kMP-gbg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
Hmmm... what else can I say about Manna that others haven't said? Oh yea, I love their endless meats =). I've been here a few times... celebrated my Bday here a few months ago cuz I didn't feel like going to a fancy restaurant or throwing a big party. Plus, all I wanted to do is to EAT... hahaha. They give you a complimentary bottle of champagne for your Bday &amp; they play the Bday song while bringing it out. It was cool cuz you got everyone's attention but it only lasted for a few minutes since everyone else was celebrating their Bdays too... hhaha. I was dancing up a storm when they brought out my champagne bottle... probably cuz I had a few drinks, surrounded by my friends, &amp; had a natural high from all the meats... "It's my party &amp; I can dance if I want to"... HA! =P Oh yea, they shake the bottle before opening it over the stove. So there'd be a splash of fire for a second.. . There are few reasons for you to go to Manna &amp; service should NOT be one of those reasons. Many Asian own restaurants have horrible service because they just want to feed you &amp; take your money. Of course, they care about how their food taste or else they'd get no customers. Anyway, you should only come to Manna if you just want to have some endless meats... partying in a big group (perfect place for a group dining)... &amp; want to be surrounded by many other hungry people &amp; only if you don't mind smelling like BBQ afterward. . . I have to say that their service isn't as bad as you'd think. They have a bell @ the table. You ring the bell whenever you need something &amp; they'd come to you as fast as they can. It's best to come here during weeknights... weekend gets really packed &amp; so are the holidays. They take reservation too if you have a big group &amp; didn't want to wait. . . Overall, I like this place... My tummy always feels satisfied whenever I leave. Yes, do bring cash w/ you for the valet unless you can find street parking. This is definitely one of those places to go if  you just want to eat &amp; chill w/ your friends. Food always makes people happy... no matter where you are =).
