ReviewID: 8iLQOH9cxIQ1fQLbytsQWQ
ReviewerID: S5ltG6HaHIzSXL97boi3rw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ri Ra Irish Pub
Category: Irish
The people who opened Rí Rá  Irish Pub did not have to import all of the woodworking and fixtures from Ireland.  They didn't have to bring in a small army of Irish craftsmen to do the buildout or import a staff of servers from  directly from Ireland either.. . I'm so glad they did.. . Such meticulous attention to detail is amazing and refreshing these days.  Rí Rá  (which, as I understand it, means something like "good fun") just opened, but the place feels like it's been in the neighborhood for 100 years.  The only way to describe the place is "stunning."  The authentic bars, paneling, and flooring are simply amazing.  It's one of the most beautiful bars I've ever seen.  . . During my last visit, I had the unique opportunity to talk with the architect, who pointed out some of the small details (such as flooring from the shipyard where the Titanic was built) that truly make Rí Rá unique.  The main bar is an old 19th century bar, meticulously restored.  The woodworking is just beautiful and it's highly evident the craftsmen who built the place take pride in their work. . . I was a bit worried at first when I found out the place is 9,000 square feet.  I was unsure how they would maintain that comfy pub feel in a place so large.  Kudos to the staff and architects who managed to design a space so warm and comfortable.  It just doesn't feel like a big bar.  It feels like a neighborhood pub just as it should.  My best friend is a architecture and history buff and he was as giddy as a schoolgirl roaming around the place and pointing out all of the little details.  Everything is authentic, thought out, and flawless.  It's also cool to walk into Rí Rá as it sits smack dab in the middle of the new section of Midtown characterized by modern architecture, steel and glass.  I love the contrast.. . The Irish menu is fantastic and the prices are very reasonable.  I was actually quite surpassed by the fair prices considering how unbelievably amazing the place is.  Service was warm and friendly and I enjoyed getting to know PJ, Keyshawn, Paula, Kelly, Brandon, and the rest of the team.  I sat down at the bar and asked PJ for a beer recommendation by saying, "What's your favorite Irish beer?"  His reply (in a thick Irish accent) was, "whiskey."  I knew, at that point, I'd found my new favorite bartender.. . Please go there and support Rí Rá Irish Pub.  I'm thrilled to have such a great place in the neighborhood and I'm certainly going to do my part to make sure they're a great success here!   From the decor to the menu to the staff, Rí Rá is simply flawless.. . One of my friends who was with me at the bar turned and said to me, "Have you ever been in a bar that just made you feel like you're home?"  That pretty much sums it up for me, too.    Cheers!. . UPDATE:  Since the first review, I've been back about 5 times and have loved it just as much.  Granted, two of the nights I went, the place was swamped and service was a bit slower, but I'd expect that in a brand new place still getting its sea legs.  I've had the Fish and Chips, Shepherds Pie, Chicken Fingers, and Kilcooly Sandwich and all were very good.  These guys do a really great job all around.. . UPDATE:  10/14/2009:  So, now I've been to RiRa about 100 times.  The service has always been great, but once you get to know the folks, it really captures that neighborhood pub feel -- even at 9000 square feet.  That's it.  This is my pub.
