ReviewID: 8KdFXdt1g5WxIC06kphuoA
ReviewerID: v3QDeKjl5-PgTG2eOa_qNA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Having read soooo much hype about this place I went in almost looking to be disappointed...it didn't happen.  Not even a little.. . The thing is, you HAVE to go in knowing that you're about to drop a SERIOUS chunk of change (though, even with this understanding, the sticker shock is pretty mean).  My friend and I decided to partake in the whole experience offered for our 12 course selection, including the champagne cocktail at the beginning of the meal, the wine pairings with the courses and the unbelievably good coffee at the end.  Everything, including tip, for the two of us totaled $630.  Yeah, I know.. . But, kinda like I described in my review of Tru, this is not JUST dining out, it's an experience in and of itself.  I am not a foodie, I am not artsy.  But I do like to go into things in full disclosure and with an open mind.  What I came out with was what was so unexpected: I was completely inspired.  In each course, the combination of flavors from ingredients I am already familiar with was astounding.  Things that I never would have dreamed of going well together worked so harmoniously, never in a shocking manner, but always surprising.  Clearly, the chef's knowledge of all ingredients - how they can be prepared in such a way to best compliment one another, how they taste at different stages of natural maturity, their textures,  - is deep and, again, astounding.. . One of my favorite eating experiences is to consume a dish where I am chasing the flavors: "ooh, I got just got a bite of sweet that works beautifully with all this savory...where's another bit..."  These are the meals where, before you know it, you're stuffed but still want more.  12 of the 13 courses I had were like this...without the "stuffed" part.. . So, the place:  Very modern, intimate, lots of clean lines and thoughtful details (the cloth towels in the bathroom - single-serve, no attendant, thank you; the tasteful covers on the HVAC vents in the ceiling; funky and unusual floral arrangements, comfortable chairs).  Aside from the fact that, when we walked in through the sliding metal doors, there was no host stand or anyone to greet us for a few minutes so we weren't sure what we were supposed to do, the staff was amazing.  I can only assume that each "server" is briefed on only a few of the dishes in the series and, when this dish is to be served at any of the tables, they are the guy to do it throughout the restaurant: we had at least 6 different people explain different things to us as they were brought.  It also didn't hurt that (especially for a 'girl's night') there were so many cute guys: well-groomed, artsy-types in very nice suits.  And the sommelier...hubba hubba.. . I have a whole description of each course but, alas, it won't fit here.. . I found myself wondering what I ever did to get the opportunity to have this experience.  Thanks E &amp; D!!!!
