ReviewID: 8KJBSZoao413mUOvUmQGfw
ReviewerID: fcNU65OaCj7slBJ60VSQgw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
I thought that I hit the pinnacle of my dining career when I ate at Everest. Ah, No. This was the best vacation that I have ever taken away from the real world. Where do I start? When you walk in through the black curtains and they seat you by name. Or when they poured the water into our glasses, it took two servers. When they gave us our menu's they had Happy Anniversary Don and Steve at the top. The sommelier recommended a bottle of wine that was 100 bucks. No  problem, it was very good. But when I saw another bottle go by, and they have quite and extensive list it made me feel had. So for my second try I shot from the hip and ordered a Spanish wine, Dei La Leda. It was 50 bucks and she smiled and told me that she wouldn't be mad for making my own selection because it was a very good choice. And it was better than the first. We started with prime beef tartare, grilled diver sea scallops, avocado green-apple salad and nantucket bay scallops. I can't tell you how much flavor came out of such small portions. They also gave us pumpernickel bread that was delicious. We both had the butter poached maine lobster with white asparagus bisque, orange, almond. I don't think I need to say anymore about that. They bring around a cheese cart when your finished with your main course. Then the dessert menu. My only complaint was the souffle' took 30 minutes. The Everest asked if you want it to order it at the begining of your meal. Yes I wanted it, but I had been there for two and a half hours already. After desert they came out twice with homemade candies that you would kill for. And to top it off they had a torte with our names and anniversary scrolled in frosting on the plate. The Startrak kitchen door was great entertainment. Every time it opened the servers would come out in a straight line and attack your table from every angle. The decor is non existent. Everything that you need to look at is on your plate. I don't know what could have made the night any better. If you ever need to get away from what the world has been flingin at you for a couple of hours, this place will make you forget about it all. This is my new favorite restaurant.
