ReviewID: 8MJ4msKd-CjPgZaJc4csfw
ReviewerID: KG2hKWyLbkER4XHFSU-IJQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I love this place!  The food and the ambience were great.  I've been to the one in Costa Mesa (OC) but this is a step above.  The decor was old world classic mixed with hints of modern art (check out the fiery glass chandelier hanging over the staircase) and you just can't go wrong with a live pianist / performer.  My husband was delightfully surprised to find that it was unlike the one in OC because he didn't enjoy the ambiance there as much. . While we waited for our friends to arrive, we sat at the bar on the first floor.  As my husband proceeded to order the Pineapple Mojito, the bartender leaned over and said that he'd recommend the regular mojito in a non-pressuring manner.  Very nicely done!  What I thought would be a snobby place turned out to be quite friendly and down-to-earth.  My husband also brought 2 bottles of wine and when we arrived, they immediately took notice of the wine carrier and asked if we'd like them to take it.  The host took the bottles out and noticed that they were red wines, so he asked my husband if he'd like to have those wines decanted until dinner.  My husband's been to a lot of restaurants catering to wine lovers, but he was VERY impressed with their proactive service.  I think that's what won him over.  . . We went with a group of 6 and got seated upstairs by the bar.  We ordered the seafood tower for appetizers and the spinach salad.  I just LOVE that salad.  It's slightly cooked but not too soft.  The blue cheese was such a great touch.  Of course, for a seafood lover like me, that seafood tower is a feast for the eyes and stomach.  For the entree, I ordered the petite filet and my hubby ordered the Sea Bass.  the steak came out in a 400 degree plate and we enjoyed creamed spinach, onion rings and mac &amp; cheese to complete our truly decadent meal.  . . For dessert, coffee and butter cake to share.  Since we were already going down the route of butter cake, we added some vanilla ice cream in there too.  Yum!  . . There was no rushing even though the restaurant was packed and while it was seating in closed quarters, I somehow didn't feel cramped.  Not sure if it's the company I was with or just the atmosphere, but either way, it was a great dining experience worth repeating.
