ReviewID: 8OvcxGz1bK_ZcWdw4_DYXw
ReviewerID: l-fe24FmqxPW1i0Jaii3ZA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Have you ever been to a party with your crew, where the music's pretty dope and the 'beer flows like wine' (TM dumb&amp;dumber), and out of the corner of your eye you spot 'that person?'  Oh, you know who I'm talkin' about.  The one that no matter where you stand, what group you're addressing, what drink you're mixing, or what finger food you're stuffing down, that person's always right there somewhere in the upper recesses of your peripherals?  Damn.  Must be telling you something.  Finally as the fates would have it, that person's now in YOUR circle!  Laughing at YOUR lame ass jokes!  Directing smiles and passes and giggles in YOUR direction!  Whoa!  So you get to talking.  DAMN.  Especially in traditional Piscean mode, now you're pretty much in love.  Maybe you exchange digits; maybe you admit to the heavens your complete and utter lameness by asking this person to be your Facebook friend.  Whatever.  You leave this shindig, lay your head down to sleep, and all you have are dreamy, fantastic visions of that person dancing in your subconscious.. . Alright!  Facebook friends it is!. . Then a couple soirees down the line, you meet this person again.  You've seen the Facebook photos and the traditionalist views on filling out the 'About Me' sections and the random Farm Ville or Bejeweled status updates, and then...  hmm.  What's wrong?  Suddenly that finely shaped, amazingly dressed 'person' just doesn't have 'it' anymore.  They're still pretty awesome.  The Facebook flaws?  Forgivable.  But...  what is it about the second pass that sometimes just has your heart sinking deeper and deeper into broken-expectations-land?. . Father's Office, I fell in love with you back in the day in Santa Monica, when I had a two-hour drive home and almost got into a weird fight about seats and even got a little drunky on McChubb's tab.  I came home, cried a little, and Yelped about it, still fresh off my gastropub orgasm.  Even though this bigger, swankier, closer (Culver City?  well maybe a liiiittle bit) and more star-powered (we met Scott Ian of Anthrax...  pretty awesome) version seemed like it was to be sexier and more appealing...  it just wasn't.  Although I got the burger of all burgers again, along with my sweet potato fries of perfection and a lovely beer, it just wasn't the same.  It's like gazing at my high school dance pictures and then trying to squeeze myself back into that junior year prom dress.  It ain't gonna happen and if it does, it wont be the same.. . Maybe it was the tired talking (this was our 'unwinding' time after a day spent watching a Conan O'Brien taping AND me driving our crew around all day), or maybe I just wasn't in the mood.  Either way, the allure of my first visit just can't be captured.  I don't blame the CC FO though; I'll definitely be back for a higher-starred update.
