ReviewID: 8p0gv2dyNYMgWmjNEfgvxg
ReviewerID: zrESudirjip-s8wxxAB0xw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Eleven City Diner
Category: Diners
While in town for a conference I made my way a few blocks to try Eleven City before hitting the airport.  As many have noted on the reviews thus far, you will almost certainly have a brush with one of the owners while visiting.  I first noticed him as he was going 100 mph around the restaurant.  I'm not complaining at all, I'm happy to see an owner taking a hands-on approach with their business.  When we arrived he asked us how many then when he realized our entire party wasn't with us he brushed us aside to wait for the rest of our party (one person).  The place wasn't full, nor was it peak hours, so I was a little put-off by this.  Trust me, I get it, and there is a sign noting that there is a "no joiner" policy during weekend peak times (but this was neither).  Either way, we waited patiently, craving some warm eye-opening coffee.... . Once seated the service was very good, very attentive but not overbearing.  We started with the spinach dip which I thought was good - very fresh but a little more bland than I'm use to.  The cheese was very mild and not the more substantial cheese I'm use to in this dish.  Regardless, it was good and heaping with bagel chips for dipping.. . I had the open face reuben with fries.  This was quite possibly the best reuben I've ever had.  The meat was tender and juicy, the cheese perfect, the bread fresh...just the perfect sandwich....and NOT greasy!  . . The food is great - breakfast all day, great sandwiches - everything you would expect from a great diner.  The atmosphere is a cool mix between throwback diner garb and more modern decor.  The only drawback that I have (and no, its not the owner) are the prices.  They were a bit steep for diner fare, but the quality and fresh ingredients make up for that a bit.  Definitely worth stopping by...I wouldn't go out of your way if you're visiting but a great spot in the South Loop...
