ReviewID: 8QFfAaWkbNgnSVwCQqH4Yg
ReviewerID: XO7EGFF6Nz_cpI-BvOVCrg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
Reasons why I am changing my career from the glorious (and oh so exciting) world of market research to waiting tables at David Burkes: . . 1. The exasperating price of each table's bills will (hopefully) transition into quite a nice tip. Try everything on the menu, learn the spiel about their aging process and having their own shire (I still don't know what a shire is...HELP) and BOOM, instantly double your salary. . 2. You get to eat here. Not just during restaurant week. but whenever your Heart desires... . . If I didn't have to worry about the pesky nuisances of life, like paying rent, having insurance, buying clothes, etc. I may just work there principally on the basis of Number 2.... that's how in love with it I am. . . Ive said it before, I am not a steak eater. And, yet, i feel obligated to say that the 28 day Delmonico was the best hunk of cow I have ever had. The steak-aficionados with me concurred. (My BIGGEST mistake: Getting mine medium-well...even if you are no a fan of pink, doing this will really negate the flavor) . . As it was restaurant week (spectacular, but our waiter told us that it is very similar to the lunch special they offer....) we got an appi and dessert also, with family style sides. . . I probably debated for a week over what I was going to get for the first and final course. I ended up with the lobster bisque (recommended by our waiter) and the apple cheddar pie. Such great decisions, but as I tried my companions' Kobe sashimi and crab cake and chocolate cake for dessert, everything was spectacular, so it wouldn't have mattered anyway. . . Drinks are pricey, to be expected. Our waiter told us Sunday nights are 50 percent off a bunch of bottles of wine, so this would be a good bonus. . . Since DBs is in a hotel, valet is astronomical. Take a cab or public trans, if possible. . . End of review, need to begin filling out my wait staff application...
