ReviewID: 8qG1LKiQuaFhk9BSPtUPmQ
ReviewerID: UaEPiHV5Cm6fDwuY6N4pyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Katsu-Ya
Category: Sushi Bars
4.56  :). . A long time ago in a land far away (Orange County) there lived a girl named SuperGirl. She loved great food &amp; awesome sushi &amp; even though SuperGirl was a Super positive person,she was very detailed &amp; objective,so every place failed to impress her &amp; 5 star reviews kept eluding her much to her dismay.. . Then one sunny Sunday in early August of 2008,Katsu-Ya came into her life &amp; all that changed.She arrived at Katsu-Ya with a friend,they did not have reservations &amp; although SuperGirl was Super hungry by this time,she &amp; her friend had to wait almost an hour.Make reservations!!Eventually,we got seated at the bar (we got to watch all the sushi being made,OMG!Can I just have everything, please?!).Yay!NOw, comes the part of the review that your kids may not be able to handle (send then away!) &amp; I am not sure you can handle it either,unless of course you make reservations &amp; drive over to this place stat &amp; start shoving sushi in your mouth!Then, you will feel great! :). . I started with a baby bottle of Perrier (250ml).Mmm :). . There is a printed dinner menu &amp; the yummy specials board that has all the Super amazing yummy items on it (that board is a bit tough to read,unless you really try,hehe,I would just like to save the reading time &amp; get everything on the board,haha.Really,though!). . I opted for the omakase sushi($35),not the omakase dinner($55, looks like a much better option,must have!).Before My omakase started coming,I got to try My friend's seared ahi with warm spinach.OMG, OMG!!What was that in My mouth?Why does it taste sooo good?Do I need protection?Is it legal?(I have never done drugs in My life,but I would think the really good drugs feel something like this!haha).The way the delectable seared tuna complements the warm spinach is simply orgasmic &amp; then some.The tuna was soo melt in your mouth amazing I thought I may have changed fairy tales &amp; got into the land of the three bears &amp; found the seared tuna dish that was just right.OMG!One problem with this dish is that you will have fantasies about it until the next time it's in your mouth &amp; at that point, you will feel a weird urge to order more, more, more of it!Moore!!OMG!If you know anyone who doesn't like sushi or sashimi or seafood,get this awesomeness in their mouth &amp; they will be forever hooked!OMG!It was My friend's dish,so I just got to have two pieces,it comes with about 8 pieces I think,but you will have a very hard time eating just one order of it,it's THAT good!OMG!. . On to the omakase sushi,boys &amp; girls.. . Miso soup with clams was yumm,a few wonderful clams in the Katsu-Ya delicious miso soup.I approve! :). . Then I had a baby sashimi salad,mmmm.Very tiny &amp; very yummy! :). . Then various nigiri 4 various pieces at a time kept coming out...I have no idea where they get their fish &amp; what addicitive substances they infuse it with,lol,but this is the freshest,most delectable,melt in your mouth,feel naughty,claw the table fish (k,I actually did claw the table a bit,it was just a natural reaction for some reason,I did not leave marks,don't worry...there was some eyes rolling back in the head &amp; head tilting back action,too...it was out of My control,these things were just happening &amp; remember I did warn you to send the kids away,haha).I got about 12 pieces of nigiri total,one of them was unagi (I looove unagi &amp; this was unagi like no unagi I have ever had &amp; I have had a LOT of unagi!).I also got to try the spicy tuna on crispy rice.It was yumm &amp; I have to tell you one thing...I don't eat rice,I don't like rice,I don't believe in rice...well,the rice at this place is a different breed of rice.This rice was literally melting in your mouth and was not mushy,but Super delectable...maybe they fish this rice out of the same special oceans (or crack houses,haha,not really,but addictive as such,lol) as the amazing fish they use.I also got to try one baked crab in the rice paper,definitely very fresh &amp; delicious,I still prefer the illegally good tasting fresh fish.. . I also got to choose an ice cream (green tea,plum or vanilla).I chose green tea,but since I had never been around plum ice cream,I just had to have a baby spoon of it &amp; I got to taste it!Yay!It was good,had subtle green tea &amp; plum flavors.Yumm,more,please!(they give a baby scoop,haha).. . So,the food,OMG!OMG!The bestestest (I just made up a word) sushi SuperGirl ever had!The value is great as a la carte sushi items go (especially considering the out of this world quality).. . The only negatives are the looong wait :( &amp; the fact that I was not full,hehe.. . So,back to SuperGirl &amp; her fairy tale,she has since been fantasizing about going to Katsu-Ya with a bunch of money &amp; ordering one of every single item without rice &amp; the 7 course Omakase dinner...but for now,even just the 7 course Omakase  dinner will do...till then,Katsu-Ya &amp; SuperGirl lived happily ever after in SuperGirl's fantasies &amp; dreams.The end...well,actually,just the beginning!hehe :) . . Must go there NOW,yumm,OMG! I want you, Katsu-Ya!NOW!!
