ReviewID: 8qsQiZAghHrb1wNwpSuzuQ
ReviewerID: Vjj_3CF0_Nwtj3XW7r3XWg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Even though I'm the umpteenth blogger to write about the new Father's Office I thought I would throw my review into the mix anyway. It's a Friday night and I decide I'll get there early to get a table. To my surprise there is already a line at 5:30.. . With about 10 people in front of me, it takes about 20 min to get in. While waiting in line, I spot some friends that already have a table, sweet. I don't have to fight for a table. As my stomach rumbled, I wished Let's Be Frank was still serving their delicious hot dogs from their cart across the street, but they've already closed up for the night. What a perfect snack that would make while you are waiting in line at FO II.. . I finally get in and I go up to the pleasantly semi-crowded bar and order a glass of the Anderson Valley Poleeko Gold Pale Ale. Anderson is a solar powered brewery, located just north of San Francisco. This pale ale has a floral bouquet and a lively, citrusy finish. Perfect for a Father's Office burger. Which in fact, is what I was here to order. I imagine one of these days I should order something else. But for my first visit to FO II, the burger is a must.. . There are two very distinct parties when it comes to the burger here, you either think Yang Soon is the second coming of Don Vito Corleone or could do without it. For those of you who don't know, the Office Burger comes with a half pound Dry Aged Beef patty, caramelized onion, applewood bacon compote, gruyere, matag blue cheese and arugula. What side am I on? I guess I'm closer to the former. I do really like it, but I do know, there are better burgers in LA. But the combination of a good burger, ambiance, patio and beers make this a wonderful spot.. . Because there are no substitutions, if you don't like sweet caramelized onions, too bad. If you don't like bacon on your burger, too bad. If you don't like blue cheese, too bad. If you want to add anything, forget about it. They don't even have ketchup here.. . The menu is limited to just a few items, a hand full of small eats, a salad, ribs, a steak and the burger. Their fries are served two ways. The shoestring style fries with a garlic parsley aioli or the sweet potato fries with a roasted garlic, cabrales blue cheese aioli.. . Their interesting selection of beers make the line tolerable, but I wouldn't want to wait more than 30 min. The bartender was more than happy to go over their selection of craft beers with me. The wine selection wasn't impressive, and they even have a limited cocktail menu as they don't carry vodka. But I will be back, if I can stop in before the crowds arrive.
