ReviewID: 8rN0046A9WQS_txQ-xqYoQ
ReviewerID: YEk-6rfOCLmEA7Cu-u8xmw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
Round 2 of the SMWC, which I'm promptly renaming The Yelpettes, commenced last night at Hub 51.  I'd wanted to try Hub 51, and I'm glad I got the chance.. . First, I was impressed with how well the servers handled our group of approximately 13 ladies.  Our glasses kept full of delicious libations like pomegranate and dirty vodka martinis, vino and of course, the infamous Hub Punch, which, after sampling it, I'm convinced is just vodka and tequila with a splash of food coloring.  Our meals were served promptly and we were checked on very frequently.. . My section of the table ordered the crab meat nachos, which were, in a word, awesome.  Hub 51 doesn't skimp on the fresh crab meat, and they piled that plate high with cheese, tomatillo salsa, jalapeños and guacamole.  Simple, fresh and delicious.. . I had been fantasizing about ordering "The Dude," which is a bone-in, parmesan crusted rib-eye steak served with sautéed mushrooms and a side of cheesy mashed potatoes since I saw it on the menu about a week ago.  Is your mouth watering yet?  It should be, because it was arguably one of the better steaks I've had in recent memory.  I split it with a friend, who summed things up with this statement: "Angie, if I was here with my family and not a group of friends, I would pick up the bone and pick it clean."  You don't get much better than that.  We also ordered the fish tacos and a salmon sushi roll to share.  I fully enjoyed everything on our plates, but I did hear some gripes from the other end of the table that the food was just okay.  Personally, I think they're jealous that they didn't order The Dude.. . All in all, a great dining experience.  I would certainly come back for dinner, but I actually kind of want to come for after work drinks and maybe an appetizer with friends.  Sure, the bar area was like a Chad explosion, but sometimes you want some cute, yuppiesh guys to flirt with you and buy you drinks.  I think Hub 51 could fit that bill perfectly.
