ReviewID: 8UrLcuDawp24nsDo9xX-Dg
ReviewerID: EGe4aAGOBfy_oqTE6tG81A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Las Tablas Colombian Steakhouse
Category: Latin American
Seems this a popular style of restaurant these days.  You get a ton of grillled meats with roasted starchy veggies on the side.  Get enough on your plate to feed you for 2-3 days and drop about 30 bucks a head.  I can see the appeal, but it just doesn't excite me.  Fun for a group, but just not a unique enough dining experience to merit the crowds.. . BYO is a big part of the "Tango Sur" model, and Tablas offers that mid-week but charges a whopping 8$ corkage on the weekend.  I've never understood why someone would bring a 15 dollar bottle of wine to a restaurant with an 8 dollar corkage.  Sure it's still cheaper than buying wine off their menu, but that's a pretty stiff upcharge.  I'll probably stick to sangria or beer at a place like this, so at least I'm not paying 20 bucks for the right to drink cheap wine from the corner shop.. . The other ingredient of the model is a huge sizzling platter of grilled meats.  Of course they serve you pretty cheap cuts of meat, brined into oblivion then covered in oil so they come out moist and shiny.  Sure it tastes good, but it's something of a mirage.  Everything ends up cooked medium well and it begs the question why you don't just go to Jewel, pick up a couple pounds of skirt steak, slam it with a mallet to flatten it out, soak it in salt water for a couple hours, then grill it up (or sear it and sautee it).  That 100 dollar meal (with 20 dollars in corkage) quickly become a 15 dollar meal with no corkage BYO in the comfort of your own home.  My point is that they're just repackaging cheap meats and vegetables (roasting potatoes is even easier than grilling skirt steak) as ethnic cuisine, when really it's just a ploy to serve steak for cheap.. . All that said, the food was all right.  No one leaves hungry and the ambiance is pretty lively.  There's a reason places like this are so popular.
