ReviewID: 8xr7ylcjZCbhpOWdhOjSyg
ReviewerID: ZzJrlRX0k5X2mMaMqPs-Ig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
What a great place to eat breakfast or lunch! I'm a huge fan of the open patio. Lots of trees and plants shield you from the traffic outside, and it's a perfect setting to eat and talk with friends.. . The food was delicious. My friend and I split the breakfast panini, which consisted of scrambled eggs, asparagus, goat cheese, and caramelized onions. Asparagus and goat cheese are two of my favorite things in the whole world, and when put together they bring me to a happy place. My only minor gripe, and this is true for several of the dishes we tried that day, is that everything was a little underseasoned. A little salt and pepper made a huge difference.  The rosemary potatoes that came alongside were okay, but nothing special. Actually they were slightly undercooked for my taste, but in general I like my breakfast potatoes on the crispy side.. . We also tried the soup du jour, a red pepper and sweet corn soup served with a dollop of lime creme fraiche. The flavors were excellent. The corn gave a nice crunch, and the subtle lime played nicely with the sweetness of the soup. Only thing wrong with this soup was a lack of salt.. . Finally, we split the house veggie burger. Yeah, you read that right. Unabashed carnivore actually tried something that I would normally mock. But my friend talked me into it, and seeing that it was a homemade patty made from good ingredients  and not a bunch of twigs and soy glued together with sap, I decided to give it a try. And ya know, it was was actually delicious! The garbanzo beans and spices reminded me of an extra thick hummus. It's a messy eat, but soooo worth it. I would actually order this again! The sweet potato fries that accompanied it (for a small extra charge) were good. Maybe not the best I've had, but they were crispy enough and went well with the whole meal.. . Everything else about this visit was great. The iced teas had nice flavor, the service was quick and friendly, and did I mention how nice the outside seating is?
