ReviewID: 8ZskLq4Ljih9-MFfZ7exNQ
ReviewerID: OlhH_-yyVWU6jj8H2TMSiQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
What the heck is this glossy Chinese restaurant doing in Logan Square (next to a mattress shop)? Thanks to a Groupon offer, our group of four was lured to try out the food. The interior lobby greets you with a wall of shiny and serene Buddha heads, and the dining hall is comfortably chic as it does not fall into the clichés of dragons and red gateways run amok. We had a relatively early dinner reservation, and even though we came a bit late it was not a problem to be seated. The place is BYOB, but their short beer list is not bad (we all went for the Kirin). . . The Groupon offer was for a 5-course meal featuring Chilean sea bass. I was the lone dissenter of our group and ordered a la carte to avoid the seafood special. The special meal featured crispy unagi with salad (was that eel?), lobster and corn bisque, peppercorn beef tenderloin, sea bass over a bed of noodles, and dessert. I ordered pork pot stickers, which were delicious and quite sizeable. My entrée was champagne lemon chicken with broccoli, which was good though I liked the beef better (yeah we all shared). The feature dessert was chocolate volcano cake, but we were allowed to pick three different desserts (glazed sorbet ball, mousse cube, volcano cake), and these are rather rich for a Chinese restaurant. I liked the little flourishes here, such as the bowls of rice delicately striped with soy sauce so they look like scoops of ice cream, and the food was all well-presented. It seemed all of the food was very good...except for the sea bass! All three of my dining mates were not thrilled by the fish, which is odd since that was the item that lured the crowd here. There were some minor service issues too (two servings of sea bass instead of three on the family plate, and Groupon cost added to total bill even though the Groupon is a prepaid item). Still, the Groupon discount was incredible ($13 instead of $50 "rack rate" for the 5-course meal) in comparison to the a la carte pricing. Overall we did enjoy the "fabuloso" dining experience at Friendship.
