ReviewID: 9-bZUghiyzcAB07I4Pwr0A
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sotto Sotto Restaurant
Category: Italian
I really like Sotto Sotto and, based on my latest visit, I would love to give it five stars but for a few things.  It was close but it didn't quite get there, although it was very good.. . The main issue I had was with our server and, in particular, with our server and the wine list.  Let me first say that Sotto Sotto has a wonderful wine list.  It's a huge list with many interesting Italian wines, more reds than whites, and the wines are varied both in type and price.  The list was so large that it was a little overwhelming but I was up for the challenge.  When our server came to get our wine order, he was rather pretentious and pushy, first assuming that I didn't know the difference between the reds and whites on the list, then pushing two wines, both of which happened to be the most expensive varieties on the list, and finally offering no further suggestions after I was forced to quite frankly tell him that I was not looking at anything in the Amarone or a Brunello price range simply because I didn't want to spend that much on a casual Sunday evening dinner.  I was irritated that I had to even tell him this but he just wasn't moving away from the Amarones and Brunellos, no matter how much I was hedging.  After I got him to go away for a while, I was able to find a reasonably priced and tasty Valpolicella which we really enjoyed.  And, the server did get his due when he asked a woman at the table next to us if she wanted something to drink and she asked if they had Beringer White Zinfandel.  He said they did not and she said didn't want any wine in that case.  Ha! . . Overall, our food was very good.  I could not decide if I wanted the gorgonzola and radicchio ravioli or the butternut squash cappellacci (like tortelloni) and when I expressed my indecision to the server, he was very helpful in pointing out that I could order each in the appetizer portion so I could try both of them.  However, this was after he told me he didn't know which to suggest since he didn't like gorgonzola.  I did try both and both were delicious.  I also sampled the Acqua Pazza (which was grouper although the online menu says halibut), which was very good and a very large portion.  The bread served with our meals was good, too.  The only think really lacking was my salad - the arugula, fennel, red orange and olive salad.  It was refreshing but I was expecting more flavor from the ingredients.  The fennel was crunchy but it was missing even a light licorice flavor, and the dressing was maybe too understated.. . We tried two desserts and both were wonderful.  The pine nut and honey crostata was very warm, rich and tasty, served with thick whipped cream.  We also tried the panna cotta and I thought it was perfect.  It was drizzled with caramel sauce and 12 year aged balsamic vinegar.  The custard held its shape on the plate but, when I dug into it, it was very soft and creamy - a perfectly cooked cream.  I love custards and I thought this one was fantastic.  My friend ordered coffee, as well, but thought it was not hot enough.  I, however, thought it was the perfect temperature even after it sat for a few minutes (I think this is an Italian thing - you rarely find really hot coffee in Italy as they prefer it immediately ready to drink).  The coffee was rich and tasty but, if you like piping hot coffee, you may need to specially request this.. . I will absolutely return here and I would love to bump them up to five stars if my next visit goes a little better.  They have very good food, very good wine, and fast service, and only a few things that I think need attention.
