ReviewID: 92EX9LIkUoZ5M4PphL9ZRg
ReviewerID: IFcruw1KHsA-X5KevmOncg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
There's a few things in my life I never thought I'd enjoy. So imagine my surprise when I found out about chicken and waffles. At first I thought it was a cruel joke someone was playing on the world. I thought, what an odd combination of sweet and savory. But I threw caution to the wind and gave it a shot. I still find it to be an odd combination, but now it's one I enjoy.. . Roscoe's prides itself on home-style, southern cooking and it shows. The place looks like a house and when you walk in, it feels like home. Granted, it's a very crowded home but when the cooking is this good you can understand why.. . There were a lot of things on the menu but I was only interested in two things: chicken and waffles. I ordered the breast meat cause I prefer it to dark meat. Usually the breast meat on fried chicken turns out to be a bit dry since it takes longer to cook. This was not the case. The chicken was so moist and I still remember cutting into it and had steam coming out. I have no clue what the crust on the chicken was but it was so good so I didn't stop to ask questions.. . As for the waffles, they're as the big as the plate and you get two. On the outside its nice and crunchy while being soft and chewy inside. It's probably the best waffle I've ever had. A drizzle of maple syrup and some butter on it could have made the waffles alone a perfect meal.. . Of course, the point of coming to Roscoe's is to have both at once. To this day I'll keep saying it's weird. It's really no different than eating chicken with bread but knowing it's a waffle is just something I have a hard time getting my head around. The weirdest moment of the meal is having the chicken with the maple syrup. It may be weird but God is it delicious.. . Like I said, there's more to Roscoe's than just chicken and waffles. I had the biscuits and gravy, a more traditional combination and just as tasty. As good as a fresh baked flaky biscuit drowned in a sawmill gravy would be, it was the probably the worst thing to order cause I was already so full from the chicken and waffles.. . The one downside to Roscoe's is that this is the only place where the chicken and waffles combo seems to work. I've tried it at home with my own waffles or even the kind you stick in the toaster. I paired it up with my mom's fried chicken and even KFC, but for some reason it's just not the same. Unfortunately, you're gonna have to keep coming back here to enjoy the odd couple that is chicken and waffles but that doesn't seem like such a bad thing.
