ReviewID: 93VUR1R2y4Q-qPdXZLfdXA
ReviewerID: NAu5U_q2o-PMNoTjZML_sQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wahoo! A Decatur Grill
Category: American (New)
This has been a local favorite of mine since they opened over four years ago.  The atmosphere is good, especially the outside patio.  Service is always just right.  The fish dishes, as expected, are all tasty.  The brunch is terrific.  I've never heard a complaint from anyone about the buffet.. . Last week after getting home late from work, my husband and I were looking for a quiet dinner.  We decided on Wahoo as it is close to home and serves lots of good veggies with the entrees.  We were seated in the outside patio area and greeted by one of our favorite servers.  Looks like  pleasant relaxing evening is ahead.  Then we received a surprise, Monday  - Thursday there is a new prix fixe menu in addition to the old menu.  Single serving sized appetizer, small salad and entree for $18.  Four or five selections in each category.  Great deal.. . I was planning on ordering the trout dinner and it was one of the featured entrees, so my decision was made.  Another option was the wild salmon.  The salmon was $22 on the regular menu - to include the appetizer and salad reduced the price by $4, so my husband ordered that.. . Appetizers were calamari and mussels.  The calamari is served with a sweet/sour Asian style sauce instead of the usual marinara and is really tasty.  The mussels were very fresh.  As described on the menu, they were smaller than Wahoo's usual serving, but large enough to satisfy.  I'm not much of a salad person, but they were good.  It 's hard to make a salad special in my opinion.. . The biggest surprise were the entrees.  I was anticipating a smaller than usual serving, but the plates contained the usual generous portions.  My trout included two filets, a large mound of grits and succotash.  The large piece of salmon was served with green beans, the veggie of the day and potatos.  The trout is a favorite of mine and it did not disappoint.  The succotash contained slightly over cooked lima beans, but I have had it at Wahoo before and it is usually an excellent side.  The salmon was good and the beans served with it were excellent.. . Wahoo is always a good option and it has never disappointed me.  . . ps, the desserts are really good. The fruit cobbler is excellent and most of the cakes are from Southern Sweets.
