ReviewID: 94NuOoCUHl3w8s_mQFVL0g
ReviewerID: HoWYMk8ToNpWXqEZ3W1hPQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Top Spice Thai &amp; Malaysian Cuisine
Category: Thai
Incredible.. . I read great reviews, and I was interested.  Their website (. http://www.topspiceans.... ) is incredibly well done and helpful, with full menus and information.  I ordered over the phone, and the person at the desk was very helpful and easily understood - he even offered an appetizer suggestion, though fortunately I made a great choice of my own.  Their driver was embarrassingly fast - my co-workers had to come find me to tell me the food had arrived, because I wasn't expecting him for at least another 10 minutes.  Overall, the service aspect was top notch.. . To round out a $12 min. delivery order, I added on an order of roti canai - basically a great style of flatbread from various parts of asia and the Caribbean, along with a dipping sauce of chicken curry.  Chunks of chicken were a nice addition to a spicy curry - I was pinching off the bread to soak in the sauce entirely, because there was so much and it was so great.  The bread was a little greasy, but it could just be the style - it was chewy, still warm, and delicious.. . All lunch items come with soup - I got the coconut/mushroom, and I'd recommend it (heard on another review the veg. isn't always the best).  The soup was about what I would expect, but very pleasantly spicy.  The rice that comes with all items is perfectly cooked and smelling slightly of jasmine - awesome.. . The main attraction, "Beef Rendang," is out of this world.  They claim to use filet mignon (I would believe it outright, but the price was only $8.25, so...maybe?), and it sure seemed worthy of the name if it wasn't filet in fact.  Very tender, well prepared meat in a sauce that was too good to throw any away - it was soaked up with rice by the end, not a scrap for tomorrow or the garbage.  Even in a to-go order, the chefs prepared huge, beautifully carved slices of cool cucumber to put on top.  Wow.. . I think I'll be ordering from Top Spice very, very often.  I can't think of a single bad thing to say, except they'll get me fat as hell if I eat there too much...
