ReviewID: 9585lvLbXKGzz1mNsvQxkA
ReviewerID: ENgL9AxV7uu-v5EUCpF69Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
If you read my review on Five Crowns, you would understand my trepidation of going to Lawry's (my first time!).  However, the experience could not be more different.  For starters, the wide open space of Lawry's was a welcome change to Five Crown's cramped cottage-style ambience and decor. (Translation: Not as gaudy). . Our server Miss Dolce was accommodating but not overly obsequious and even showed a bit of spunk.  Her honest opinion of the over-rated trifle was much appreciated.  . . The tableside serving of the food was also unique to Lawry's.  First, the spinning salad - great salad, great dressing, fun presentation.  Our pals who have been there before commented on the absence of grape tomatoes.  Miss Dolce advised that the restaurant was hoping we wouldn't noticed but would let management know we noticed.  I guess that's an area of cost-cutting???  Jumbo shrimp cocktail, which is about the only appetizer they have, was good.  Standard...fresh giant shrimp in a ketchuppy cocktail sauce.. . Entrees... Four diners - four different cuts.  Lawry's (standard), California (smaller), English (thin cuts - me) and Diamond Gem (bone in HUGE cut, hubby).  The creamed spinach tasted better than Five Crowns.  The beef was good quality and extra au jus is always a great accompaniment.  I enjoy the creaminess of the whipped horseradish but always have to mix in some of the straight stuff to get it to the right heat level.. . Being stuffed with so much prime rib and red wine, we opted to bypass dessert and go straight for the food coma.. . Dinner for four cost about $210 including a corkage fee for the wine we brought.  But with the ability to combine rewards certificates ($XX off x 3 + Free appetizer + double bonus points), our tab came to $160 including tax and tip.  . . How, pray tell, did we swing such an amazing deal??  Well, we're local to Five Crowns in Corona Del Mar which is part of the Lawry's chain (see my review on 5 Crowns) and the VIP Program is the same and linked.  Between the high priced food, anniversaries, birthdays (of myself and the rest of the family), one can accumulate quite a bit of savings.  And this is with going on average once a year!. . The meal was great and so was the service.  This was a pleasantly surprising experience for me at a longstanding institution on Restaurant Row (La Cienaga).  . . P.S.  The meatballs in the waiting area were yummy too!
