ReviewID: 95eXD284zRW6fxLCRBv5Pw
ReviewerID: l58GiI354JSPMFwaDhRlUw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Uncle Julio&#39;s Casa Grande
Category: Mexican
Uncle Julio's Casa Grande never fails put a big smile on my face. The atmosphere is bright, festive, and full of charm. Definitely a great place to celebrate a birthday, meet friends for dinner, great for dates, and also a great place to take the family. . . If margaritas are your thing, I'd highly recommend "The Swirl." It's Casa Grande's signature margarita..Sangria meets Margarita. I'll be honest, 2 of these drinks will guarantee a good time. 4 will give you an out of body experience. They are life changing, and worth the money...Even the boys like em! They might try to put up a fight due to the frozen-colored-nature of the drink, but once they try it...Its highly unlikely they will switch to another drink. . . Also, they have a special machine that makes their hot fresh soft tortillas-complimentary for ever table. The chips and salsa hit the spot every time. And the cheese dip isnt half bad either. (Buyers beware that is is the yellow cheese dip, not the white-id recommend getting it with the jalepenos!).. . I always order the steak fajitas. The steak is truly life changing. So tender and juicy..it comes out on a hot skillet with peppers and onions. I used to be a chicken girl...but ever since I took a chance with steak at this place, ive changed my ways-at least when i find myself at Casa Grande. Definitely get the cheese and sour cream..It adds to the fajita experience. And, although I hear that others love the charro beans, I tend to go for the refried beans instead. They will switch it out on request. . . Bottom line.... if you are looking to have a great night out-Try Casa Grande if you haven't already. Its a Mexican food lovers paradise. Definitely more sophistocated than your typical Mexican food joint. Id say it's ...Mexican Food meets Magic on a plate.. . Food: 5. Atmosphere: 5. Service: 4. . Recommendations:. Swirl Margaritas. Steak Fajitas. . All in All: Seriously Addicted to the Swirl Margaritas and the Steak Fajitas..Life Changing!
