ReviewID: 98wp8tBvHxCLk8pwiBG9AQ
ReviewerID: cr3E57KJP7Zq9s105Y4FdQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
not the best burgers i've ever had, but definitely not average.  really moist compared to other burgers.  the umami burger is a tad too salty in my opinion, but it did have more flavor than my turkey burger.  my turkey burger was super moist, but lacked a little bit of... something.  with a name like "turkey miso" and an ingredient of "asian bbq sauce" i thought it would have more of an asian flair.  it did not, it was just a really good plain turkey burger.  fries were just "ok."  the fact that they ration the amount of sauce that comes with your fries is one indicator of how snooty this place is.  now let me tell you about the staff.... . we got there with 7 people for a party of 8.  they refused to seat us until our entire party was there.  which is fine, but the way the guy barked at us was really uncalled for.  then our 8th showed up and we went in to get a table.  he barked at us again to "go outside and wait!  i need to get the tables ready!"  well excuuuuuuse me, burger nazi!. . one of our friends asked if they could serve a burger on lettuce instead of a bun b/c he's doing the low carb thing.  the waiter widened his eyes and slowly shook his head back and forth.  you would have thought my friend was growing a second head with that reaction.  finally the waiter said they don't change anything about the burgers.  they could remove the bun, but if my friend wanted lettuce he would have to order a side salad, which he did.  and then his burger came on a bun.  . . my boyfriend and i ordered 2 sauces (b/c we wanted to try the umami ketchup AND the garlic aioli, god forbid) and they not only forgot one of our sauces they brought our other friend the wrong one completely.  . . the staff really ruined the experience for me.  while the burgers were good, i left with a bad taste in my mouth.  . . FYI, if you're in a large group make sure to bring cash.  they will only take 2 credit cards per group.  (also announced with a touch of disdain in their voice). . p.s.  seth rogan and friends were there.  is this a celeb hang out?  is that why the staff thinks they can treat us "regular folk" like crap?
