ReviewID: 9bDlU7kq3om2ESXdp8jK_A
ReviewerID: 9o_ePu9wfQZFpnE8Nss27Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Located conveniently off of Wilshire, it's a prime location for a lot of the employees in the high rise buildings along the main street, and is within walking distance of where I work. If you can, I would suggest walking in lieu of driving to the restaurant as it's valet parking only at the La Brea lot (it's only $2.00, but still), and when it's busy it's impossible to find street parking.. . The first time I went to Umami I was with a group of four and we arrived at around 6:30, a reasonable dinner hour that we had assumed wouldn't have the place too crowded. We were wrong, unfortunately, and so we were seated at the bar in this teeny tiny room with a counter top running along the walls with high stools. Ideal if you were by yourself or with one other friend, awkward when you're trying to talk to three other people. The waiter wasn't particularly accommodating when we asked about available tables for four people, and in the end we just decided to stay at the bar.. . I ordered an Umami Burger, the classic, and I tried a bit of my friend's Port &amp; Stilton. Both were great. I loved the Parmesan crisp on the Umami Burger, and the patty was cooked a perfect medium-rare so it was juicy and tender. The Port &amp; Stilton was very rich, could be mistaken for being too heavy, but I loved the flavor combination of the buttery cheese and the hearty beef patty. The sweet potato fries were alright, pretty standard fare, but I liked the onion rings a lot more. They were a bit difficult to eat because they were so large and so I ended up using a knife and fork. . . The dessert, however, is what stole the show, and it isn't even made at the restaurant. Ice cream sandwiches from Milk in toffee coffee and red velvet were split between four people, along with a homemade Ding Dong dessert cake from Cake Monkey. The sandwiches were so DE-LICIOUS that I ended up paying a visit directly to the source not long after.. . My second experience was better on the service, not as great on the food. I feel like eating at a venue sized like Umami on La Brea is better suited to a meal for two, which is exactly what I had when I grabbed lunch with a coworker. We were seated immediately despite the lunch rush at about 12:30, and our waitress was very attentive throughout our meal and promptly refilled our drinks as soon as they were nearing half-full. I ordered a Turkey Miso Burger for a little variety and then ended up wishing I had stuck to the classic Umami. It was WAY too salty, even for something infused with miso; I had to keep sipping at my water and had it refilled quite often. The saltiness overpowered the flavor of the entire patty so much that I couldn't even taste the garlic garnish, and while I was kind of let down, I rallied with an ice cream sandwich which redeemed the burger to some extent.. . As a note, don't feel scandalized by the portion size of the burger when you first see it. It may look small but with a side order of fries or some dessert, you WILL get full.
