ReviewID: 9Cj1IZG74ksQsksUVkiohA
ReviewerID: 6QLuXNLUEnSHHFKIqf4c2w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zuma Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
Zoom Zoom Zuma.  Zoom Zoom Zuma.  Za za zoom zoom zuma, za za zoom zoom zuma.  I just love the name of this place.  And the sushi is near the best in the city, easily as good as the likes of MF, at half the price.  I consider myself a complete and utter sushi snob.  I can spot low quality tuna across the room; and most sushi in Atlanta, sadly, is of poor quality.  Its a shame that you have to pay through the nose for AVERAGE sushi in this city.  Seriously, sushi here is pathetic compared to Chicago or the West Coast ((end rant)). Having said that, Zuma offers perfectly average quality sushi for normal prices (mostly).  Last night we had four tasty rolls (shrimp tempura, rock-and-roll (eel), rainbow, and negi hamachi), plus two seaweed and cucumber salads and green tea for $45...and they gave us $10 off coupons for the next two visits, which would lower the tab to $35, which is wayyyyy reasonable.  They have two classes of rolls, the regular rolls which are $5.50 each (a bargain!), and the special rolls which are $12 each (a little pricey, but still 60% the cost of MF's).  While tasty and fresh, the rolls are just average.  Rolls in my opinion, are often used to mask sub-par quality.. . I think the straight up nigiri is where this place shines, because the quality is there.  The salmon is buttery, the yellow fin is nicely marbled, and the tuna is getting toward dark red, not pink, although still not the deep reddish purple that I like to see and not quite as fatty as I like.  Nonetheless, it rivals the quality of ANY sushi place I've been to in the city, and with good portions and a decent price.. . Plus, and this is the BEST PART, they have televisions set up along all the walls and last night they were playing Kurusawa's Seven Samurai.  My date was probably a little irked, as I tended to let my eyes drift up to the subtitled masterpiece a bit too much while we ate.  Last time I was there they played Mulan. eh.  What I'd really like to see is some classic Godzilla action!
