ReviewID: 9dVXGN5K3tJzvlRMtDvj7w
ReviewerID: QlUcyoFACXutTrv5cB8sgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I have heard mixed reviews of Osteria or Pizzeria.  I will agree with the people who say that the Osteria is in another league from Pizzeria opposed to people who say there is no point in going to Osteria and save money by going to the Pizzeria.  They are completely different.  I know there is a big difference in price, but I don't think the pizzeria is all that special (but still good).. Atmosphere/service was nice, but I don't really care about that too much as you can get that info from other reviews.  I am all about the food in this review as the decor and service is what it should be for a place that is $75-$100 per person (without drinking).  . . The occasion of this meal was me taking my mom to dinner for her bday.  Here is a breakdown of everything we ordered and shared between the 2 of us:. . Grilled Octopus with potatoes, celery &amp; lemon - The Octopus definitely had a different texture than normal, less rubbery than usual.  It was good, but not as amazing as everybody hyped it up to be. . . Ribollita 'Da Delfina' - I have not had ribollita since I was in Florence 6 years ago and could not find it anywhere in LA until Mozza.  So I had to order it and it was not what I was expecting, as it was not the traditional heavy sticky soup that I remember.  But, it was more like a ratatouille meets ribollita in a fried up fritter type thing.  A little disappointed at first but then realized it was really good.. . Burrata with bacon, marinated escarole &amp; caramelized shallots -  This is exactly what it sounds like and was amazing.  Best of our Antipasto and Primi.. . Gnocchi  with Duck ragu' - This was good, but not amazing. The few big pieces of duck I scavenged were really good.  . . As of now I was happy with everything but not blown away.  Then the entrees came this place earned its fifth star and I was blown away.. . Grilled Quail wrapped in pancetta with sage &amp; honey - This was amazing, so much detail, so much going on and everything worked perfectly.  These were decent sized quails and were quite meaty for game.  Soooo much good flavors.. . Sweetbreads Picatta with artichokes - Amazing as well, so many different unique flavors that complimented each other perfectly.. . Bombolini  w/ mountain huckleberry compote &amp; vanilla gelato - As a guy I dont really care or crave desert, but if my mom wants desert on her bday, she is getting it and I am eating it as well.  This was really good.  The description didn't do it much justice as there was much more too it than described.  This was 4 beignette/doughnut holes and 1 more with a ricotta filling topped with a huckleberry sauce and vanilla gelato and lemon sauce.. . Thank you Mario for putting so much thought and creativity into your dishes and making it worth it., as opposed to so many other overpriced trendy restaurant in LA.
