ReviewID: 9E1UvgE-40Ceh66BzBgLnA
ReviewerID: 3wq5u6jaZOYzkU2kQOqRwA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sura Thai Bistro
Category: Thai
Me - "So I guess Sura has Thai tapas.  No idea what that's about.". . Friend - "That's cool.  I wonder how big the dishes are?". . Me - "I'm guessing the dishes aren't very big.  Probably small portions of random Asian food.". . Friend - "So we're basically eating dim sum for dinner?". . My gf and I went with four friends to Sura for dinner last night.  Between the six of us, we pretty much polished off the entire "Thai Tapas" section of the menu.  As some Yelpers have already noted, the dishes are very hit or miss.  . . Some standouts included:. . - Crispy Ginger Calamari (lightly battered with aterrific aioli dipping sauce). - Beef Salad (excellent flavor with a little bit of heat to the beef) . - Hung-Lea Steak (very tender and moist).  . . However, I wasn't all too impressed with the following:. . - Teriyaki Steamed Tofu (bland and boring). - Scallop 'Ceviche' (the ginger flavor was too overwhelming) . - Taro Egg Rolls (they were fine -- just didn't actually taste any taro).. . The decor has a modern/minimalist feel to it.  The walls are very white and almost have a sterile feel to it.  I was digging the overall vibe but my gf felt like she would've preferred a bit more color.  They have these swinging bubble chairs in the lobby that are fun to sit in, though probably not after drinking.  The music was a little on the loud side and made it very difficult to hold conversations, despite the fact that there was only one seated table next to us (I can only imagine how loud it gets if the restaurant was actually filled).. . On the positive side, Sura is still BYOB, though they are trying to secure a liquor license so enjoy it while you can (there is a liquor store about 1 1/2 blocks north on Broadway).  Service was top notch -- very attentive without being annoying.  Our server poured each of our beers for us and I appreciated the fact that he knew how to pour it correctly (ie. not too much foamy head).  The prices are very reasonable for what you're getting -- we ended up paying $20 per person (including 20% gratuity) for roughly 16 dishes.  You may not feel stuffed afterwards but you'll definitely feel satisfied.. . If Sura was located in a neighborhood like Bucktown or River North, it would probably be making a killing right now.  But since it's in Lakeview, it may take awhile for the neighborhood to warm up to it.  So go check out it out while you can before the word gets out!
