ReviewID: 9EbEKRy9MEwQ-tXINpe6qw
ReviewerID: MbE3C2bCJJ8FZ1nK7K82bA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
A great Wednesday lunch with my buddy Dr. John (I try to call him Mr. John, but he won't have it). Waited only 5 minutes (at about 1:45pm). They started to send us to the other location, but things were clearing out quickly. Service was EXCESSIVELY efficient! I don't think we waited more than 120 seconds for any person, food item or drink to arrive at the table.. . First good sign was homemade chili oil on the table. Second was a plate of shredded ginger.. . XLB were nice. My first time! Had many dumplings before, but these were heavenly. Worth driving to Arcadia? Maybe a couple more times, but the newness may wear off. The soup inside the dumpling tasted good and so did the pork, and the ginger was nice. Didn't bowl me over or make me change my religion, BUT provided a welcome taste treat. Once I got my soy sauce, chili oil, ginger mix perfected, I dipped the XLB, plopped into a soup spoon, and inserted in mouth.....and waited for the explosion. YUM.. . Most impressive was the fried pork chop.  Sliced nicely to be edible with chopsticks, this was one of the best thinner-style chops I've ever had. Absolutely flavorful, absolutely tender. Incredible, with just the right amount of golden flour coating.. . Got some string beans wtih garlic. Perfectly cooked, and were a nice compliment.. . We still wanted something else starchy (sorry, nutritionist of mine over at St. Joe's Med Center), so we ordered Shrimp Fried Rice.  This was of the Yang Chow tradition, rather than the browner soy-sauce colored tradition. Fluffy white rice, with wonderful shrimps of a decent size, scallions, onions, egg. All perfectly stir-fried and seasoned.. . Dessert? Was it called Sesame Bao? Bao with a black granular filling that had just the right amount of austere sweetness. Loved it.. . The place was clean and bright and filled with an "LA mix" of both Asians of various varieties and non-Asians (meaning white folks, Latino folks, and moi). My people.....all of yawl.. . I'll be back in a few days!
