ReviewID: 9eV34pxdkrs8-P-S78y1xw
ReviewerID: ya3mbvTaymecfrTc08SxhQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pricci
Category: Italian
Jimmy got a Buckhead Life gift card for a guest lecture at Tech, and I thought that Restaurant Week would be a great time to use it.  After perusing the menus for the event, we opted on Pricci because they had so many choices!  . . Fortunately for me, they let me substitute an appetizer for a dessert since I'm not eating sweets during Lent.   I opted for the Carciofi (artichoke stuffed with carmelized onions, cheese, peas, and artichoke), the Saltimbocca alla Romana (pounded-thin free-range pork with prosciutto and sage, served with potato and broccoli mash), and the mixed salad (lots of different greens with anchovies, capers, tomatoes).  Overall, I would have to say that the meal was surprisingly lacking in flavor and salt.  The thing about Italians is that they know how to use salt to really bring out the flavor in ingredients.  The Carciofi was fine - creamy, warm, comforting - but could have benefited from more flavor, and the texture reminded me of cooked flour rather than artichokes.  The Saltimbocca alla Romana was also generally lacking in flavor - it looked like there were pan juices on the plate, but I didn't even get a hint of sage or salty pork unless I was eating the bite with the sage and prosciutto.  (Actually, when I reheated the leftovers a few days later, the extra cooking seem to really marry the flavors together).  Finally, the mixed salad was beautiful!  The greens were quite flavorful, but the briny salt and tanginess expected of the anchovies and capers were just not there.  The salad was an excellent pallet cleanser because it left no taste in my mouth at all.  I felt that all the ideas and ingredients were as described on the menu, but the extra oomph of execution could've bumped this up to an amazing meal instead of a perfectly good one.. . While the food was just average, the service was excellent.  Our waiter, Holger, was friendly and attentive without being overbearing.   Normally, I feel obliged to stop talking when servers are around, since I feel like I'm making their job harder by being there, but this was not the case with Holger and the other staff.  They fit in seamlessly and really enhanced the ambiance.
