ReviewID: 9gWDkTgGYwlFtlqabGI9pg
ReviewerID: WWnhqRnWWjutMqh-2SzEuQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Though Los Angeles is home to so many excellent restaurants that I could not possibly visit every one on my list in even a year, I ate at Osteria Mozza twice in the span of a week.  The first time, I went with Dee C. and it was so good that I decided to bring my mom and Michael K.  The second time around we showed up before opening and sat at the bar for what must be the best dining deal in the city.. . There are certainly advantages to sitting in the main dining room.  The meal feels more formal and the service is probably a bit more fawning.  Dee and I had around fifteen different faces come by and check on us throughout the meal.  You can also make a reservation, and while the bar menu is available all night, seating may be hard to get past 5:30 - there was a small line outside the door by the time the restaurant opened.  There are also, of course, more menu options.. . For instance - there is the phenomenal grilled octopus.  Served with potatoes, celery, and lemon, it's one of the best octopus dishes you're bound to meet anywhere.  The octopus is very tender and meaty, with a texture almost like flawless chicken.  It has a great smoky flavor, too, and the potatoes are excellent.  Dee and I also tried the orata, which is wrapped in radicchio and grilled whole with extra virgin olive oil.  This is a lovely white fish with a firm meaty texture and a mild but definite flavor.  It's stuffed with a fragrant green, possibly shiso, and also served with lemon, salt, and olive oil.  The flavors are straightforward but very nice.  Be sure to eat the head - there's some tasty oily meat in there.  I will say, though, that if you're averse to paying almost $30 for an entree that you have to pick bones out of, that you might skip the orata.. . I also think that at Mozza, the mozzarella bar and the pasta menu are the main draws.  Everything else Dee and I tried on my first visit, I repeated with Mike and my mom, with no regrets.  For this reason, as well as the discrepancy in price, I think my future visits will be limited to the bar.. . As in the main dining room, you get fixed up with bread and a delightful crostini before you even order.  The bread options are simple and all very good - white, wheat, and multigrain.  The multigrain especially is awesome, very nutty with little seedy bits that provide great texture.  The crostini amuse is topped with ricotta, tapenade, and basil and it tastes splendid.  The tapenade is very dark and bitter, but the ricotta softens the effect and the result is smooth and full of flavor.. . All three of the mozzarella selections I've tried are spectacular.  The burrata with speck, peas, and mint comes with soft, yielding, creamy cheese, tearable, lightly salty speck, and peas cooked a perfect al dente.  The burricotta with radicchio, spiced walnuts, honey, and fried rosemary is superb - fragrant and complex but with the lush cheese acting as the main attraction.  The smoked Bufala mozzarella with prosciutto di San Daniele is the least of the cheeses I've tried, but delicious nonetheless.  The only "problem" is that the generous portion of lovely prosciutto overwhelms the gentle mozzarella.. . The pastas are dreamy.  A squid ink chitarra "Freddi" with uni, dungeness crab, and jalapeno tastes like the ocean, with subtle flavors, a layer of creaminess and body from the uni, and a tiny bit of heat.  It's served at a refreshing room temperature with an al dente texture reminiscent of really good soba noodles.  The maltagliati with wild boar ragu is a consummate earthy tomato-rich pasta dish, with wide chewy noodles and a comforting, meaty ragu.  And the ricotta and egg raviolo with browned butter and crispy sage?  Heavenly.  This is the best cheese filling I've ever had, and the egg yolk on top added beautiful richness, especially in concert with the brown butter.  The pasta is thin but still gives texture, and the sage adds an aromatic layer to each bite. . . Dessert is equally impressive.  The rosemary olive oil cakes with olive oil gelato and rosemary brittle are phenomenal, with spongey Madeleine-like texture.  The gelato is clean and tasty and the brittle great, though very salty at points.  The whole dish is redolent of rosemary.  The bombolini with mountain huckleberry compote and vanilla gelato are equally fantastic, donut holes and a ricotta fritter rolled in cinnamon and sugar, with whole huckleberries in the compote.  Skip the apple borsellino - it's a bit bitter, and the pastry to apple ratio too high.. . At the bar, the base price was $35 a head, with a glass of wine each to boot.  Compare this to $79 with no alcohol for my first trip.  I'm going back for this deal until the powers that be realize they're allowing highway  robbery.. . One thing I forgot to mention - the decor is excellent, very dark wood and sleek.  The best part of the scenery?  Clive Owen.  Sitting a table away from me and Dee.  Still, sexy as he is, I'd rather kiss another raviolo at the bar.  Now excuse me while I daydream.
