ReviewID: 9nOOnR-4WoMWcle33WFJgg
ReviewerID: 4dk6ki0f4GKpgzAqdupOvw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cho Sun Ok Restaurant
Category: Korean
Famous For: (My rating in parentheses). - Chadolbaegi (10/10). - Banchan (Side Dishes) (10/10). . Ethnic restaurants are hard to review or to take advice from. After reading a few reviews, some of the things people order and expect from this place are kinda weird. Perhaps to a non-Korean who's been to their fair share of Korean BBQ places, there are certain expectations for every DIY Korean BBQ that Cho Sun Ok doesn't meet, but that's like expecting great steak at a seafood restaurant. Natives have a completely different tongue and set of requirements when it comes to their own food than foreigners. Ever have a hamburger in Korea? They think it's all the rave, meanwhile, I thought it was terrible! So, with that in mind, I'm reviewing this as a Korean... . With a decent amount of traveling on my belt, I want to say that Chicago has some of the worst Korean food on the planet, contrasted by LA that has some of the best Korean food on the planet (better than Korea)! I've been to a ton of Korean places in Chicago (obviously), but nothing compares to LA except for 2 places, but 1 of those closed down, and the other is Cho Sun Ok.. . Despite what you may have read elsewhere, you need to order Chadolbaegi and go home. Don't bother with anything else. There's a minimum order of 2. Oh, and come here in groups of like 3+ (not too big because the place is tiny), never alone, there's no point. Chadolbaegi is basically very thinly sliced beef brisket. It's got a lot of fat around the edges of the meat. Once you order, they'll bring a portable Butane burner and a stone pan with some sesame oil drizzled on, and start to heat it. Along the way, they'll bring you some banchan (side dishes) and I am very very satisfied with all that they bring out. Not only is a a decent amount, but it's very good! The Korean potato salad is awesome and the kkakdoogi and kimchi are pretty good too. The sliced moo (radish) is excellent! . . Anyway, the chadol comes out and they put a bunch on the pan and start it. You do the rest of the cooking. Chadol is very thin, so it cooks very fast. Almost as soon as it's on the pan, you can see it browning, so you flip it for a few seconds, and then take it and eat it. You dip it in the sesame oil/salt/pepper mix too. Personally, I just love getting several pieces of meat, lightly dip in the sesame oil mix, and then piling some kimchi, moo, and just taking that in 1 mouthful. I'm the type of Korean who eats very minimal or no rice with Korean BBQ. You have to specifically ask for rice if you want it.. . Usually, after the meat, I'm already pretty full. But when your meat is about gone, they'll pour a bunch of rice on the pan and all of your left over banchan on top of it. After a while, they'll come back to mix it. Leave it heated for a while, and then they'll come back to scoop it in a bowl for you. This ultimate ending is just amazing. This is why having good banchan is so important for Cho Sun Ok, because of this finale. Because it's a stone pan, even when the flame's off, it's still cooking the rice so you get that nooroonji that's oh so delicious and crunchy + tasty with all the extras on it!. . Couple things:. - Place is TINY! You go for dinner and there's a line, and if there's a line, you will wait a while!. - Service - you know how in movies, you'll hear people scream for their waiter? That's how Koreans do it (except in Korean). If you don't, you'll get overlooked.. - Smell - You will smell like Cho Sun Ok afterwards. Typical Korean BBQ.. - Attire - Stretchy pants!. . MAN I'm hungry for this now! I realized I just explained how to eat at Cho Sun Ok without really reviewing it. Maybe I'll add an update later.
