ReviewID: 9Oo0bwWzJgT2wbE4uJWcKw
ReviewerID: Rhc_W4CuBf7O7xYyLTCPzQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
After coming home from a long weekend in Rosarito, Mexico this past weekend. Oinkster felt like the perfect homecoming to our beloved Northeast.  For me after a long drive or plan flight nothing sound better than a cheeseburger. It's a comfort food thing, no doubt. I usually can't satisfy myself with any old fast food that always seems to be bland in nature and being left unfulfilled.  . I have to admit I almost opted for Penny's being that were a bit fatigued from all that driving but then it hit me as we were leaving the Vons on Fig.  The Oinkster. I could almost taste the melted Gruyère, as we descended to Colorado. . It  wasn't my first time at Oinkster. I've done a lunch and happy hour before, and the times before been happy with the results with the exception of a salad my girl got once seemed to not at all fresh at all. This time we opted for take out. I got the large combo order so her and I could split the fries.. The burger was a strong solid, hand shaped and sauced to perfection. I love the fact that you get say how you want to have it cooked, as part of the slow food concept that makes this place so worth it.  The cheese perfectly melted evenly on the patty.  The veggies on the burger featured a fat slice of  bright red tomato, robust pieces of lettuce, and a coupled pickles about the size of a fifty cent piece.  I also took the liberty of smothering a good helping of some of the restaurants signature chapotle catchup on my patty. Pure bliss.. Which brings me to the topic of the fires, which has been the subject of much debate, in terms of how they are cooked. I have been on the fence before as well as some other people who've I've talked, as for being a bit straw like. I'm happy to report currently that fries did seem softer than before, but only by a bit. Upon taking them home I promptly dumped a heap Cajun seasoning as well as crushed sea salt just to make it extra special for our dear pallets. . Overall, as part of take out experience with food was equally as enjoyable and delicious as eating on site.
