ReviewID: 9q9RcNfhYJAIgrd2thbIXw
ReviewerID: FmZmSm6rXQCjbVMRr7lwOA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
Went with group of 6.  Ordered the octopus with peruvian yogurt (amazing - nice portion size), mackarel and jalapeno (NOT that great - and it was cooked! we though it would be raw because it was near all the raw seafood on the menu), ricotta agnolotti and eggplant (decent but spaggo makes better), and spotted romaine with anchovi (basically a good ceasar salad) to start.  The amuse bouche was pate.  . . For entree, we got the 35day aged sirloin (great flavor but not as good as mastros), lamb (nice flavor), braised short ribs (amazing- fall off the bone with great flavor), duck (tasted like red meat, nice and lean), pork loin and belly (it was only loin on the menu but we begged for the pork belly because of all the great reviews - definitely worth begging), and loup de mer (or fancy way of saying sea bass - which was not anything to write home about).. . We got 3 orders of corn (amazing, sweet), potato gratin, crab and asparagas risotto (ok, not the best i've had), shitake (small shitake mushrooms), hen of the woods (too strong for me).. . The dessert amuse bouche was some kind of icecream soda (apricot with vanilla ice cream) in shot glasses - realy cute.. . For dessert, we got the berry cobbler, chocolate souffle (to die for but without the gooey chocolate center), bread pudding (nice caramel flavor), and beignet (light, fluffy, dusted with cinnamon sugar, served with honey and chocolate dip), and 3 icecreams (vanilla, cardamon, and mint chocolate - we loved the cardamon).. . They bring out bags of home made granola, small pieces of chocolate brownies, some kind of fruity chewy things, and caramel popcorn with the check.. . We all ordered at least 2 drinks each.. . total damage was about $675 including tip.  Service was WONDERFUL the whole night.  We hung out outside in the bar area after dinner and stayed until 1am.  . . overall good for a special occasion but the food was not the best i've ever had.  definitely high quality stuff and it was great but not memorable.
