ReviewID: 9rikNZi8L67G8rAkv7SwGQ
ReviewerID: -S_86RYS3W_Ui1Oz1VNBhA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
Though Lola's has been my weekly obsession ever since I attended an UYE a few months ago, I put off writing a review until I had something unique to contribute... But first, I have to get the rest out of the way.... . OMG those apple martini's are so absolutely amazing!!!  So sweet- so strong.. so intoxicating!!  I love love love them (and the orange.. and the lemon... and the pumpkin- okay already). . So, this has been my happy hour joint for a while now- no, you really can't beat those $5 beauties in a cool, friendly atmosphere (everyone including the bartenders are so so so nice!!) with cheap good food to boot.  . . I discovered three minor flaws in the Lovely Lola on Saturday night.  Yes, it's partially my fault to mess with a good thing, but it was rainy, late and we needed some Lola loving so we decided to hit up Lola's at 11 on a Saturday.  . . My first mistake was going from Lala's restaurant where we drank multiple pitchers of sangria to Lolas.  First off, Lala's AND Lolas?  whatever!  But the overindulgence of sugary sweet drinks for over 4 hours is NOT recommended. . . Secondly- because it was my first time not limited to the happy hour menu I decided to go crazy and try new drinks.  There definitely are some flaws in Lola's repertoire.... one major flaw would be the Key Lime Martini- yech!  This is coming from a girl that protests that the Apple martini could never be too sweet and yet I nearly keeled over in a diabetic coma from that Key Lime monstrosity.  I did discover the star f*ucker though which was pretty damn amazing (which also included red bull which delayed my sugar coma for a couple more hours).. . Thirdly- avoid the back bar during a thunder storm.  The roof leaks...bad!  Storm water martinis NOT recommended..   . . Otherwise, I am happy to report that Lola maintained her integrity even on a crowded Saturday night.  The bouncer, bartenders, waitresses and even patrons (outside of the large group of frat boys chanting "Drink drink drink" in the back room) were still charming, beautiful and gracious.  Lola survived the Hollywood stress test and will remain my BFF 4ever!
