ReviewID: 9sN3tCRp6b193F9b-5Hn-w
ReviewerID: kRLkHf0lJWNOoJrxA5HA3A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mi Barrio Mexican Restaurant
Category: Mexican
Mi Barrio  -  (pause) - (pause) - (pause, pause) - (long pause) - (even longer pause) . . I have to think about my review of the grub of this joint as to be honest with you........nothing really stood out to me as dam good. Not saying that it wasn't good, it just wasn't dam good. Authenticity? The building yeah. The food? About the same as any other Mexican restaurant I have eaten at here in this city. Chips and salsa are served as you sit down at no charge. I don't get places that charge you for "complimentary" chips and salsa when you take your seat. Yes, I'm looking at you Frogs Cantina.      . . The building it self looks exactly like something I saw the last time I was in Mexico (pronounced Mhe - he*-co) in 06'. It's a perfect blend of charm and shanty shack that compliments the ultra cool, urban high rise condo style living right next door. Uuummmm - okaaayyyy........The view of the Oakland Cemetery adds mad props to the joint. Plus (+) one star for that alone.. . I had read mixed reviews before deciding to eat here, so the true draw was the opportunity to hang with my fellow yelpers at Tulie's UYE (YAY TULIE!)  for Thursday night. Well, that, and the fact that I was WAY over due for my Mexican food fix. I expected to hear Mexican music blaring from a torn, tattered, broken old speaker hanging from a hook in a ceiling corner somewhere as I walked in. Instead, I was greeted by the sweet sounds and cheers from my fellow yelpers who were already seated. OLE!!!!. . The one thing I can say about this place is that they are fast. I'm talking a lightening fast rodent with a big brim sombrero and brightly colored hanky tied around his neck, Speedy Gonzalez fast! An delay! An delay! Arriba!! We were late, so 2 minutes later the rest of the table was being served their food. We placed our order and no kidding kids, WA BAM! We had a - hot plate! Of Mexie mess in front of us, with a cold serveica (sp?) to boot. Their was a plate of tongue taco's that made its way around the table - for viewing? I guess? I didn't eat any. I stuck with 2 taco's, 1- soft shell chicken, 1 - hard shell beef, rice and beans. The hard shell beef taco was AWESOME! The flavor of the spices and onions and beef really came through. I could tell the taco shell it self was pretty authentic too. About the only other thing I found authentic though. Laura scarfed down her plate of Chili Releanos' (again with the sp?) with the quickness as I barley got a sampling. It was greasy. Too many dishes in the double digits price range for me here. Mexican food should be cheap, and to be honest with you, it was a bit over rated. . . All in all, the food was mediocre, but the experience and night were authentic. It was my first time in that neck of the woods so being there with such a great group of friends made it perfect. It was a good time. From their, it was off to Morelli's for ice cream (see review) and what would become my last will and testament and the writing of my very own eulogy. Rest In Peace Eric S, Rest in Peace.
