ReviewID: 9Srzs27DtNLxIgWWJUJlfQ
ReviewerID: O0LBte-WB_WNrZCBeSCRDg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
I've been waiting forever to visit the illustrious Magic Castle. I finally got to go thanks to Steph W! She's an amazing artist who was showcasing her artwork along with others at the Magic Castle. . . First off, this place is not for bums or hobos. Valet is $8 for non-members. Admission is $25 per person for non-members. And this is with an invitation! Need I say ouch?. . Walking into the small lobby. I was impressed by the decor, it was Victorian-esque.  The first cool thing was saying "open sesame" and having the faux book shelf wall open up. People oooed and ahhed. . . We walked in and went right for the bar. I had the special "Harvey Wallbanger". It was tasty! We reviewed the magic show schedule and was hoping to see a show before our 8p dinner reservation. Little did we know that you had to get in line early and get a numbered ticket! So our little sad clown feet wandered around until we found the art gallery. We met up with Steph and Curtis. She was showcasing some very lovely lotus blossoms that had real gold leafing. We were impressed! The rest of the show had an eclectic mix of art. The mod matrix-styled clothing was a hoot! The duck themed stuff had us quackin! (Yes, I went there). . Time for dinner at the swanky restaurant. We were seated and while perusing our menus, we were forgotten. Seriously, the waiter went around to the all tables around us like we were invisible. I was annoyed by the time he got to us. But I let it go because I didn't want to be in a mood at a nice place. But again, we were forgotten like the red-headed bastard step-child. After 30 mins or so, our food finally arrived. So my mood was teetering when I tasted the food and it fell. The steak was awful. It was dry and tasteless! Luckily we ordered the mac and four cheese. At least that was good. My guy had the prime rib and he enjoyed it. After shuffling my food around for a bit, we asked for the check. It seemed like everything took forever. I was very ready to leave. We skipped dessert since we didn't want to stay in the restaurant all night. --- The restaurant has this policy of holding your leftovers until you're ready to leave their place. What they don't tell you is they only pack the meats and nothing else! If we're paying for a fancy meal and have leftovers, I dang well want all my leftovers. I was pretty pissed off since it was the first time a restaurant has ever done this to me. Of course I didn't discover this until the next day. I was really looking forward to having some mac and cheese. I hate the restaurant!. . Now the fun part, the magic shows! Those were the best! We laughed and were flabbergasted! It made the awful dinner forgotten. We got to see the main show because we had dinner there. Then got to see another show before it got too late. Seriously magic is so amazing! . . The restaurant overpriced food and service deserves one star but the magic shows redeems it. Word of advice, skip the food and just go for the magic shows!
