ReviewID: 9unNn2zk7uN8VhJn9CJ7Ig
ReviewerID: yyXMzsAAEFfZtIdPIKucOg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Noni&#39;s Bar &amp; Deli
Category: Italian
A month or so ago, I heard that an Italian deli was going in on Edgewood between Boulevard and the Connector... closer to the Connector. I smiled wistfully to myself and sadly shook my head. While I admired the tenacity of anyone willing to push that far into the hood, I was fairly confident the extension was too far and the new small deli would be engulfed in people willing to watch your car for $1.. . My opinion has changed since they opened on July 28, 2008.. . Noni is no little deli shop. It is a full on restaurant and bar in a well built out space full of exposed brick and heavy, dark and natural wood that just happens to have a "to go" counter if you are in a hurry during lunch. The fare consists of sandwiches and pastas that are derived from one of the owner's grandma's recipes. . . THE LOCATION. This is still pretty sketchy, but I believe they are going to have some security around during the neighborhood transition. Overall it's fine, just watch you're back. . . THE SPACE. There is a patio with seating for about 20 people with a centralized fountain (not up and running at time of opening), a bar that sits probably another 15-20, and then two different dining areas. Good ambiance (low lighting, a few nooks and crannies), but still a big open space.. . THE FOOD. It's good. I like it. And even though I generally don't like to review places that have just opened (there are always some issues to iron out), here are some of the high points.. . Marinara Sauce - mmmmmmmmmmmmm.... thick and tangy. It is very much like the sauce my Auntie makes - straight from the old country. Really good.. . Bolognese Sauce - this is good as well, but I prefer the marinara. . Meatballs - Good size and not inundated with breadcrumbs so they are still moist. Also, a very nice seasoning - subtle and delicious.. . Veggie Sandwich - grilled eggplant, portobella, zucchini, homemade mozzarella, pesto and olive oil on pumpernickel. A nice blend of enticingly fresh tastes.. . I think these guys have a winner and I'm looking forward to working my way through the rest of their menu!
