ReviewID: 9vi_I3LhVFg54ZMmdH52Cg
ReviewerID: BI4lPhrUpmEySIJUywjIjQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
After all this hype and Ellen M promising me a delicious dinner at David Burke's - did it live up to its hype?  Yes and it's probably my new favorite steakhouse here in the city.  (We're still Pete Miller fans through and through). . We did come for Restaurant Week and we felt like we had a steal!  Our popovers came in the tin and were flaky and cheesy and melt in your mouth good.  The husband started off with the Lobster bisque with green apple essence and lobster spring roll.  It was pretty neat how the apple was in the center of the bowl and then, the poured the bisque on top of it.  I stole a couple bites of his lobster spring roll, which was pretty good.  I, on the other hand, went for the baby arugula salad with truffle-smoked tomatoes, pine nuts, goat cheese fondue and white balsamic vinaigrette, and that was a delicious mouthful.  The tomatoes were smoked to perfection.. . As for our entrees, I definitely preferred mine over the husband's.  I ordered the petite southside bone-in filet with basil-whipped potatoes and tempura green beans.  My filet was probably twice the size of his and really tasty.  You have to thank the bone for maintaining the flavor.  My husband had ordered the baby delmonico steak with truffle asiago skins, asparagus and shallots which was a little stringy, but the truffle asiago skins were yummy.. . After all that food washed down with glasses of Syrah, we had the dessert sampler plate which had a mini chocolate milkshake, a slice of their heavenly chocolate cake and a cheesecake lollipop - I had a chocolate covered raspberry one while the hubby had a chocolate covered vanilla one.. . Overall, a wonderful experience, delicious food, attentive service (we also arrived a little early - 5:30pm so I did see that we got better service than those arrived after us), and a wonderful deal for Restaurant Week!  On a side note, there is a specific garage that you can get your parking validated for so make sure that you read the signs.  We ended parking in the wrong garage and couldn't get parking validation.
