ReviewID: 9wWIRLihJrqnlgFEcntoeA
ReviewerID: ywrHdV006WcJVHtxKfyPqg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Are you really serious? People wait in line for 30 minutes or something just to eat this ramen? o.m.g. It's unbelievable. So, my boyfriend and I were craving for some good ramen, we yelped and found Daikokuya and Orochon in downtown LA. . . So, we decided to drive up to LA from SAN DIEGO (yes, 2 hours driving) for our ramen adventure. We got there and we had to wait for 30-40 minutes. I was so excited about the ramen because of all the hypes. I was hungry and it was chilly outside (yes, we waited outside). So, I expected some decent ramen. Others said that Daikokuya is a better version of Shinsengumi. Oh, hold that thought. . . When we got in, we were seated on the bar. Man.. it is a dirty little joint (ps: bathroom too). My boyfriend decided to order a combo of ramen (with daikoku and another fatty broth I can't remember), an eel rice bowl and also a grilled kurobuta as an appetizer. We wanted to share the food because we were planning to go to Orochon afterward. Then this girl told us that we couldn't share the meal because it's a combo.. Ok.. . Then I decided to order a small ramen thinking that we could finish the food. The food came out pretty fast actually. We tried the appetizer and boy, it's the best appetizer I've ever tried. it was pan fried (even though they claimed that it's grilled), but whatever. It was really that good. then moving on to the eel bowl. Hm.. I'm not a big fan of eel, but I'll still eat it anyway, but for some reason, the fish smelled fishy. meh... . Here comes the ramen. I couldn't wait to dig in when I saw a bunch of green onion on top. I sipped the soup and looked at my bf. he gave me that disgust look that I had on my face too. It was bland. unbelievable. I had to put so much garlic puree and salt into the broth to make it edible. . . The egg, oh the egg. I was so thrilled to see the whole soft boiled egg. my bf doesn't like egg, so he gave it to me. I had 2 eggs in my ramen.  I was hoping at least the egg could save the day. mmmm.. i bit into it and my bf could see disappointment in my face. It's boiled to the way I like it, BUT it's tasteless. I dislike it. I don't usually leave my food untouched, but this one.. forgive me, I just can't finish it.. . I think I should stick to Santouka for the broth, Tajima for the egg and Shinsengumi if we're around orange county area. . . oh well.. at least the kurobuta saved the day.. 1 star for that.
