ReviewID: 9xrwFUbWO1WSlSqoAI-0gw
ReviewerID: rWad0m47ODrKbYh50TNk3A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
If you're as drunk as I was Saturday night and find yourself on the crowded sidewalk outside this place, not eating here is not an option.  The line on a Saturday night after 2:00 A.M. is in three words off the hook.  I'd say we waited around 1/2 hour; however it would definitely have been much longer had the ten of us not pooled together $30 to bribe the host staff (this was not my idea for the record).  . . While not necessarily part of everyone's experience here... I need to mention for the record that I met, in line, 7 out of the 9 other people I dined with.  It just goes to show that drinking really does crumble social boundaries... so long as everyone plays nice.  And speaking of the line... you'd think you were waiting to get into Studio 54.  This place definitely gets the after hours club crowd...as could be inferred by the copious amount of recently shaken money-makers.    . . I think it took us four hours to decide what we wanted.  The menu is not drunk people friendly.  There are just two many options... do I want one waffle or two...and how many pieces of chicken?  Dark meat or white meat? Leg or thigh?  Both?  Are we still talking about chicken?  Why are there ice cubes on my lap? Why am I still thirsty?. . So I finally decided on the one piece thigh and waffle combination.  The thigh was very small, but it tasted wonderful.  As others have mentioned the waffles are thin, crisp on the outside and chewy in the middle.  The syrup was pretty average, and I assume it was not actual maple syrup given the huge quantity they brought out.  And then there was the mount  Everest of butter.  Holy good God it was huge!  There was literally a stick's worth of whipped butter piled atop my waffle.  I used maybe 5% of it.  . . The juxtaposition of crispy fried chicken skin, dark meat, waffle and syrup in one bite is quite possibly one of the great hidden pleasures of late night Los Angeles.  The hype is right.
