ReviewID: 9zJeCat7dsAhn29gZDMIlw
ReviewerID: nycvEchF_j0rOknOFaMECQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Fiddlehead Cafe
Category: American (New)
Chaos- pure and simple. My friends and I came to Fiddlehead on New Year's Eve. We were seated over an hour after our reservation. Being that it was New Year's Eve- we had tickets to be at an event after dinner so this really threw a wrench into things. We ended up getting to the event 20 minutes before the ball dropped for New Years. . . My main complaint about the whole Fiddlehead experience was how inconsistent they were in dealing with the multiple groups of people upset over having their reservations pushed back so far on top of incredibly SLOW service. For our group, who I'll admit were vocally annoyed- our food service was sped up so that we ended up being done with 5 courses while other people who had been seated before us (for two hours after waiting 1 1/2 = 3 and a half hours) were being served course two. One  group was comped a huge bar tab and given two free bottles of wine, while we were given two free cokes and a glass of wine and were charged for all other beverages, even a coffee on a bill of about $400. Still another group were given nothing and waited way longer than us- they finally walked out. Finally, groups started discussing with each other how bad things were going.  The manager didn't even come over until we had finished eating- two hours after being seated.   . . Advice- . 1. Have the cojones to tell the group who sat at their table 3 and 1/2 hours to leave or move to the bar so you can seat your next table (this is your problem not theirs so don't blame it on them to us). 2. Order enough food for a fixed menu so you don't run out. 3. Have a standard comp for any group that is inconvenienced by YOU (i.e. two free bottles of wine or 10% off the bill) not whatever comes to you in a moment of panic. 4. Take ONLY as many reservations as you have the staff and space for. . All I can say is NEVER AGAIN- pure and simple.
