ReviewID: __CF7pgVWw67Ssu1VD_8mQ
ReviewerID: 8A4Xbr9SUkNqoZ54GFDTAg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I refused to wait in a line that's an 1 hour+ for kogi tacos, even after hearing that these things are the bomb.  Cuz anyone who knows me, if I go past my feeding time, I can be a big beeatch!. Well after all the hype over the past several months, the Kogi truck, which comes very close to my work, and was actually on campus last week, I decided I must try these suckers.  . My buddy at work waited in queue and ordered for me, so I didn't have to bear the 45 minute wait, and he was 2nd in line!. I ordered one kalbi beef taco, one spicy pork taco, and a Blackjack quesadilla (which is a flour tortilla with spicy pork, carmelized onions, cheddar and jack cheese, topped with salsa verde - tip: get the sauce on the side, otherwise the quesadilla will be soggy by the time you chow down).. The kogi tacos are topped with a marinated cabbage slaw wrapped in two small corn tortillas.  For big eaters, if you're just ordering tacos, you'll need to get 6+ to fill you up.  I thought the meat was marinated perfectly in both the beef and spicy pork.  I thought they were good but didn't see what all the rage was all about.  My sister makes her version of kogi tacos, and her version is way better than these, more meat and she makes her's on full size corn tortillas....not the small appetizer size tortillas kogi makes their tacos with!. The black jack quesadilla was also good.  But still didn't see what the big rave was all about.. I also tried my friend's kalbi beef burrito.  If you need to watch your sodium intake, don't get this item.  Way too salty for me.  The burrito is filled with beef, marinated cabbage, egg and potatoe.  This asian fusion didn't work for me at all.  Didn't like it.. The tacos are 2 bucks a piece.  And the black jack quesadilla was 5 bucks.  With a can of soda, my lunch was over $10.. If I had to wait in line for over an hour for this, I'd say definitely not worth the wait, over rated and over charged ($2 plus tax for a mini taco, come on, get real!).  But since I didn't, I'm giving kogi tacos 3 stars.  Sorry.  Maybe my expectations were set high since I heard all the rave/buzz about these things!
