ReviewID: a-f1jSb4gO2fNn2icP69Hg
ReviewerID: E280TQsOPACVLpKHuQoauw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
I'm not sure why I love this place but I do. When you think about it, it's deli-style, pre-made, refrigerated food! How good can it be?!? Not only that, it is quite pricey for what it is. Joan's is also a relatively high-end caterer  - I think that's how they started - so that should give you some idea about their food and prices. It costs the same to eat at Joan's as a relatively nice sit-down meal that's made-to-order but I find myself craving Joan's and going back time and time again, especially picking up food for holidays like Christmas, Thanksgiving, New Year's. Their offerings vary so that can be a bummer (mmm... vermont maple syrup yams... when will it make another appearance?!?). Anyways, Joan's is a great place to get food for a party, or on a sunny, lazy afternoon, to get a snack and catch some rays at one of their tables out front.. . The cheese plate is fabulous and a pretty good deal relative to everything else. They will recommend and let you sample different cheeses from around the world - if you like cheese, get some to go for yourself or your next party! The desserts (e.g. cakes, cupcakes) are pretty good too - not the best but we always walk away with something sweet! It's hard to name my favorites. The sandwiches are good but I wouldn't go out of my way just to get a sandwich there. Try getting a 3-selection plate and sample things like the pasta salads, couscous, etc. For certain foods (e.g. korean bbq short rib - I know, it's odd), they will reheat it for you so that could make all the difference.. . Joan's is often quite busy so this is not the place to go if you are in a hurry or have limited time. Parking can be a challenge but that's 3rd street for you.. . Oh, I actually met Joan, her daughter, and son-in-law one time - they are so sweet! Another tip is that if you are nice and you actually know what you want to order by the time you get to the counter, you will get much better service! We've heard people complain about the service but we've generally received excellent service. Sometimes saying "hi" and being polite will get you want you want. :)
