ReviewID: a0h3Tn3vZqS161JlGyXE3w
ReviewerID: hCIAOge9ebt0f8UL1sXCQQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
This was a special occasion meal that I had been looking forward to for some time and was not disappointed. Ford's Filling Station is owned by Benjamin Ford, son of actor Harrison Ford. Other reviews I read made comment to the menu being a little overpriced. I can't comment on that here, since I was treated to this interesting (and amazing) dinner. . . For my brother's birthday, he invited us to the special, order 10 days in advance, suckling pig dinner. Ok, sounds interesting. Why do we have to order it in advance? Because, my pork fans, it is a six course dinner of pure pork. Every course. Pork. . . Andrew Zimmern from Bizarre Foods has actually done an episode on this very meal. Should have been my first clue for the strange things that awaited me. . . Chef Salvatore graciously came out and described each course as they were delivered. . . Course 1: Head cheese in a chili oil served with a baguette. Head cheese is a gelatinous loaf of pig scraps. You know. The stuff they can't make into anything else. Not even a hot dog. Have to say though...it wasn't bad. . . Course 2: Pork butt pate on a garlic crostini. The pate was a little bland but worked well with the garlic crostini. Kind of reminded me of deviled ham. Remember deviled ham? Not sure it's even made anymore but they were small cans of ham that you could spread on bread. . . Course 3: Flat bread with thinly sliced prosciutto and fresh mozzarella. The prosciutto was aged 18 months. Tasted like a fancy ham and cheese pizza. Quite yummy. . . Course 4: Salad of mixed greens with eyeballs and ears. That's right. Eyeballs and ears. Crispy pig ears and thinly sliced pig eyeballs. Ears were tasty. I couldn't find the eyeball in my salad but was assured that each salad contained a slice of eyeball. I must've eaten it and didn't even know it. So bummed. I wanted to see what all the fuss was about. Plus, it was my first eyeball so I wanted to remember every detail. . . Course 5: Whole suckling pig brined in duck fat for two days served with pork cracklings, collard greens and brussel sprouts cooked with bacon. This was the freaky part. The pig head, hooves, everything.....was served on the platter. The meat was the consistency of pulled pork. The eyeballs were actually peeled grape tomatoes because the original eyeballs were used for our salad. Meat was good if not a little salty from the brine. It was suggested that the head be taken back to the kitchen to be separated and eaten. It came back out in pieces. Including the brain. Let me just say....I like trying new food. I'm an adventurer when it comes to cuisine and I will try anything and everything - once. I took a bite of pig brain and had a hard time swallowing it. In fact, it took several minutes for me to actually get it down. The consistency was like an avocado except it stuck to my teeth. So bizarre! Yet I, being the trooper I am, did indeed swallow it. And survived. . . Course 6: Homemade white chocolate ice cream with candied bacon. Thought for sure this was the one that was going to send me over the edge, but I actually liked it. Nice balance of sweet and savory. . . All in all, this was a great experience. Fun food. Good friends and family. Something I will not soon forget.
