ReviewID: A1hUQ9bkRnHO8fXn4DCBcg
ReviewerID: jWzvItmqHyHXtuXpMP7B-w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
Garlic. . . In EVERYTHING.. . Even your damn WetNap is laced with garlic. . . Well, that I don't know, but I wouldn't be surprised. Haha. This place was exquisite! Nice classy joint in Beverly Hills. I'm a big fan of garlic, so I was really excited to go here for dinner. You walk in and it looks pretty much like Buca di Beppo sans the overwhelming Italian environment. Pictures on the walls of past (and some present) Hollywood celebs. Rennaisance murals. Garlic related paintings etc. It looked like the restaurant was sectioned off into a bunch of different little dining rooms, much like Buca di Beppo. Overall, the place looked old and classy. . . They presented us with rolls that were garnished with, what else, garlic. Haha. Tasty little things. I got the Forty Clove Garlic Chicken and someone else got the Arugula Pesto Pasta and my other friend got some Prawns (which I'm assuming was drenched in garlic). Everybody said their food was scrumpdiddlyumptious. Mine was good, though, two things: I didn't like that it was roasted on the bone (I hate picking out bones and scraping the meat off) and I thought it would be a BIT more garlic-y. Yeah, it came out and had delicious garlic mashed potatoes and a side of 10 or 15 cloves of roasted garlic, but I thought the chicken itself was gonna be more orgasmically garlic. Regardless, it was still a damn delicious chicken. It was glazed in some garlic-y brown sauce. . . At the end of the dinner, my friend got a birthday song from the waiter and host. They put this huge garlic hat on her head and it looked like she was getting teabagged by a buncha white testicles. It was cute. Then they gave us the complimentary Garlic Ice Cream. This thing was...odd. Everybody in previous reviews says it's tasty. Well, it is, but it's just...weird! It tastes like cold garlic bread! I still don't know what to make of it. Haha. Anyways, white testicles off, and then we were out.. . Overall, I would definitely go back to this place! And surprisingly, my breath didn't kill vampires afterwards even when we were drinking and burping up a storm! Weird huh?
