ReviewID: A2lL-xRwt22tk0Gwsc-8-g
ReviewerID: kdYQcHqRwyTCkEDd_rUwZQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
Worst dining experience ever! Waited 45 minutes to be seated when we had a reso and dinner took 2 hours.. . On Saturday we had an 8 pm reso for a party of four. The hostess said they were waiting on our table to finish dessert. I explained that it was dire that we be seated as close to on time as possible as I had put together a surprise bday party and timing was crucial. Thirty-five minutes later we still had yet to be seated, and not once were we approached, with an apology, or an explanation. On any random night this would be disappointing enough, but this night was extra special and time sensitive.. . I approached the hostess stand for an update. She repeated that they were waiting on our table to clear. That's when the Principle Sue Kim-Drohomyrecky asked what was going on. How an owner was not already aware of this infuriated me. I have worked at many restaurants and cannot imagine any of the Maitre D's not being on top of the reservations. That's why I was especially shocked that Sue worked as a Maitre D for Trio. With that background I would have expected a lot more. To make matters worse she said I should have brought this to her attention earlier. Really? How is it my responsibility to do her hostesses job? Also, how was I to even know who she was? I couldn't believe that she was displacing blame. She explained that the 5:30 reservations had run behind due to the weather. I was on time, despite having to battle the same elements, why was I being penalized? Anyhow, she said she would do what she could to get us out quickly.... Too bad that meant that we were seated 45 minutes late and dinner took 2 hours. By 9:30 we had only had 2 of the 8 items we ordered. We didn't leave until 10:45.. . By the time we go to the actual surprise party (an hour and a half late), two friends were walking out the door, and friends who got sitters saw us for 20 minutes before they had to leave. . . The Green Zebra ruined our night.
