ReviewID: A3IJtGZTtjaHyDeeB-NB2w
ReviewerID: LJ8U5ZVnFpF8XNUR7DcUng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Here as I sit, on a very cool summer night in Chicago. My mind begins to wander. Actually it is my stomach that leads my mind to wander. Traipsing back to a month ago when I was in LA, visiting my sister and brother in law, sister #3, (I have four sisters, just an FYI, try and keep up willya?), talked at dinner about these Korean tacos. How she wanted to try them, how great they were, how she was going to get on Twitter to follow them. She raved at how good they were supposed to be, but sometimes how hard it was to find them... yada yada yada, we move on to the next day.. . My brother in law and I stop by some section to visit the Levi store so he could pick up a pair, when all of a sudden, we turn. Angels start singing, things moved in slow motion, beacons of light stream down from the heavens above.... no.. not really. We actually started walking by the Kogi truck when he said, "Wait, that the truck your sister was talking about." . . "The Korean taco truck? Would it make her burn with envy if we got some and then texted her about how good they were?" . . "Yes, I think it would.". . "You know I could go for some tacos right about now, let's get some.". . We ordered one beef and one pork, when they popped out, we looked at each other, my brother in law, (who is a large man, just so you know), said that if that's two, we need another order, he wanted two for himself. I was about to pull off to the side, when the guy behind the counter asked me if I wanted some hot sauce. Ever the seeker of the heat, (if I ain't sweatin', it ain't hot), I said sure and he slid over some nice and burning Korean hot sauce. Dumping it on, I managed to get a little taste with out, the pork was tender, very flavorful, and wonderful. No fatty pieces to chew on, just some great porky goodness. The beef was great too, but I preferred the pork one. Just better flavor over all. I slammed down those two in minutes, narrowly beating my brother in law who got his three minutes later. . . Were these the best tacos ever? No. Not by a long shot. However, unique, really great concept, flavorful, small, cheap and certainly satisfying. If I ever ran in to them again, I wouldn't hesitate to order four, six if I was kinda hungry. Just thinking about them is making the crave wave crash over me. Oh I can't wait to savor the flavor once again!
