ReviewID: a3yKDsT7Rgi_sAeqY56u1w
ReviewerID: sMg9FedC5D-jf69_c2wjFQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Moody&#39;s Pub
Category: Pubs
So, on St. Patrick's day, after a full day of having lunch with friends from the "industry" (that sounds so hot, I think), I came home.  Yes, I had already had 7 bellini's, but who was counting.  I wasn't really tipsy, just feeling a bit social.. . SO I decided that nothing makes a day of drinking better than more drinking.  I met my friend Ralf here for a pitcher of beer.. . It was my first time going to Moody's.  I thought it was nice.  I also think Hellen Keller would have appreciated the level of lighting they used.  Once I felt my way over to the table, I sat down to discover the floor covered in peanut shells.. . I have a thing about places that allow you to throw things on the floor on purpose.  It's sort of like going to Marshalls: Don't like it? Throw it on the floor!  Doesn't fit? Throw it on the floor!. . Or nursery school: ugly color? Throw that crayon on the floor.  Did you pee your pants? Throw them on the floor.. . Or like my SIL's housekeeping skills.  Don't feel like putting it away? Throw it on the floor! (this applies to dishes, underclothes, and magazines.)  . . Not my style, but whatever. Ralf talks a good game.. . Our waitress didn't seem to mind that we were there.  At all.  In fact outside of the pitcher of beer we managed to order, I'm not even sure if she knew we were there.  Though that might have been the lack of light.. . A homeless lady came in and asked me for change.  When I declined, she helped herself to the peanuts on my table, and put them in her pockets.  And that made me feel a)bad b)amused and c)grossed out all at the same time.  Kind of like when you find out you were born because your parents actually had sex.  Not that my parents did. I still believe a stork brought me.. . I did not use the bathroom, astonishingly, but I'm kind of glad I didn't.. . Overall, the location was unexpectedly close to my apartment (about a 7 minute walk), in a brightly lit neighborhood - with loads of restaurants that I now want to try, and it was a pretty good value.  We had 4 beers each out of that pitcher, and it was like $16.00.. . Plus Ralf taught me some really filthy jokes that I'm not sure I can remember, or if I could, repeat.. . I'd suggest going.  Great for blind dates.  Literally.  Make sure they have a tap stick.
