ReviewID: a482ceGGJnG1q4HG40UrwQ
ReviewerID: _nnH4brnz8i28T7ub_fZoA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
The most accurate adjective I can think of to describe Ugo would be *uneven.*. . I can't figure out why, and that bothers me. The atmosphere is pleasant, but the service is lacking. The food is good, but the prices are way too high ($12 for a salad with no meat?). It's a place I really want to love, and on paper it seems like the perfect, little neighborhood Italian Cafe, but up close and personal, it's easy to see its faults, and fixate on them.. . Everything started out okay. We ordered beverages--a Limonata and water with no ice for me. The waitress immediately brought out a glass of water *with* ice, and later a glass of regular, fake-tasting Minute Maid lemonade:  no good.. . Lunch was comprised of the Insalata Capra, with herb-encrusted goat cheese, panchetta and dried cherries over a bed of greens and it was extremely tasty--so good! It was upon its arrival that I asked the server to switch out the lemonade for the Limonata I ordered, to which he replied that they were out. I sent the lemonade back and five minutes later came the waitress with a bottle of Limonata in her hand and a glass of ice, and no explanation.. . My friends' food was good, too, especially the house-made meatball "tapas," which *claim* to be the best around, but clearly these Ugo folks have never had my mother's meatballs, but that's another story .... . For dessert, we each ordered a kid's-sized gelato, which, I did not know until today, came in a much larger glass than the little plastic to-go cup--but then the gelato was half-melted by the time we got it, so ... again, like I said before, uneven.. . What can I say? I think Ugo is best when you want to stop in for a gelato before running across the street to catch a movie. Lunch was just okay and I probably would not come here for dinner, and definitely not drinks. Their Negroni was $12! Even at the Association it's only $10. C'mon, guys, who do you think you are, Fraiche?
