ReviewID: A4N6aG8s4RLf_KGuzKJSWQ
ReviewerID: Zctjw6CHWJN5m9AC3haDhg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
I 'm sure that I am the one-millionth person to write a blog about Pink's Hot Dogs, but I feel that I need to put in my two cents and it will be an easy intro into the world of blogging.... . If you asked most Angelino's to tell you about Pink's, you would probably hear the following phrases: "tourists, long lines, no where to sit &amp; bad parking."  While all that may be true, there are a few tips one could use to make their experience at Pink's much more memorable.. . Pink's opens at 9:30am everyday.  The best time to go to pinks is between 10:30-11:30 in the morning, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday.  But, this rule does not apply during the following seasons and holidays, when it is best to avoid Pink's at all costs.  It's not like it's going anywhere.... * Summer. * Thanksgiving. * Christmas. * Bowl Season. * Easter. Another good time to visit Pink's is when School is in session and people are less likely to be taking a vacation.  If you ever have the opportunity to go during the rain, seize it!  Angelino's and tourists are highly unlikely to stand outside in the rain to wait for a hot dog!. . Parking can be another tricky situation when visiting Pink's, as they only have a handful of spots.  The other problem is that there is NO PARKING on La Brea between 4-7pm, Monday-Friday.   You can try your luck in the neighborhoods surrounding La Brea &amp; Melrose, but beware that many of these streets require permits to park.  The only advantage of going to Pink's during those times is that the line is noticeably shorter.  Angelino's don't like to walk.. . There are thousands of combination's you can stuff in your face at Pink's from Polish Sausage to an old fashioned Chili Cheese Dog, which is my personal favorite.  You should also go to Pink's with a large appetite, just in case it's a year before your return.. . I personally recommend the Chili Cheese Dog, which comes with Mustard, Chili, Cheese on top of Hoffy Frank, packed inside a steamed bun.  I get mine without Mustard because I feel that it takes away from the Chili, which is the real reason you are here!. . Pink's is a Los Angeles staple that should not be passed up by anyone.  You can also try Pink's at Knott's Berry Farm, the Greek Theater and the LA, Ventura &amp; Orange County Fairs.
