ReviewID: a4Ots5i1jhCHqT2PKybTcw
ReviewerID: 8K-GdEg3NZ8LS-OiDh3L4Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
If you want a quiet sit down dinner to enjoy with a good conversation, find a different place. The high energy level as well as the noise level will make that impossible.. . I heard about this place from a friend's review of his breakfast which he and his girls fully enjoyed. So, I figured we'll give it a try for dinner. Sadly, I wasn't as lucky.. . I just fell into the high level of energy and the upbeat buzzing atmosphere along with the beautiful decor of the place as we walked in. The wide open space and the super-high ceiling was very welcoming and I felt very drawn into the place. However, once we sat down and ordered our food, things turned downward. We noticed that we couldn't hear ourselves talk. Carrying on a conversation was difficult due to the high noise level created by the crowd, especially with its hard floors and the lack of drapery made the noise level even worse. I understand that this was the whole point to the decor, but it didn't help our conversation.. . The service was good. The server offered complementary sparkling water which was pretty good. She recommended the White Beans &amp; Sausage, and the Portobello Fries. On top of her recommendations, we ordered the Caesar Salad, a side of Sauteed Spinach, and the Burrata pizza &amp; the Clam pizza which they allowed us to do half &amp; half.. . The thin slices of fresh parmesan cheese in the Caesar Salad was very good. The rest of the salad was good but nothing out of the ordinary. I bit into the portobello fries and was pleased. I love mushrooms in general so this was a treat. I never got to try it anywhere else before. I didn't even know they existed. The juicy flesh of the mushroom was covered in crunchy batter. The dip that comes with the fries enhanced the taste another step. If you like mushroom, you have to try it. It's something you won't find any where else (I think). So far, so good.. . When the pizza came out, it looked very good. The clam pizza was a bit too garlic-ky and slightly fishy. I never tried a clam pizza... I didn't even know they existed, so I had to try it. Gotta try everything at least once, right? The Burrata pizza was even saltier. The "wet" burrata cheese was different. It's kinda like fresh mozzarella cheese, but more runny and creamy. Not anything special, but once again, I had to try it. The white beans were cooked very well to my liking, but the sausage (once again) was very salty. The side of sauteed spinach was no exception.... Salty once again.. . I wanted to stay and try the chocolate souffle, but because of the noise level, we left and decided to find a different place for dessert.. . To sum things up, I was impressed with the decor and enjoyed the atmosphere. I don't think I'll be coming back to dine here. Maybe I'll give them a try for breakfast or their pastries.
