ReviewID: A84ldKjhrz9ryb0BRr4kGQ
ReviewerID: 4jKl_pJoQdJbrczVQtaD1A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roasters
Category: Southern
I would travel upstream without a paddle to get to Roasters if that is what it took (and sometimes with the traffic in Atlanta, that's what it feels like)!!! . . I have a very very deep pit of the stomach love for this place. Lets start with the location, easily convenient, just shoot up Buford Hwy and make a left onto Lenox Road it will be just a short distance down on your left.... It's worth it, I promise. . . Oh, the glorious corn muffins... the perfect mixture of sweet and corn. Top with their melty sweet butter and you're doing good. Just thinking about them makes me drool a little bit! . . The Spicy Spinach Dip with all of its Spiciness and Spinachy Cheesy Goodness. Large Bowl, plenty to share with friends if you must.. Served with Corn Tortillas. . . Their Rotisserie Chicken is to die for, melt in your mouth delicious! The Ribs are finger licking good and pack a lot of meat onto the bone. The chicken tenders are battered perfectly and fried to the exact golden brown that they need to be. The Mexican Chicken is topped with . black beans, jack and cheddar cheese, diced tomatoes, green onions and sour cream, served over their oh so JUMMMMMMMYYYY rice. . . Let's not stop at the main dishes as they are the star of the show, but have some of the best side kicks I have ever known. Their "sides" menu is extensive and any item that you choose is fresh and delicious. Some of my favorites include, in no particular order as they are all amazing, the black beans and rice, Broccoli/Cauliflower Cheese Casserole, Cinnamon Apples, Creamed Spinach, Macaroni &amp; Cheese, Black Eyed Peas and the Sweet Potato Souffle. . . Their dessert menu is limited to dessert of the day, ice cream, and cookies. I have never eaten dessert at Roasters because I am always incredibly full from my meal and almost need to be carried out. They also serve beer and wine and offer a nice outside patio. . . ** I also must pay tribute to, in my opinion, the best thing that Roasters has ever offered... The Chicken Chimichanga. If I could only eat one thing for the rest of my life, that would be it. But, they stopped serving it and only occasionally offer it as a lunch special, but if you are fortunate enough to go for lunch and it is the special I recommend it highly!
