ReviewID: a8NpELX2CDTdMqoE8GWmRg
ReviewerID: 8La14S--Nt8kUo6r_l_m6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Shaun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
Went for Restaurant Week, and it really was one of those experiences that made me think that Shaun's didn't skimp one single thing for their special RW menu.  Many restaurants will cut down their portions, or create some sub-par dish so they can staunch their losses (if any) for the RW prices, and I'll notice it.  Shaun's though, I felt I had just as good a time--food, service, atmosphere--as if I'd come any other day, and from my point of view...their usual standard of business-as-usual is pretty exemplary, everything.  There were 7 of us, and in spite of our numbers, our server just handled us superbly.  Never without water, wine when we wanted it, extra utensils were put down when things were cleared away.  And he didn't even add on gratuity to our final bill!  I don't know if that was a personal decision or Shaun's policy as a restaurant, but that's classy.  Even if I'm gonna give a fat tip anyways (which I did here, and on the cost of the food usually, not RW prices), I still feel like it's such a tacky thing to add a mandatory gratuity on large parties.  And the food...oh, the food.  The chopped liver app was phenomenal.  One of the most comforting and revelatory plates I've had in a long time, even though it's in no way trailblazing.  Portions sizes were more than ample, and I CAN eat!  The steak was cooked to a perfect medium-rare.  To be nitpicky, the fries were a little over-fried, and maybe the oil could be changed since there were a couple black nubbins.  But still, fries, even meh ones, are pretty tasty.  A great bottle of Montepulciano '07.  And my dessert, the sticky toffee pudding was everything I thought it could be: gooey, hot, the aroma redolant of caramel and cake.  I could have used a scoop of vanilla or maybe even an almond granita to cut the richness, but no matter, it was still a damn good sticky toffee pudding.  This was one of those happy dining experiences that counters one of the sad ones (*cough* Mykonos Grill).
