ReviewID: A8QUqfowxx4xfxm1sxpb7w
ReviewerID: pZjpnDqiORF1lVqXLnYRyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
This review is long overdo! I have a soft spot for Crustacean,  its the first restaurant I've gone to that really blew me away and inspired me to expand my tastes and test my palate. You can say that my "career" as a foodie was essentially born here. Its also been a part of quite a few joyous occasions, from birthday dinners, to prom, my parents' anniversary parties, to my first dinner with my inlaws.  Crustacean has been more a part of my life and memories than the An family will ever know! Alright, I'm feeling sentimental!. . Even today, I must admit that Crustacean really stands out among its peers. Its Franco-Vietnamese approach to fine dining sets it apart as it exemplifies the perfect harmony of Vietnamese cuisine as well as the subtleness of French haute cuisine. You won't find bold flavors here. What you will find instead are prominent simple flavors, lingering subtle notes, and pleasant undertones. Even the decor itself exemplifies the same tradition, with the interior based on the family's Franco-Vietnamese estate near Hanoi.. . As far as the food goes, I've pretty much narrowed the menu down to my favorites and have yet to be disappointed:. . APPETIZERS. . Beef satay($9)- Its somewhat different from its Thai counterpart in that its subtly redolent of lemon grass.. . Shrimp toast($11)- Perhaps its a mundane choice, but I enjoy the dish and Crustacean's version stands out.. . ENTREES. . Udon($16.95)- Organic noodles with shiitake mushrooms, carrot, squash, green beans, and a sun dried tomato sauce.. . Steak($38.95)- Ponzu glazed filet mignon with portabella mushrooms, onions, and leek mashed potatoes.. . Red snapper($23.95)- The fish comes broiled and is flavored with dill and turmeric. While it comes with rice, I prefer to get the jasmine rice sauteed with garlic($4.55) instead.. . Porcini crusted chicken($25.95)- A porcini crusted chicken breast with a truffle-peppercorn sauce, served with saffron-truffle risotto.. . I suppose my reason for not recommending the usually hyped up dishes aka the garlic noodles and seafood dishes, is because like most things constantly hyped up, they may not always live up to expectations. It happens a lot folks! Also, because the restaurant does not specialize in seafood per se and has so much more to offer. I think getting the more mundane dishes doesn't let you savor the chef's delicate artistry! . . While Crustacean has a somewhat large array of dessert options, I tend to stay away from desserts in general, and especially at Asian restaurants(I've never liked Asian sweets regardless of whether they're fusion cuisine or the real deal). Likewise, the restaurant offers a wide array of seafood dishes including sashimi, however, since the restaurant doesn't specialize in seafood per se, I would rather not get them. If I'm paying that much for them, I'd rather do so at an establishment which specializes in them. Yes, seafood figures somewhat prominently on the menu, but it focuses on the preparation of the seafood, not the freshness or quality of the catch as such(unlike traditional seafood houses).
