ReviewID: A_0hCfBAA6KSsZgXA1mzNg
ReviewerID: 49EVOXwLnE81c9mv2B9r9Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: So Kong Dong
Category: Korean
Ok, so I know nothing about Korean food.  The only time I've ever even had Korean food is when it came from my own kitchen.  There's not a whole lot of Korean food in Savannah or Athens, so I'm basically clueless as to how a typical meal at a Korean restaurant should go.  I figure I'm probably not the only one, so here's a quick rundown of what to expect at So Kong Dong:.     Luckily, it seems like most of the servers speak English, so that makes things easier.  I was really in the mood for some hot tea, so I just ordered some, but it looks like they end up bringing it to most people anyway.  Either way, make sure you get some.  It's a barley tea and it tastes nutty and buttery.  It's good, trust me on this one..      The menu basically consists of pancake/meat dishes like bulgogi, rice/noodle dishes like bibimbap, tofu soups with a variety of flavors/add-ins, and combos of the above with Korean BBQ.  I thought it was weird that there were no appetizers on the menu.  Then I learned why..      After you place your order, the waitress will show up at your table with what seems like a never ending array of plates full of stuff, most of which you won't be able to identify if you're in my boat.  Just try it all.  With the exception of the whole fried fish, everything appeared to be vegetable in origin.  Even the clear squishy thing is tasty!  And don't worry, it's all free.  Even the tea is free!.     Once you've realized that you can't possibly eat everything in front of you, the stuff you ordered will arrive.  If you're clearly not Korean (like me), the waitress will explain to you how to eat everything.  And she may offer you "rice soup," which I learned is the barley tea poured into the rice pot. It loosens the slightly browned pieces of rice that are stuck to the sides giving you rice soup!.      So how was the food?  I'll say that the tofu soup lives up to its reputation.  I got the pork variety and loved it.  Lots of tofu and thinly sliced, mostly lean pork.  You'll have the option of cracking an egg into your soup, which makes it very thick and rich.  I specified "regular" as my spice level and it came out relatively tame, honestly, but it was exactly what I was looking for at the time.  The BBQ was a little on the chewy side, but I loved the flavor.  .      One last piece of advice:  Come with a group of people if you can.  Between all the appetizers and whatever entree you order, it's waaay too much food for 2 people and you'll feel like a bad person for wasting so much food.  Or I guess you could just come really, really hungry!
