ReviewID: AAz3uMeFzsbHY_KrAy-NZw
ReviewerID: IJz15DVlEEe4-Q0LiDEmeA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Takashi
Category: Asian Fusion
Despite our mediocre impressions of the Duck fat fried chicken we sampled early last week at the Food and Wine festival, we were very intrigued by the Takashi menu.  I was very optimistic by the Yelp 4.5 star review, but was somewhat disappointed with the meal.  I guess the first red flag should have been the ease at which I got reservations at 1:00 on a Saturday for that night.  It wasn't all bad, there were some highlights.. . Per the recommendation of others I started with the Ginger Lime Martini.  I thought it was OK.  It was a little sweet for my liking, but not bad.  My fiance got a really good glass of chardonnay which I quickly switched to.  . . We started with 2 hot appetizers; the scallops and gnocchi and the pork belly with buns.  As many others noted we were drawn here partly because of the Scallop dish that was just OK.  The scallops had some sand in them which I got past, my fiance did not.  The gnocchi was very bland and the mushrooms were kind of hard.  The creamy froth was pretty bland too.  You got 3 small scallops for $14, which seemed a little high for what it was.  The porkbelly on the other hand was the absolute highlight of the meal.  If I went back I might just order 6 of those appetizers ($14).  This pork belly was very tender and had a lovely bbq glaze (this was $14 also).  It came with a pickled salad and a hot fresh bun.  The chef recommended an "open-faced sandwich"- we complied and it was fantastic!  Literally one of the best dishes I've had in Chicago.. . For our main plates I ordered the Fluke which is a white fish similar to halibut.  My fiance got the Salmon (against the recommendations we read about it).  As always, the fellow yelpers were correct.  Her salmon was well cooked but very bland.  I felt like you could have bought the salmon at your local Dominick's and thrown it in the oven with a little butter and wallahh.  The accompaniments were not great either- dish seemed to lack flavor.  My fluke was pretty good.  Fish was cooked great, and was served over hot pickled carrots and cabbage.  It also came with butternut squash ravioli that were tasty.  Both entrees were around $26 each.. . The food overall was decent, just not amazing (except the porkbelly).  Be aware the dishes are very small- 2 apps and 2 main entrees left us both satisfied but not full.  We therefore indulged and got the bread pudding dessert.  This was very tasty, but staying in line with the entire meal very petite.  We needed to order a couple of glasses of dessert wine to round it out!. . The restaurant has a very cool atmosphere as it's 2 stories in an old house.  It's definitely a great place for a date as they bring out 1 dish at a time and you can't get out of there in less than 2 hours.  I will say they don't have tap water available and you are forced to pick sparkling or still and they graciously bill you $8 for this.  . . So... 2 apps, 2 entrees, 1 dessert, 1 ginger martini, 1 bottle of wine, 2 glasses of dessert wine was $205 including tax and tip.... and like I said we definitely were not full nor drunk.  I wouldn't tell someone NOT to go to Takashi, but I'm unlikely to return as I think there are better meals available in our great city for $200.
