ReviewID: Ac-RqTkRXu755Tobac9bsw
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
A so-so experience at Pizzeria Mozza had pushed off my visit to Osteria.  However, their bar special (Sunday through Thursday) was too tempting to pass up.  The bar special allows you to pick any mozzarella, any pasta, any dessert, and a glass of the house red or white for $35.  This special is only available at the bar near the back of the restaurant.  The special provides a low-cost (non-dineLA restaurant week) option to try one of the more touted restaurants in L.A.. . Osteria Mozza is very loud and raucous.  It has a very dark interior with a lot of dark brown woods.  Though the menu is fancy, the non-formal decor coupled with the loud dining area makes the place quite casual and friendly.  The mozzarella bar, where the chefs assemble the mozzarella selections, is nice.  The mozzarella bar has a sleek marble top and is well lit from soft lighting above.. . We were a little worried that the bar featuring the $35 special would be too busy, but it was quite easy to get a table.  This run-of-the-mill, no frills bar was much less crowded than the mozzarella bar.  No backs on the stools.. . We started off with the complimentary cheese toasts.  Tiny toasts covered in ricotta cheese, olive tapenade and fresh basil.  Small but appetizing.  The basil was very pronounced, which I liked (though some may not).. . Complimentary bread (sourdough, wheat or wholegrain) was also served, but we were not provided butter.  I had the sourdough, and it was a little dense and dry.. . For my mozzarella, I had the burrata with bacon, marinated escarole (a braised green leaf) and caramelized shallots.  All of the ingredients were served on toasted crostini (kind of like bruschetta).  They provided two servings, making it perfect for sharing.  I liked it.  The creaminess of the burrata was nice.  The shallots added a slight sweetness.  The bacon was very good, but I actually wish there was more of it because some bites were better than others.. . I also tried the burricotti with spiced walnuts, honey and fried rosemary.  I liked this mozzarella selection as well though it was very sweet.. . I ordered the tagliatelle with oxtail ragu.  It was a small portion.  The tagliatelle was nicely cooked.  The oxtail was meaty and flavorful.  Unfortunately, the pasta dish was quite salty.  The ragu was also a little acidic.. . My friend also said that her dish (linguine with clams, pancetta and chiles) was very salty.  I tried it.  I could not believe she ate as much as she did.  The noodles were quite undercooked.  Linguine should have a bite to it (and most places overcook it), but these noodles were stiff with no bend to them.  The only flavor I could taste was salt.. . One of the bartenders indicated that the dish is designed to be salty.  I think there are cases when salt should be more pronounced like salted caramel ice cream or baked goods topped with fleur de sel.  However, those dishes specifically call out the ingredient.  I looked at the Yelp reviews and found that several complained about the saltiness of this dish.. . The bartender was nice enough to switch it out, and my friend opted for the fresh ricotta and egg raviolo with browned butter.  This dish went the other way.  It was quite bland.  A large ravioli (covered in browned butter) sat in the center of the plate.  It was filled with ricotta and an egg yolk center.. . The good thing about the bar special is that it allows you to pick any pasta.  I would not get any of the pastas we had again; however, I'm sure there are better pastas on their menu.  That being said, I was more impressed with the pasta at Piccolo, Drago, Angelini, and Fraiche.. . For dessert, I had an apple pastry.  There was a large and light puff pastry bowl on the center of the plate (sitting atop some whipped cream).  It was dusted with powdered sugar and filled with a tart apple compote.  The pastry was paired with a very tart apple cider gelato.  I really liked the pastry.  It was a little flaky and crispy on the outside but also had a softness to it.  I would have preferred a milder/sweeter gelato to balance out the tartness of the apple compote.. . I also tried the bombolinis, which were tiny fritters (like doughnuts) resting on a bed of very sweet huckleberry compote.  It was accompanied by a good vanilla gelato.  Overall, it was a decent dessert though I would have preferred that they fill the doughnuts with a cream or a vanilla custard to make them stand out a little more.. . The service was okay and friendly, but sometimes it was hard to flag somebody down.  We recently had bar service at Reservoir, and I found the service there to be more attentive and welcoming.. . Overall, the food was hit and miss.  I think their bar special is a great way to try their restaurant and I recommend it.  While I'm sure there are some good dishes on their menu, I might want to seek out some other Italian restaurants (or revisit Piccolo or Angelini) before making another stop at Osteria Mozza.. . Parking available via street or valet.
