ReviewID: ac92usR5j0EeQzsg6Won7w
ReviewerID: rvSUEFsoKKyliJ4VBwY4aA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Since moving to LA, we've been to Pink's twice and surprisingly recently (considering how many times we've driven by the place waiting for the right mood to go there &amp; also for the shorter line). Pink's  will always have a long line, as it's both a LA institution, and a tourist trap or sorts (kind of like if you were going to NYC, you want to try the original Nathan's).  We waited a half hour the first time, and it was worth it, but anything longer than that, not so sure.. . They have so many choices that the variations are almost indeterminable, so you have to look at everything twice it seems. The spicy Polish is amazingly delicious, snappy and filled with real peppers and juicy! You almost don't want to ruin the yummy taste by putting anything else on it, but the Spicy Polish Chicago Dog is good and if you like greasy chilidogs, the stretch chilidogs are yummy, (so my hubby saiys). The 2nd time we went there the line was so short we had to have dinner there. This time we tried the Martha Stewart. This sounds like it's going to be delicious til you realize, the best part about the Martha Stewart is the amazing 3 slices of bacon that comes on the 10in stretch dog. The stretchdog itself is nothing to write home about, and needs all those toppings to make you forget how small and bland it is compared to the spicy polish. The Martha Stewart has kraut on it which we both like so there's that, the onions, lots of relish, tomatoes and the 3 slices of bacon as well sour cream. . . Both times we came here we ordered a side of onion rings, which are delicious by themselves or with a side of ranch dipping sauce.  . . While I found the Martha Stewart Dog to be very bland and uneventful, (the bacon I keep going back to was amazing!) I know we'll come back one day certainly, as there are so many other variations left to try on the menu.. The "lord of the rings" dog (bbq and onion rings on a 10inch stretch dog) sounds perfect! Plus we need to come back when we can order the Spicy Polish again (they were out of them the 2nd time we came).  With hours of operation like theirs, I'm sure we'll be back. It's on our way to the grocery store, so in our case, it's convenient.  =)
