ReviewID: adeWy0eWHWK4b-iy5knYxA
ReviewerID: lpKD0hwlYUCi8kmXrKYKGQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
We pulled up to their valet lot around 9p.m. and asked to be seated, and surprisingly, there was one table open! considering the hustle and bustle of the packed place, we were very very lucky to secure a table for 2 in the main dining area. The restaurant itself was done in a lot of whites and blacks, with brown paper instead of tablecloths, and separate restrooms,  but a long unisex sink! Very original! One of the walls within the restaurant is a chalkboard which I thought was cool.. . Our server greeted us almost immediately and took our water order, and came back to explain how the restaurant worked: Food and cocktails served in  pre-prohibition style, it was in our best interest to sample several of the appetizers, and maybe 2 entrees.  While we perused the menu, we asked for the eastside cocktail, a plymouth gin-based drink with fresh squeezed cucumber, lime, and mint. Delicious! Probably one of the best cocktails i've savored in a while! Everything on the menu looked so delicious, but i finally decided on the escargot appetizer, the tarte flambee, and the mushroom risotto. The escargot came out garlicky and delicious, in a greenish sauce I don't know the ingredients to. The tarte flambee was a flatbread, with bacon, caramelized onions, and creme fraiche. YUM! Oh, and the mushroom risotto was laced with truffle oil and was out of control divine!. . For our entrees, we shared the crispy skate with lemon, butter, capers, and haricot vert, and the beef bougournon which was so tender and rich and flavorful, served with whipped potatoes. You almost didn't have to chew it. . . For our after dinner drinks we tried another  plymouth gin-based cocktail with shaved ice, and blackberries, again, delicious. Dessert came in the form of a  chocolate mousse, layered with dark cherries, hazelnut crisp and coated with a dark chocolate shell in the form of a little ball, along with a scoop of pistachio ice cream to magnify the rich sweetness of the cake itself.. . Check:$174. Tip:$40. Result: Happy patrons!. . On a return visit, I sat at the bar for a different experience, and had the joy of sampling the moules frites, served with the best garlic aoili i've ever had, and also, a new fave, the sweetbreads. As if I didn't already adore this restaurant.... . My 3rd visit tonight...and I tried the profiteroles, which were filled with housemade pistachio ice cream...with an option for chocoloate ice cream too, but no no...i wanted them both to be pistachio. Delicious.
