ReviewID: ADg9wD7qsSPlF71rBRhq8g
ReviewerID: jKRwYkehA43W1cs4NyBpyg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Went to Spring for the first time last night. Service was very attentive and timed very well. Lemongrass Coconut Shrimp soup was really good. The creme fraiche and wasabi dip for the tuna roll was good. The bean dip for the crackers was very oily. . . And then ... A HAIR in the bean dip. Pointed this out to the waiter and did he apologize? Not really. He took it away and had the bus boy bring more. Did the manager come over to say anything? NO. Wasn't looking for them to comp anything but they could have said "Coffee is on us". Did they ? NO . . The manager asked how dinner was as we were leaving and when I said "fine except for the hair in the dip he was surprised and said "nobody told me about that". I told him the waiter never apologized and because of the way it was handled I would never be back even though the food was good. At that time the phone rang and instead of letting the one of the 2 women working at the desk with him to answer it he chose to ignore us and answer the phone. . . Now I see why the waiter never did anything more because that's the style and attitude management teaches their staff. It's too bad because they have interesting menu and would have liked to go back and to try other items. If you don't mind that you that you could have hair in your food and not have the staff recognize that and that it doesn't belong then feel free to go to Spring. If you are looking for only eatable items in your food then you might want to stay away until management decides they need to pay attention more. . . As a side note, This was for a 6:00 reservation and the restaurant was maybe 1/3 full and never did the manager come by to see how dinner was or if everything was OK. I have been in other restaurants that are full and management makes a point to come by at least once to every table to make sure you had a good dining experience.
