ReviewID: ADm5BH1IU99rH3YYoGcjcQ
ReviewerID: cSWJG7KKNt5SWfNI_DnILA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I wanted t give it 3.5 stars actually but here's my take on the food:. . 1. It all tastes the same. 2. It all tastes the same. 3.did I mention that it all tastes the same?. 4. I forgot, it all tastes the same but some of the food has some cheese in it and gives it a different taste.. 5. It all tastes the same but has a sprinkle of  cheese... ( the burrito has cheese, mm mmmm... *! fart !* ). . Does everyone get the point here?. . it's like this,  all the food is garnished the same way, and you can taste the spicy flavor on all their items, but after trying about 80% of their menu,  again: IT ALL TAStES THE SAME  its GARNISHED AND FLAVORED THE SAME WAY. - n with cheese.... . Don't get me wrong, I still think it's good, and it has a great twist on a traditional burrito which makes it great because it tastes different , but it's something new that is actually a fad, and a little bit overrated.. . things to watch out for:. . 1. Waiting in long lines. 2. People cutting in long lines and no one has the balls to say shit to them. 3. All these fucking asian kids who yell and scream and act immature like they are 5 year olds while waiiting in line with their iPhones/Blackberries and cell phones Texting to each other and talking shit to each other trying to act all fucking gangsta about how fucking cool they are to be waiting in line for the Kogi truck. (incidentally, these are the same people cutting in line...)  (( don't kill me, i'm asian...)). . If they are ever in echo park again, you should go there because it's not as crowded, and its not in a trendy side of town, so all these fucking hipster wannabe's won't go there and ruin your nite or cause a long wait in the lines.. . PS. I saw the 2 main guys who concocted this and they seemed really nice and they provided great service when we ordered. It's just the fact that it can be a hassle, and it makes you feel like you're at a drunken  college event  with the long lines and immature kids that kinda kills it. . . It's definitely worth trying once though.... . ** * * If you don't want to wait in line, and you only want to order tacos, just go straight to the Alibi Bar in culver city and order there. The menu is limited to:. Tacos, sliders( mini burgers), fries, quesadilla, but at least you dont have to wait in line, just order at the bar. it costs a little more but i think it's worth it to go there if you havent had any kogi items yet...
