ReviewID: aDwhzRku009J9M4KMXj7hQ
ReviewerID: 7sziKo2Uv-Q-wYkUDA2x4w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Feed
Category: American (Traditional)
Love the place, have been going there over a year now. I guess I could say I was a fan since "before it got popular," but that wouldn't be true; it seems like they've been hot since day 1. . . The owners Donna &amp; Liz are a lot of fun; they have a bunch of 80s-era   TV shows on video, which play on their only TV set. If you've never hung out with them, I can also tell you Liz is a real good singer &amp; decent guitar player - maybe some mandolin, too? They really like quality musicians, which is good thing, as Superior Street rehearsal studios are just around the corner, and Feed has a steady stream of customers from there. . . Again, any place like this in Humboldt Park is an oasis, but they'd do well anywhere. In this review, however, with all due respect to Donna's skill as a chef &amp; restauranteur, I want to put the spotlight on my pal Dan Pearce, who also cooks there. . . Dan is not only an excellent musician &amp;  fun guy (Berklee Music School, plays bass &amp; guitar), but a VERY talented chef. I say the c-word because, if he weren't working for Donna, he could be a chef at many, many places. FYI, Dan has been there over a year, they seem to get along pretty well, and it's actually quite a compliment that Donna trusts him with her food when she's not around.. . The thing about Dan (he'll tell you): Just like me, he loves playing music at least as much as he likes to cook. And that makes it hard for him to really bear down on either vocation. Again: I understand. But as this is a food review, I'll tell you a few things I've noticed about Dan's cooking: S K I L L. . . If you judge things by the side dishes, Dan's a killer. Don't get me wrong: the rotisserie chicken, the burgers, their gumbo - all great. But when you see a PERFECTLY sauteed/seasoned side of spinach sitting beside the soup (say THAT 5 times fast)... that's what gets my attention. And yes, I always tell Dan to his face how much I dig his cooking.. . On a final note, Dan tells me metromix was shooting video of them recently for a segment somewhere; Donna being Donna, she didn't want to be on camera, so they highlighted Dan instead. He's good on camera, kind of a rockabilly-looking kid; did I say "funny?" And, I'm told, Liz was running around (again) in this big yellow furry chicken costume. Should be an interesting segment....
