ReviewID: AerP81hY0cu6IrQ69uBixw
ReviewerID: AJArGCwpYWkLyCK8gbMMkQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
Alright-- I am a worst critic because I used to be a server, server trainer and I still bartend on occasion. Originally this dining experience was organized by my old co-service industry mates. They wanted to meet for Happy Hour on a Monday.. . We arrived early. Parking is valet $5. And the place is fairly easy to find. It's got a sort of Spanish-Mediterranean outdoor decor and edifice. You can really find street parking if you wanted to. You enter a large brown door with wrought iron handles. There is a small bar on the left and the hostess station on the right, a few small tables for two are littered in the "lobby area". It wasn't busy (6:20pm). There is a large dining area on the left and the bathrooms are also located in this section. You walk farther and there is a sofa area kinda like on the set of Friends. And more little cafe tables. Farther back is the larger bar or main bar and more cafe tables for 4 and booths. . . It is so dimly lit in this far back bar area. There is a large flat screen TV with sports on. Last night was college b-ball. There were only like two other couples present sitting at the booth. One obviously looked like a date and the other was a married couple. . . My friend and I first sat at the cafe tables. Since we sat ourselves I asked a server dressed in black if she could give us some menus to look over. I had already perused the menu online, but my friend wanted to see since it was her first time here. She couldn't believe the price of Happy Hour appetizers at $5.50. This establishment specializes in martinis. They have a variety of all kinds and some that were exclusive to Lola's. The menu was also very eclectic. . . The main bar was large enough with all call and top shelf liquors along the back wall in sandy brown shelving and glassware and fillers on the back counter. The bar counter could fit maybe 12 people tops. It was not busy. . . We decided to sit at the corner booth facing the two couples I mentioned because of the room and the light. Like I said it was too dark and having to use your candle on the table is not good. The candles were those white novelty saints candles you see in church or on the side of a memorial. My other friend had arrived by now, he also had never been at Lola's. We decided to order drinks first. And two of us got ours, the other did not get hers until halfway through her entree after flagging down the server. Mind you we had appetizers and salads first. I had to keep looking around for the server so I could get some salt and pepper. The food is very good. It has a healthy flare to it and the presentation is great. It is very bland though. Maybe that is purposefully done to add to its simplicity. . . Throughout the meal we never once get approached by the server. Not a once. We kept grabbing the attention of the busboy. We needed refills of our beverages. We needed our little table cleared of our first course. There is a thing in the service industry called Standard of Service. We see the server running back and forth from one room (the dining room) and back to the back area where we were to log in her orders and pick up her drink orders. She kept mumbling and looked very hurried and stressed out. We tried to get her attention, but she ran into the other room quicker than we could raise our hands. We had to ask the other server who was attending to only the other people on the cafe tables (some of which we knew).  My friend got her club soda finally after asking her for the the drink. Our server I finally had to call out from where I was sitting to her across the way to refill our drinks. It was very frustrating. I had to literally keep coming up to the bar or the other server to get anything. . . Finally, we had had it and decided to call it a night. I went up to the server and told her we wanted to leave and needed our check. I showed her a pay stub and she took the bill to the manager. Meanwhile we looked over the dessert menu and didn't see anything special, the server miraculously saw us doing that and she asked us if we wanted any of the overpriced desserts. I mean $10 for cookies. You can bake almost 100 Tollhouse cookies for that price. And you have to wait 25 minutes for it to bake. No way. She dropped off the checkbook. . . I stood up and looked for the manager. I sat at the small bar near the entrance so I could speak the person in private. Some hostess comes up to me and then after hearing my complaint (she was just being nosy) she eventually gets me the manager. I start off telling the manager how the food was phenomenal. But the service is a zero. She asks me why and I tell her about the neglect of service and my having to get up to make sure my friends were being attended to. The busboy and I served the table. The brunette manager made excuses. In the end we got free drink tickets and 20% off. Still if your server is alone on a not so busy night help her out.  Cari K - ask for help. That's what managers are for!
