ReviewID: AFH9gDgdly2OPYc8MlMadw
ReviewerID: KMfLcj021gd55naYESzSkA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Gastropubs
Third stop in our LA Food Bloggers Crawl and Battledish evening. Tracy dined at the original Umami the night before and made rsvp's for this one. Don't know what she said or did, but the manager comped us a round of oyster shooters with shots of a vodka/citrus/yuzu that both were amazing! I'm usually not a big fan of oysters, but I have to admit I thoroughly enjoyed these ones! Very fresh they purchased them from the Hollywood Farmers Market, just hours earlier in the day. The oysters were topped with peppers and a home made hot sauce one of the employees made who is going to be marketing the hot sauce in the future on his own apparently. So okay, maybe I've been bought off with the freebies... LOL. . We were pretty damn full after hitting two restaurants previous to Umami but we tried the Truffle burger and the Stiltson cheese and port carmelized onions burger and a side of their hand made tatter tots. I gotta give them props, their Truffle burger was awesome! I'd have to move it up to my #1 burger edging out F.O. in terms of taste. It was perfectly cooked medium rare and the flavors were the best restaurant burger I've had. Their Stiltson burger is definitely in my top 10 as well.  However, when it comes to burgers, some of my favorite burgers ever were home grilled. The Umami burgers are a bit small for those with big appetites but might be just the right size for the ladies.. . The tattertots were good... okay very good, but what's not to love about potatoes deep fried... it whatever shape, they are good. . . One foodie in our group was raving about the Umami custom ketchup... I thought it was tasty but I wouldn't have even mentioned it in this review except she was so impressed with it. Me??? It was okay/good... but I've been customizing my own ketchups at home for years... I love my fries and potatoes with ketchup and a ton of Tabasco or Franks Red Hot sauce, so I'll combine my "57 with one of my hot sauces to create my own fiery ketchup that no restaurant has. I guarantee if you tried my ketchup, you'd remember it... negatively if you are a spice wimp.. . They also comped us a plate of their house made pickles and pickled veggies... It was okay, excepting the pickled beet which was excellent. The vinegar was very powerful and kept making me cough... . Okay, this is the 2nd Umami location I've visited, I still have to check out the original location. The decor was urban, the location is right in the heart of Hollywood and the staff were really great But then, they knew we were foodie bloggers, so I presume they were on their best behavior and it showed. . . An interesting side note... I went to use the Mens room before going to the final destination and the restroom reeked of pot. That was good for a chuckle. A delicious meal, good service,freebies... gotta give them a 5'er.
