ReviewID: AfUAEggPrENUQjjU9wzVGg
ReviewerID: NrqnE2zTt6XAEC3hsRkoWw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I came here after a friend and sister raved about it.  She said it was the best burger she ever had.  I've never had a phenomenal, blow me out of this world burger before, so I had to try it.  . . I brought my cousins from out of town along for this taste test.  Upon entering we were CARDED!  I guess because it's more of a pub than restaurant.  We went for lunch and it was a beautiful day, which was great for outdoor seating, but all their outdoor seating was full.  Inside the design is quite modern, lots of wood, clean lines, etc.  It took us a bit to figure out how to order, but apparently you have to order everything at the bar with the bartenders.  Again weird.  It was hard to order because, amidst the noise of people talking inside the pub, we had to yell everything across the counter to the bartender, who couldn't hear us half the time, and we can't hear him either.  We had ordered two burgers, medium temp, with fries and an heirloom tomato salad.. . The heirloom tomato salad was perfect.  We shared it amongst 3 people, but I could've eaten it all by myself.  The tomatoes were ripe and sweet, the cheese divine (feta and something else), and the pesto (basil maybe?) was light and airy.  The presentation was beautiful as well.. . Then came the burgers.  I hadn't started on it yet, but my cousin took a bite, and looked at me with eyes wide open.  And she said, "This is the best burger ever!"  So I took a bite, and my taste buds were just exploding.  The meat was soooo tender and juicy, the caramelized onion sauce was sweet, and the cheese (gruyere?) was rich and creamy, the buns were not hard but soft.  Each ingredient was perfect to make a perfect burger.  Basically the best burger I've ever had, and the best burgers my cousins ever had.. . We didn't try the beers, but from what I heard their selection is pretty good.  If there are any improvements I could make, it would be to expand the outdoor seating, have actual waiters instead of ordering at the bar, and have people coming around to refill water (because currently refills are only at the bar).  But from this standpoint, I'm definitely coming here again!!!
