ReviewID: aHDZN6JL6TMGqBkEKhdoDw
ReviewerID: z6IJ92Co1iF-knabeXx7aQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I only wish I could join the ranks of Bottega Louie fans, but the rude service ruined my experience.. . Upon arrival, the hostess informed us that there wasn't any seating available in the main dining area, but that we were welcomed to dine in the bar/café section.  The few open tables were still littered with used glasses and dinnerware but we sat down anyway, hoping a busboy would be by to clean up shortly thereafter.  We waited.  And waited.  10 minutes later a waiter (name: Doug) finally came by to offer menus and clear the table.  Then we waited another 15 minutes before he came back to take our order.  As we briefly scanned the menu to name our dishes (it'd been so long, we forgot what we wanted), he rudely interrupted, "You guys have a minute to order.  Do you know what you want?"   I was shocked!!  I'd never been timed when giving my order and couldn't believe he had the nerve to infer we were holding him up when we'd been waiting nearly a half hour!  . . After placing our order the hostess informed me that a table had opened up in the main dining room, so we moved.  2 minutes later Doug comes by and THROWS a bill at us, saying  "Take care of this for me, will ya?" and leaves.  We hadn't even received our food yet and he just throws a bill at us?  They don't even do that at Denny's!  I was ready to leave at that point, but my friend insisted that we talk to the manager.  The manager was very understanding, apologized for our experience and comped us our wine.  So while the manager's kindness was appreciated, my evening was nonetheless ruined.. . Now that's out of the way, a few comments on ambience and food:. . The restaurant is lovely with its gilded moldings, large gleaming windows (meant for looking in, rather than looking out, I wager) and pristine marble flooring.  Feels like Dean &amp; Deluca meets French café.  As you step into the restaurant the clink of silverware and chatty diners reverberate off the high ceilings to create vibrant atmosphere.  The showcase of pastries and deli items are dazzling and really get you "in the mood"--for eating that is.  . . The food is aiiiight.  The mushroom fries were dry and the batter was was too cakey.  The prosciutto, mozzerella &amp; sage crostini was average.  They went too heavy on the cheese and it overwhelmed the dish.  The corn, chard and bacon was delicious.  The highlight in an otherwise dim meal.  So my take on the menu is don't be fooled.  The vocabulary is far more sophisticated than the execution.
