ReviewID: AJEwqE3-HXGC2AnAuSrsjg
ReviewerID: IMJ1ANR_Az-ef72hweNkEg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mana Food Bar
Category: Vegetarian
Duplicate posting..... . My GF and I were here for one of the maiden voyages.  I'm always happy to find new veggie places, especially closer to the fine dining end.  Metromix had stated that Mana would be more Green Zebra, and less Veggie Bite, which already won me over.  Further more, I was intrigued by the notion of dishes being available as large or small plate, especially for my first meal there.. . The decor is lovely and very "green-" heavy on the reuse/ recycle feel.  The people were SO nice!  Because of the size of the joint (max 34 diners,) your server is never more than a couple feet away.  The menu offered dishes from Greece (ye ol' Spanikopita of veg and catering ubiquity,) Korea (Bim Bop,) Italian pastas, a Thai salad, and of course, Hummus and Tabouli, without which no vegetarian place is truly complete.... . The meal had high points and low points.  I will provide constructive criticism, rather than lashing out, so the owners can try to improve a couple things.. . The first beef I had was with the pricing of some dishes.  I know real estate is damn expensive in Wicker these days, but an 8 dollar smoothy had better come with some booze in it.  Ours, the Avocado Pineapple Coconut Water, was good, but had uneatable chunks in it, and was about half the size I expected for the money.. . Secondly, the beer list was seriously lacking.  No west coast beers and no Ipa?  Come on.  Vegetarians love beer!  And variety.. . Now to the food.  The watermelon salad was painfully hot.  We got a salad sampler, and though good, the only thing that stood out to me was the unbalanced heat of the melon.  I'm sure this will get ironed out.. . The Ravioli was excellently cooked- al dente, lovely filling, but not seasoned as I would have expected, especially given the "spicy" tomato sauce advertised in the menu.  I have to wonder if the chef actually tasted this sauce or the melon salad.. . Now the deal breaker.  The shared plate size tofu Bulgogi was SUPERB!  What an excellent dish.  As good as the dish was, my heart sank when it came to the table.  The serving size was tiny, even by Green Zebra standards.  As a fine dining enthusiast, I don't mind paying 6 bucks for a tiny plate, but not that tiny... I honestly left hungry.. . I felt overall that for the pricepoint and goals of the place, the small plates could have benefited from bolder seasoning (besides the watermelon,) and better presentation.  Also, paying dinner prices for lunch?  Even Zebra cuts their prices for the Sunday brunch, which I pray Mana adds as well... at a lower cost to the diner.. . Mana could make some minor adjustments and have a serious winner here.  Wicker Park needs a step up from Earwax and Handlebar, but honestly, with the exception of the Bulgogi, there was nothing that made me want to come back and spend 40 bucks for lunch again, especially given the serving size of that one stand out dish.  . . Who am I kidding?  With the limited number of options available for vegetarians, of course I'll come back... a more cohesive product and value for the buck dining experience will get Mana at least one more star, and alot of my money in the coming year.
