ReviewID: AjfDy-NS7iapXnarTW2nfw
ReviewerID: azGKeQXOMz4F5-6xIVh6jA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I thought Italians just did pasta, but MAN can Batali and his exec. chef do it all! FIST PUMP! Even their butter was delicious and I'm no Paula Dean! . . They have a variety of Burrata Mozzerella to choose from and they all come in smaller portions so you can try a few different ones. My favorite burrata is the one with candied walnuts and a bit of honey drizzled on top. What's better than having a dessert teaser as a starter? . . There's so many different things to eat and Batali definitely helps you make room for most of it. The portions were petite and moderate so our party of 6 got to share 3 pastas as our first course: calf-brain ravioli, sausage orecchiette, and ox-tail tagliatelle. One bite and you know the Osteria means business. Their pasta had the perfect bite to it. Home-made. Al dente. Just  MMM. They were all delicious in their own right but the orecchiette... wow. I admit I was kinda annoyed the waiter suggested that dish just because it sounded so plain. Sausage pasta? Can't a 5 year old make that with hamburger helper? But... yeah... I wished I had my own entree of that because it was just that good. . . 2nd course (I felt like a king that night!), Batali's steak and duck. The steak was the size of my head and more than enough to make a vegan call PETA. The size was bold and the flavor was even better. I'd put this steak with the Mastros and Mortons of LA (Cut is still MJ). Next, the duck. WOW! To me, it resembled a chinese spicy, salted duck that is served at a wedding banquet--it even came with a wedge of lemon! I put my knife into it and the whole thing just fell off the bone. It was just that tender! I probably could've just swallowed the duck without chewing. Hah! The skin was golden and crispy. It's just freakin awesome--like, I want it at my wedding good.. . Dessert was ok. They had an olive oil ice cream that piqued my interest but nothing to write home about. Next time, I'd see if I can have a pizza from the Pizzeria as dessert instead...
