ReviewID: AJP4bsXpTa3yjPkmMOrp3Q
ReviewerID: 1XI227n3JPoUajEPJxXGew
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tito&#39;s Tacos
Category: Mexican
I HAVE TO PUT THIS OUT THERE. . As a native of Culver City I have to say that this place can most definitely be called an ANOMALY. Why does it keep making money? Why can it beat out any single McDonald's restaurant for the hours it's in operation? . . Its mexican alright, but its so unique in its tastes and textures you either think it's whack Mexican or Gold. For some reason out-of-towners can't understand the spell of Tito's, while most locals do (despite not being able to explain why) . . I've taken so many people from out of town (or even across town) to Tito's. DO NOT ever expect these people to like Tito's as you do. Most of the time they will think it's either just alright or some whack-ass version of mexican food. THESE people are thinking taco trucks, your neighborhood, full-menu mexican joint, mexico itself, etc.  They won't understand that it's a unique taste you can't get anywhere else in terms of its quality (debatable in grade but not in taste), taste, texture, etc. . . Like I said, very Mexican indeed, but can be a subversion of Mexican food due to the tastes, ingredients, and textures. But, instead of being birthed and accepted on a mass scale like Tex Mex, this cuisine probably just originated in a Mexican home that improvised intentionally (or to no fault of its own) and came just to Culver to start hooking tongues. . . Most outsiders aren't down! So it's a local thing?!! Alright, what gets us hooked?. . What is it that's so good? Is it the meaty viscous con carne sauce and stringy soft meat? the almost perfect combination of their chips and salsa (a crunch you can't replicate and a tanginess and consistency of salsa you could die before trying to make yourself) ? the three chews meat they put in the tacos? (so soft with grease and salt you only need three chews instead of six), the texture and taste of the shredded cheddar and lettuce (something that for some reason your local supermarket can't ever give you)? The familiar taste? The familiar smell?  A shared sense of history and like thought process that could've only been created by the social, ethnic, socio-economic meshing within Culver City and surrounding neighborhoods? Or maybe it's just that these out-of-towners will never appreciate that the same video games have been there since you were a baby ; ) . . all of it
