ReviewID: AKmPm0WiD5Vrf4GXjFcB-w
ReviewerID: NBJVYt7sO-2WDg3bPwBT0Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Long story short: If you don't know what an orgy of meat is like, come to this place.. . Long story long:. . A good friend of mine just recently turned 30.  In his hay day, he was known for being a big eater.  He definitely appreciates food and just loves to eat.  He is in fact, a Yelper, but shall remain unamed.. . Anywho, for his 30th birthday, he decided to go big.  He originally wanted to go to some other Argentinian place for dinner, but they couldn't accommodate our party of almost 20, so we switched to this place.. . This restaurant is located on La Cienega Restaurant Row.  Hiding in the shadow of the SLS Hotel, this place seems to get lost in plethora of restaurants.  If you've read my Jar and Petrossian reviews, you should know what I'm talking about.  The restaurant itself is beautiful.  I mean, given the neighborhood, there's no doubt that this place is catering to the upper middle class and beyond.  I mean, $60 for endless and copious amount of meat?  Hey, if that floats your boat.  I'm just saying..... . We were set up in the back room and were given one long table.  I guess the way the room was laid out, that was the best they could do.  Of course, when you have as many people as we did, it only adds to the difficulty of it.  I suppose looking back in retrospect, the key complaint among our group was the setup, not allowing everybody the ability to talk to everybody else.  We were more or less restricted to talking to those only in our closest proximity.. . Each place setting had a little button, which actually more resembled that of a stock paper coaster, that was red on one side and green on the other.  In case you're not familiar with this concept, it's the "keep the meat coming/I'm done" button.  You put it green side up if you want the guys coming around with meat on a stick to you, red to let them know you're done.. . This is where I went into a bovinal, swinal, and poultric haze.  I had tri-tip, sirloin, filet, chicken, pork ribs, lamb chops, garlic beef, garlic chicken, uh... probably one or two more things.  I can't really quite remember.  I told you it was a copious amount of meat.  I originally had decided to not hit up the included salad bar, because well, salad would only take up space, but I probably should've gotten some leaves to help pass things through.  Just saying..... . I had some filet mignon and it was on the rare side of medium rare, but I liked it.  It was glorious.  I honestly had so much meat I can't remember what else I liked.  The garlic beef had good flavor but was dry.  As was the garlic chicken.. . Service was alright.  They were quite attentive and helpful.  One of our servers, who happened to be Asian, spoke in a low, Sulu kind of voice and was oddly polite.  Like when I asked for the bill, he said, in his Sulu voice "Very well".  WTF?!?!?!  It was quite amusing in fact.. . I mean, this place has been here for a long time and if you're a big meatatarian like my friend or myself, then you would really enjoy this place, however I'm just not sure if it's worth the $60 price tag.  I suppose if I was invited back not on my dollar, I'd come back.  But I'd rather spend that amount of money on a variety of things at like Petrossian.  Just saying....
