ReviewID: ALm3um4EpCgv1h3fi1o3Gg
ReviewerID: oBtlcE8FrnBWfmGHVQpgSA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
We arrived 15 minutes before our  reservation  to celebrate my Girlfriend and fellow  Yelpers  30th birthday.  We were seated  right away  by request outdoors. We were very comfortable once they turned on the heaters. The waitress was  nice but  a little pushy when it  came  to drinks. neither one of us  drink alcohol and  it seemed like she kept on pushing  the alcohol on us we were a little uncomfortable... her menu knowledge was good but  not great. Otherwise we found her to be  very nice. We started with boudin noir (blood sausage) it was  very good although I  wish it  had more mustard sauce I also specifically ordered it as boudin noir and not blood sausage because my  girlfriend never had it before and i didnt want  to freak her out but when the waitress dropped by to see how  we were  enjoying it she said how is  your blood sausage.... Next  we had the  mushroom salad  with greens  arugula,endive and  citrus  vinaigrette the salad was large  enough to share but it was  very lightly dressed   so we had to  request more dressing to actually taste it I was very subtle for my taste and and  no endive to speak of although it was plentiful on the mushrooms.  Entrees  arrived on the table while I was in the restroom I would have  felt more special if they would have waited till I was seated. We had  short ribs with salsa verde over polenta I don't recall seeing any salsa verde on the plate it did have a demi glace though yummy yummy, but once again more sauce was needed . The  polenta  was perfecto . Our second  entree was the Monkfish  francaise with   SPINACH, WHITE WINE,POTATO PUREE, and SHALLOTS  They call it The poor mans lobster ????? Hell No!!! This was perfectly cooked   succulent delicious and fit  for  a king It was  the highlight of our evening a  four star dish and  futhermore just  order  this  if  you  have never had  Monkfish before you won't be disappointed and  the saucier got it  just right No  additional sauce was needed....... Desert was confusing it was called CHOCOLATE BREAD PUDDING with BOURBON CARAMEL SAUCE and PEANUT BRITTLE ICE CREAM  It was  not  bread pudding and  the waitress was  confused about describing it as well . It's  a  chocolate molton cake or  a  Lava cake   as  some people call it    round  chocolate cake  with  a  caramel filling It was good  but  I  could buy the same thing at Trader Joe's we  were  disappointed it was not  bread pudding. So all in all  a great meal   a  wonderful restaurant in a  great neighborhood  highly recommended  and  I hear the wine list is reasonably priced..... Xander
