ReviewID: AM0adaNOMerUO8oD5LpKhg
ReviewerID: uFLcGw3p4I-rHMefRSyzBQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Maybe I never really grew up, but I really had a lot of fun here. I had the occasion to visit California one spring, and one of our activities was Magic Castle. Magic Castle is a magician's club and it's member's only. That means unless you know a member from whom you can get tickets, the doors to Magic Castle will be magically sealed and bolted from you.. . Like most exclusive venues, the dress code required a tie and jacket for the gentlemen and a dress for the ladies. Do I enjoy getting fancied up? Usually no, but Magic Castle was one of those instances where wearing a jacket and tie and accompanying a group dressed in their finest adds to a night of magic and mystery.. . As you can imagine, Magic Castle is housed in a very Victorian-esque mansion in Hollywood. The flora and fauna are meticulously groomed and the dark imposing castle looms over the grounds. Traffic to the castle was pretty bad. Plan on leaving early. Parking is valet and there's a $20 entrance fee.. . The theatrics begin as soon as you enter. Take a moment to take a picture. With a whisper of 'open sesame', the bookcase slides open to reveal a hidden set of stairs. Walking up the grand staircase, you'll find yourself in the main dining area. This is where the main magic happens.. as in the magical disappearing bills. Dinner is on the expensive side, more so considering it isn't all that great. The ribs and steaks were mediocre, I'm told. The fish of the day, orange roughy, was pretty ok. It had a mild taste, neither outstanding nor offending.. . On to the shows! You can get lost walking around the Castle at the first pass, but it's really easy to get your bearings. The dining area is crowded, but once in the outer areas, navigating is much easier. There are two or three stages dedicated to guest magicians. I guess you can call these the featured acts. They appear at various scheduled times, so be sure to get in line quick! I had fun at all of them. There were a couple duplicate acts, but even still, the showmanship of the magician made the whole experience. Heck, I still think the finger movement thing is hilarious and anybody could do it. In addition to these featured acts, there are bars throughout the Castle. The bars are hosted by card carrying magicians.. as in they do card tricks, really really impressive card tricks. There was one British fellow at the basement Hat and Hare pub who was really outstanding. He would string trick along trick along trick along.. well you get the picture. We'd all think.. there's no way.. that's not possible! On the middle floor there was a more Victorian bar with pew seating that had an impressive card magician as well.. . Perhaps I am easily impressed and / or, at times, just really childish, but I really really liked the Magic Castle. The tricks, the showmanship, the near impossibility of it, I was impressed by it all. Sometimes, letting yourself get lost in a bit of pleasant fiction is magical in itself.. . review 5/5/2008. I.M.Y.
