ReviewID: aNcoDHDq8VxhdFeOvIISTA
ReviewerID: lPe6n62Vv-xiEMenhOlMnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Mozza is excellent.  It is a tad over priced, but I can live with that.  The pizza is amongst the best I have had in the US. . . I went for lunch and started with an insalata mista. It was very simple, probably not worth $8, but it was good and very fresh.  The vinaigrette was light and tangy, and worked perfectly with the assorted greens. The pizza I ordered was basically a meat lover's, with bacon, prosciutto, fennel sausage, salami, tomato, and mozzarella. Like the salad, the word that came to mind as I took my first bite was "fresh". I know it is hard to imagine when covering crust with that much meat.  The toppings, cheese, sauce, and crust were fresh, and that is what separates this place from many other upscale pizzerias. . . In my opinion the crust is the absolute most important part of a pizza. Sure the sauce and cheese make a difference, but if the crust is good everything else tastes better. Mozza's crust is pretty damn good, but not perfect.  It is very thin and very crisp.  Actually a little too crisp for my taste. The edge was too crispy and full of air.  Some might like it that way, not me.  I prefer the crust I have had in Europe.  It is crisp and thin, but it has body and the edges are a little chewy and definitely not full of air. That being said, this is still good pizza, especially for a place in LA.. . My friend ordered a pizza with goat cheese, leeks, scallions, and speck.  I actually preferred his choice. The goat cheese complemented the speck and leeks perfectly, and the pizza was not as overwhelming as my meat lover's.. . For dessert I had a Meyer lemon gelato pie with candied lemon zest.  It was far from being upscale, but I would rather not have an upscale dessert. It was great and I ate every bite.. . Overall, I was very impressed.  I am not going to be eating here every week, but I will definitely return.  My meal at Pizzeria Mozza has actually made me very interested in trying Osteria Mozza.
