ReviewID: ANDplVgjJhduvBNAjgisvg
ReviewerID: yOi3du7-JJQHAcYCC7ClbA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kevin Rathbun Steak
Category: Steakhouses
Came here the other night with Nova and a friend to bring 2009 to a close. I honestly think this was our best experience yet. . . Despite the crush of people at KRS for NYE, we were seated almost immediately. We had a roomy banquet under the monstrous portrait of Kevin Rathbun, which was right next to a huge cluster of candles. It felt cozy and warm...something I can't always say about our previous visits. . . Overall the food was great, but the apps were probably the weakest part of the meal. Nova loved her Caesar salad, but Heather said her lobster fritters didn't compare to Chops (though she did say they were good). I liked the flavors in my butternut squash soup, but it was more of a puree. I really missed the velvety texture I've enjoyed in other versions. . . When it came to the beef, we were all quite pleased. Both Nova and I ordered the 10 oz. ribeye with bleu cheese butter. Each was cooked to order, had a nice char and an awesome melt-in-your-mouth flavor. Heather was also happy with her petite filet as well. My only knock was that my ribeye had much more fat and muscle tissue than Nova's. I expect some of that with a ribeye, but in my mind it wasn't the greatest cut.. . As I mentioned previously, the sides are typically great here. The only disappointment was the greasy and super-puffy onion rings. Of all the sides we ordered for the table, it was the only plate with anything left on it. You can't go wrong though with the mac and cheese tart or the creamed corn with jalapeños. The cheese grits and fries are also good. . . Though we probably shouldn't have, we opted for dessert at the end of the meal. Nova and Heather split a wonderful apple cobber while I got a delicious brownie sundae with chocolate and caramel sauces, as well as toffee bits and housemade Chantilly cream.. . Despite the few dishes that were merely good, this turned out to be an amazing meal. At $195 for the three of us, it obviously wasn't the kind we have everyday, but it was a great way to end a largely miserable year. Here's to 2010 and (hopefully) more meals at KRS!
