ReviewID: aOalHc4awPSSi4-dNlOaUw
ReviewerID: KxRk9x4NU9DPUA3HYOzX0A
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I've been a *big* fan of Father's Office in Santa Monica for a while, so naturally I was pretty excited when I heard about F.O. 2.0 in Culver City (although a new location on the EAST side would have made a hell of a lot more sense). Their beer selection and burgers really are as good as everyone raves about. But since that's all anyone raves about, I'm not going to say much more here.. . What I will say here is that the new location is in dire need of a hostess and an actual seating system. When you have a tiny hole-in-the-wall of a restaurant/bar (like F.O. Santa Monica), the free-for-all laissez-faire seating policy makes sense. But when you have a HUGE outdoor seating area as well as an enormous bar/table setup inside (like they do at F.O. Culver City), it only serves to aggravate people who must wait in a huge line just to get inside where they have to wait again to place an order, followed by (yup) MORE waiting to find a place to sit and enjoy their order.. . But, that's assuming you actually make it inside. Take this following example of my recent experience under serious consideration before you go- I will NEVER go back to their Culver City location again, and I'm seriously considering a company-wide ban despite my love for their burgers/beer.. . My girlfriend and I showed up, waited in the long line for about a half hour while our friend was on her way to meet us. We got towards the front of the line and she still hadn't made it, so we let a bunch of other folks go ahead of us. After a few minutes, our friend showed up, but the arrogant prick of a manager (a skinny bald guy with no tact, no class, and no soul) would not let her join us in line. He then informed us that the three of us would have to go to the back of the line if we wanted in, since our party wasn't all there together. "It just wouldn't be fair to all the people in line." WE ARE THE PEOPLE IN LINE you moron. We even offered to ask permission from everyone behind us, and at one point even got them all to raise their thumbs-up in agreement so that our friend could join us at the front, but to no avail. This jerk wouldn't budge, and I won't either on my decision not to ever again give them my money.. . I should also mention that we then drove a half-mile down Culver Blvd in search of another (better) gastropub and found Ford's Filling Station, which had a better beer selection, an equally amazing pub burger, and some of the nicest, fastest service I've ever experienced. And all without a reservation. So take note Father- don't screw with hungry folks, or we'll smear you on the internet.
