ReviewID: AOm0DtObgsS6pnBHBo4KOQ
ReviewerID: suEkmcRAiMt1GJMxbUzLgA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
We thought we would give Gloria's a try, yes we saw it on Triple D. Just like all the other overflowing guests that were standing in a line that was outside the door. You could definitely witness, once again, the power of television. . . We walked in on a Sunday night, around 6:30'ish. We were instructed, by Gloria, to sit at the bar. It is small only about six stools. As we sat there, little did we know that this was going to be an indication of the rest of the night. We sat for a few minutes watching the bartender in front of us work busily. We continued to sit there until all of a sudden a man asked me what I wanted, I ordered a beer and before I could order for my wife he was gone. I had to finally get the bartenders attention; she was right in front of us, to order for my wife. (At this point we figured out that speaking Spanish would be helpful, plus it would come in handy the rest of the evening.) We sat for about ten minutes and a table had opened up. Right next to a 10 top, with more little kids than you could imagine. Oh well. We sat and sat and sat and sat, until finally a small bowl of chips was dropped on the table. Then we sat and sat and sat some more. Until finally I asked for some salsa, once again a small bowled was dropped on the table. We then sat and sat and sat some more until finally the same guy who took the drink order at the bar was now our server also. We ordered and enjoyed our chips and salsa. People kept flowing in. However, as we looked around you could see people were frustrated by the lack of service. It was noticeable that this place was not use to the overwhelming crowd it was having to put up with. . . Our guacamole came, in a very small bowl for $4 and two pupusas cut in half. However when they arrived they were not hot and did not come with cabbage and red sauce. We started eating them without, then finally asked. Then before we were done with the appetizers our main dish came, the Carne Abodaba. It was very good; the pork was tender and flavorful. However, it was not delivered with the tortillas. We asked but after waiting several minutes, we continued to eat the dish without. . . We understood from overhearing comments that others were there because of the publicity on Triple D, however, for us the problem we had was not that they were busy but just the basics did not get handled. The service at the bar was poor, once we sat down at our table the wait time was very long and then the sides for the pupusas did not come with it and the tortillas did not come with the main dish. To say the least, it was not a very good dining experience. I can handle busy, but I can't handle not receiving the basics of dish delivery.  . . I will not go back at least until the 'pub' wears off (6 months minimum).
