ReviewID: ArFhvMdGGHundUHyASQOkg
ReviewerID: pA8Q4djhX7vkjA4n9GIWWg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
We went this Saturday for my 40th birthday celebration.  I felt like we were on the set of Iron Chef.  The plates were that out there.  . . My appetizer was the scallops crusted with quinoa.  It kind of had the texture of sesame chicken.  This was a homerun dish.  My wife had the Thai butternut soup.  That dish had a presentation like no other.  They brought the bowl out with the mussels and the lobster and the other ingredients in the bowl, then poured the soup on it, and added the foam.  Food porn at its finest.  . . My main course was the venison.  I loved the way it was prepared, and all the different flavor options that came with the dish.  My wife loved her halibut.. . Given what each of us ordered, I had no idea what wine would be compatible with both dishes.  Chad, the sommelier, came over and helped us pick a wine that worked.  It was a Sicilian red that featured the nerello moscalese grape.  Given that I always want to try a new grape, it was a perfect choice.  It went great with both of our meals.  I had to tease him about all the Nacionals offered on the port list.  ('Has anybody really ordered one of these bottles?' I asked him.)  We had a nice discussion about the uniqueness of the Nacional vines.  . . We ordered the dessert collection.  This was probably the part of the meal that my wife was most looking forward to, as Gale Gand is her idol.  We each had three desserts brought to us, along with a few other things thrown in, like Gale's infamous root beer float.  I had a late harvest Malbec to go with the dessert (another Chad recommendation), and it really shined with one of the berry dishes.  We would definitely come back here just to have dessert, if nothing else (because it ain't cheap to do the whole production).  I don't think there is another dessert experience like this anywhere, period.. . It's funny, because these dishes all look so small, and you wonder how you can possibly be stuffed by the end of the meal, but it really adds up in the end.  At the end, I could barely get out of my chair.  We really liked the service there.  There was none of the snooty treatment that one might fear at such an upscale establishment.  If you're planning a special occasion, this is a great place to do it.
