ReviewID: atsXwO0o9ojQhj9trIL5jQ
ReviewerID: TcMgLChkfdvO_3k1Fjrwww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: JCT Kitchen &amp; Bar
Category: Southern
JCT Kitchen (can't speak for the bar) is awesome. Good location, plenty of parking, nice ambiance, and good service. I made reservations for a group of four on a Saturday night at 6:15, and we definitely beat the crowd. There were no leftovers amongst our order of several different dishes:. . JCT Salad: Crisp and largely portioned. Nice blend of granny smith apples, green beans, romaine lettuce, nuts, and a creamy dressing.. . Crispy Beet Salad: Smaller than the above salad, but very fresh and healthy. Sliced beets, peaches, avocado, oranges, a small fried dollop of goat cheese, and a delicious citrus dressing.. . Short Ribs: Very tender meat atop creamy potatoes. Flavorful and not drenched in a heavy sauce.. . Fried Chicken: Two large pieces of juicy dark meat served next to a generous pile of green beans. Huge portion of mac and cheese - it came in a separate bowl and was a meal in itself! The mac was very white and creamy (like me!) - definitely not your fluorescent orange Velveeta variety.. . Ostrich Loin Over Pimiento Grits (one of the specials): My own loins trembled with excitement at the mention of OSTRICH as one of the evening specials! After Vortex, Fuddrucker's and Whole Foods banished this incredibly lean, low-cal, high protein red meat, I've given up. Tonight's ostrich was the best I've ever had. They had no problem preparing it bloody rare, and it was so tender.... so juicy....... The sliced filet was topped with roasted peaches and green beans, and the flavors went together well. I would've like a little bit more of a jous or drizzle, but no complaints here. I replaced the pimiento grits with grilled asparagus, and it was yummy.. . The complimentary bread and honey butter is great, too. Overall, the portions are very large, the presentation is pleasing, and the food is high quality. One con: they don't do anything for a diner's birthday, so don't expect a free dessert!. . I'm ashamed to admit I learned something life-changing from JCT today. I was given a black napkin because I was wearing a black dress... too bad I didn't realize it until I got up to leave and noticed enough white lint on my dress to clothe an infant.
