ReviewID: AtXycOsmDpmPqylNFomZwQ
ReviewerID: DIciwuIFTUChQ0ZbwVeCHQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
I finally did it. No, not "it" it. It being, made my way to Orochon to see what all the crazy hype's about. The buzz for this place was starting to become deafening when a few friends and I actually got it together and trekked over on a random Tuesday evening, so that at least one person in our party could partake in the Special #2 challenge. I talked big like I was up for the challenge too, but then quickly realized how silly it was and settled on something more tame and enjoyable when it came time to order. . . I was actually pleased with my selection, which I believe was the number 4 with soy broth. Just the right amount of spiciness, probably a slight notch above medium, so my nose was still runny. I thought everything about it was good, save the bell peppers, which were a bit random to me. The bamboo shoots and pork definitely elevated everything. . . My friend was able to complete the challenge just in time, about 25 minutes. Just watching him going at it with such tenacity and determination made my stomach turn a few times, but I believed in him and rooted him on while the others criticized his attempt. Another friend ordered the 2 but without any real intention on completing the task in 30 minutes. I tasted a few spoonfuls of his soup, and while other people say there's no real taste and only heat, they are obviously trippin. I actually liked the taste and flavor, but then again, don't ask me to drink it down. . . Overall a satisfying experience, although I'd never want to come here during a weekend since I'm sure the wait is super crappy. Make sure you check out the wall of champions, and take note of my boy Jon in his yellow Jamaica soccer jersey, photographed triumphantly with a face drenched in sweat and tears, and an empty bowl in hand. . . PS. There seems to be a misconception that if you finish the #2 in 30 minutes, your bowl is comped. This is not true, and really the only thing you get out of it is bragging rights and a really pissed off stomach. Make sure you get to the nearest unoccupied bathroom as quickly as possible, because it is guaranteed that you will need it.
