ReviewID: au5BhKIIKqZO2o1eWzZ_5w
ReviewerID: LJ8U5ZVnFpF8XNUR7DcUng
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Urban Belly
Category: Asian Fusion
I heard some rumblings coming from Avondale, most likely people's stomachs, about a new place opening up. I heard from the venerable and amazing Lindley D that when she was back in Chicago, she was headed there. There being this Urban Belly. Something about dumplings and really good Asian stuff. I heard from other notable foodies that they chatted about THIS was THE place to go. Hmmmm my curiosity peaked and then a ray of sunshine appeared in the distance. Yes, I could see it. It being an opportunity to visit. . . I came on a warm, sunny September day, with the loveliest of people, Brett, Colleen, Penny and Nikki and our luck held out to see a fairly empty place. Four large communal tables took the majority of the room with the counter holding court over the room. Counter service? Relax, you order at the counter, they bring the food to you. Yes, let us talk about this food. . . Truly amazing stuff, tasty, super fresh, no compromising wonderful food. Since our group was large, we ordered about 3/4 of the menu. We got all the dumplings, almost all the noodles, one of the rices and almost all of the side dishes. To name all would take all of this space... and well I don't feel like it. The dumplings were simply superb. Fresh, some steamed, some pan fried, but above all phenomenal. I do have to say the top three would be 3. Pork and Cilantro, 2. Chicken and Mushroom and 1. Lamb and Brandy. Although if I was offered any of them I would greedily take them. Fried rice, although we only got the pork belly, (some how I thought Brett got the Short Rib and Scallion), it was good, but to be honest wasn't my favorite. I do want to come back and try the Short Rib one and will hold my opinion until doing so. Then we come to the side dishes. If anything get the Wrinkle Beans. There was a lovely depth of flavor that is making my mouth water just thinking about it right now. The noodles, well... they were all good. Again deep flavors, well seasoned, heartiness that made me love them and will appreciate them on a cold and blustery day. To be honest though I think I found my winner in the Rice Cake, Chicken, Mango and Korean Chili Sauce. Can you really taste the mango? I didn't and I don't care. I was savoring that hot and spicy broth too much. Letting it the beads of sweat form on my arched brow.. mmmmm... I loved it. . . The staff, including the chef, very friendly, very nice and made sure we enjoyed everything. I will make this very well known, the place isn't big so don't let your group be big or you might have to wait. Come early, because I will be coming here often seeing as it isn't too far from home, perhaps I will bring a friend, a six pack, (its BYOB!!), but I will bring my appetite and I look forward to my very soon subsequent visits.
