ReviewID: AV6GfNmKqQrRySsxoWXDxQ
ReviewerID: KQcllhHprGDMB0ODxhj3_g
Rating: 1
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
We came out to David Burkes on a Wednesday night to celebrate having a little extra money to spend, and in this economy we wanted to make it count! The waiter was in a hurry, rushed through the specials in that "I just tried to memorize this and couldn't care less" way that is sooo annoying especially when you're expected to leave him $50 later on. Appetizer was a thinly sliced beef over their brick of salt and sadly that was the best part of the meal. I ordered the Delmonico and read my lips IT TASTED LIKE RAT POISON. I had some of mt boyfriends 55 day and it was good! So I'm sitting here with this absolutely INEDIBLE $60+ steak and when the waiter decided to bother to come back around I told him politely that I thought there was something wrong due to the POISON taste. He said he'd get the chef. 20 minutes later he tells me the chef is on break so it might be a minute. 10 minutes later he basically said that he didn't know where the chef was -- it was in the middle of dinner service where the heck did he go? -- and that it was my fault for not liking the dry aging process. I insisted that there was something incredibly wrong with that particular piece of meat and he wouldn't listen. He just ran off, didn't offer to replace it, take off the check or anything helpful. So the check came and we had to pay for garbage can filler. Ridiculous. If I had known how TERRIBLE this place was I would have gone to Whole Foods, bought my own dry aged steak and made it at home and saved like $200!.  Oh yeah and the chorizo in the chorizo mashed potatoes tasted like pieces of slim jim.. I'm still livid about this place. What happened to the customer is always right? What happened to make it right if it's not? And what happened to simple caring? For classy restaurant they sure don't give a rats ass (which is what the steak tasted like) about their customers.
