ReviewID: AVTSCnnvXGv8hPZvpQiR6Q
ReviewerID: kPYu2OCfxk4Ugr5BWGdY2w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
I will not be going back to Bossa Nova.  The food was ok.  Not amazing, but ok, especially given the modest price.. . But the service was downright AWFUL.  . . Here's what went down:. My roomate, her boyfriend, and a few friends traipsed down on a cold and damp Friday night for dinner.. 1) We were forced to wait outside.  In the cold.. 2) Valet is $8  For that part of Sunset?  Ridiculous.. 3) We were seated at a table that was WAY too small for our party of 7.. 4) The waitress took FOREVER to take our appetizer order.. 5) It took forever just to get a chair for the seventh person in our party.. 6) The waitress too half our order and then just wandered off before our table was finished ordering.. 7) She brought out the wrong food.. 8) They spilled my beer.. 9) She HIT my roomate in the head with a plate.  HARD.  Then waved a fork around to laugh at her blunder and nearly got our friend Ron in the eye.. 10) My food was bland and unimpressive.  Sauteed vegetables tasted like a frozen mix reheated and the fish was overcooked.. 11) When our 7th person FINALLY got their food she made a joke about hitting my roomate in the head by grabbing her boyfriend's head and shoving it into the table as a joke to suggest that she was trying to avoid beaning another person.  My roomate's boyfriend was understandably perturbed by this crazy woman shoving him around.. 12) Appetizer dishes were slow to get cleared.  The table got CRAMPED.. 13) Waitress continued to see cracked out.  We suggested that she not charge us for the meal that went into my roomate's head and she came back saying she could offer us a free dessert.  BS.  A table of seven doesn't want one free dessert.  That's a chintzy upsell.  Considering how we'd been manhandled all evening a free meal, or comping our beers we'd ALREADY had would've made sense.  But not one free dessert.  That's a cheap ploy to try to get the rest of us to order more food.. 14) After we tried to flag down a manager she comped us the meal.. 15) All the beers were sweet.  An interesting variety but this diabetic girl wanted something that wasn't a sweet wheat beer.  Only a couple of choices.. . Ok...that's the bad stuff.  Here's what was good:. 1) The picayune steak was good.. 2) The table bread was good.  Of course, they ran out of it so we got a few pieces for our large party.. 3) The Chicken Brochette appetizer was fatty and delicious.  That part was good.  Too much sauce though.  Who needs a bowl of sauce?. . Ok.  So good steak, good, if scant, table bread.  And a good appetizer.. . I might have returned for a steak had the experience been less miserable.  But it was awful.  There are lots of decent steaks on the planet.  I don't need to suffer through the indignaties of dining in such a chaotic and unpleasant atmosphere just for a piece of meat.. . Our friend insists the We Ho location is MUCH better.
