ReviewID: AWK1pA1czarmoBeLtdub1A
ReviewerID: JTsIuvsmTlVLUxX42BkBIQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
#95. . Last winter when my sister and her husband drove up Highway 1 from LA to Norcal, they stopped in Santa Barbara. It was there that my brother in law said he had the best burger in his life. I later found out that the restaurant was called The Hungry Cat. It became even more of a mystery when I found out that the restaurant is primarily is a seafood and rawbar.. . When I looked online and discovered that they had a Hollywood location, I just knew I had to have it. And, I did. It comes with blue cheese, bacon, avocado, lettuce, red onion, and fries ... for $16. I'm not exactly sure of the weight but it's definitely at least 6oz. You can also choose to add a fried egg for $2, which I did. Take a look at the masterpiece here: . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . I did find the burger difficult to eat with hands. I first tried cutting it in half and picking it up, but I could barely bite the stack. In the end, I decided to use a fork and knife for the second half. If you order with an egg, watch out though - once you pop the yolk, it's bound to get messier. As for the fries, I did find the seasoning a bit heavy. They were undeniably too salty for my taste. However, I'm sure that was a one-time thing.. . Service was only okay. They seemed to be a bit understaffed on this Sunday lunch hour. Initially, we were seated outside on the patio, but then they seated another party (3) next to us. And then another party (2) next to us on the other side. With an entirely open patio, that was unnecessary and a little awkward.. . Yes, $18 is expensive for a burger. In fact, it almost seems excessive but if you want the Pug, you're going to be shelling out the cash - there's no way around it. All this "best burger" talk is all subjective in the end. Everyone has their own preferences and opinions. However, I will say that I do slightly prefer the Pug over the Office Burger @ FO. I have yet to try Blue Dahlia and 8oz. BB.. . I really want to try their seafood next time. I'll be back.
