ReviewID: aXpRaslBDbzPDkQwVgLYAQ
ReviewerID: Z-qG5sUYv383gzOHULsKeA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daddy D&#39;z BBQ Joynt
Category: Barbeque
BBQ unlike any other restaurant food requires a higher balance of supply and demand.  When the BBQ'er has made a simple mistake of underestimating a crowd, they have to play catch up- which means less slow cooked meat and more BBQ sauce to cover up the rush.  Good BBQ takes time, BBQ restaurants have to find the balance between timing and size of crowds demanding BBQ.  Suffice to say the most uneven thing about Daddy D'z is the crowd.  . The best time to show up is during the week, before a dinner rush.  You are going to find tender meat, a healthy supply of sauce and larger side items.  If you show up on a Friday at 7pm, you can expect chewier meat with smaller side helpings.  Its a mom and pop joint so things are gonna be different each time.   Normally this kind of uneven thing aggravates me but since I know firsthand the painstaking task of smoking meat, I give them some room for error. . The servers have been there for quite some time and they are true southerners who will help you out with a bit of sass.  You have to understand that they are just kidding around with you, but Ive seen it go awry on dense patrons.  I appreciate their no bullshit attitudes- once the owner was taking a phone order, and then exclaimed in irritation- "you either want it spicy or you want it sweet, I can't make up your mind for you!" Then hung up on the customer.  It warmed my heart a little. . The sides are alone worth going back for.  Everything is delicious, except for the green beans, which are about status quo beans from a can.  I recommend the fried zucchini and the greens.  The cornbread is just as touch and go as the ribs, but when its good, its damn good.   The spicy sauce isn't very spicy, but they have a varied selection of hot sauce on the table if you need to kick things up to a burning BM later. . Overall, I dig the place.  I wish the patio area was a little more organized, but you can't beat a cheap bite of Q and beer.  Any naysayers should stick to Kenny Rogers or wherever the art of BBQ is not understood fully.
