ReviewID: ay610bneUcuaF7uTKnsmiQ
ReviewerID: iMpvRmy9X04ElLDbyvB7-A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
My first experience with The Apple Pan was on some first date thing. Impressions be gone, I was hungry and just wanted to rub my face on much talked about burgers. So we arrive and there's a massive line. Saturday, dinner time, everybody's doing the same thing. We're nothing special. Damn it. Neither of us were sure how to manage a seat around the U-shaped counter so we stood around trying not to piss anybody off. There were no hosts/hostesses or reservations, just guts, and crafty positioning around people who were nearing empty burger wrappers (though at the time we did not account for the timeless...charm of pie). After about fifteen minutes (with people grabbing up seats, our stomachs growling all over the place), neither of us knew what to do so we left. Instead we ate at In-N-Out. We really failed at life that night.. . However, I recently went back. Bit my lip, buckled down, and yelled at my heart to shut the hell up and walked in. Luckily, we went during that magical limbo between 4:00 PM to 5:00 PM. Empty seats beckoned to us like sirens. The smell of cooking meat and buckets of apple relish hit us hard. It also helped that I was going with somebody who had been there before and easily steered my doe-eyed naivete in the direction of a seat.. . Definitely count on splitting up if you're in a large group (whatever it takes!). Our party of four split into two.. . The menu was simple, straight forward, and sounded delicious. I ordered the Steak Burger and it was great. The fries were delicious (not the best) but I seldom complain about fries. They just need to be hot and within my reach and they can do no wrong. Best of all, they serve Dr. Pepper. No polite smiles that say no "we're too lame to serve awesomeness", no surrogates, just the real deal! In odd yet quirky little paper cones. Yay!. . I had to say no to the pie because it was getting close to that dinner rush line. I felt the eyes burn into my spleen and heard the saliva drop. Mark my words pie, I haven't even started but I'm not done with you!. . I must say that old man sass cannot be beat. Just ask the two jerks who came in and insisted on ranch and thousand island dressing. The gruff dude at the counter mixed up some apple relish, ketchup, the old mayo, and shrugged. It's hot, it's busy, what else can you do but be a smart ass? . . The price is reasonable for the quality. For about 10 bucks you can probably get double this spread at another joint but I'd say that my recent experience (and now emboldened self-confidence) warrants repeat trips and the extra couple of dollars. Cause you know that extra two dollars is for the sass. So good!
