ReviewID: ay_6log9nzWOlS5GjGlhWA
ReviewerID: tt95jFVbkz-SYr2CAM61gA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
First visited some time in early 2007.  Last visit was December 1st, 2007.. . Went here twice so far at the recommendation of a friend.  Great environment but the location seems a tad difficult to get into.  They have valet parking right in front.  So if you're not okay with having someone park your car, you'd have to find parking on the street, I believe.. . First time I went, I took my sister-in-law and it was a very nice experience.  Very "romantic" yet relaxing.  I had made reservations online from . http://OpenTable.com.  so it was a breeze getting a table.  Only waited about 5-10 minutes.  Although it sure did seem somewhat crowded (I believe it was either a Friday or Saturday evening).. . We both ordered the garlic cloves appetizer dish that is basically heated in oil and spread on bread.  That sure felt somewhat "oily" but interesting.  I'm not too into garlic but it was surely a new taste.. . She had ordered the rabbit and I ordered some fish, I believe (don't remember now).  The food was fairly decent but slightly higher priced than normal.  But, given the location and the atmosphere, it was somewhat expected.  I don't remember the total for the dinner as she had "stolen" the bill from me.  :/. . The second time I went was for a "first date", so to speak.  Great experience again and we only waited for about 5-10 minutes WITHOUT a reservation.  We both went a tad bit more dressed up than usual and it seemed fine (although there were quite a bit of people in really casual attire).. . I had ordered us the same garlic appetizer dish which she said was quite interesting but very "oily" (which is to be expected since it's basically garlic cooked in oil) as well as some cheese/meat bread "snacks".  Those were actually quite good yet the bread seemed too crispy for my tastes.  I would order these again (probably not the garlic dish even though I believe it's one of their specialties).. . For dinner, she had ordered the rabbit (based on my recommendation from before) while I had ordered the blackened pasta.  The pasta was superb and I would definitely order that again!  Loved it!. . The service BOTH times was quite excellent.  The waiters seem very friendly and the hostesses are extremely friendly.. . All in all, the entire experience was delightful.  The only downfall of this establishment was the difficulty in parking without valet (I used valet both times) as well as the entrance.  Seems too 'trafficy", if that's even a word.. . If you like garlic, however, this is THE place to check out.  Definite tourist attraction.  ;). .  - Curtis
