ReviewID: aYEkbc0_6r05uT9aEepwlQ
ReviewerID: HHVnXxa7MAadnP4uUxc6HQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Shopsin&#39;s
Category: Diners
After seeing the documentary I like Killing Flies I was intrigued enough to hunt this place down in even another location removed from the end of the film.  I had absolutely no drama getting a seat as I was alone and just sat at the counter after asking the waiter if that was okay.  It took me a while to realize that the chap sitting in a large easy chair only a few feet away from me in a deep sleep was Kenny Shopsin himself.  A regular sitting next to me was making his own coffee and joking with the other cook which I figured out was Kenny's son Zak.  Zak was swearing at some passersby who were also vendors in the Essex food court but in a very funny good natured NY kind of way.  I minded my own business, was very courteous to the waiter and made sure that my cell phone was turned off.  I was planning on eating a big meal that evening so I just went with the Nutella shake and the patois sandwich, a spicy jerk chicken type thing with feta.  The Nutella shake was fantastic, as good as you will get of this sort of thing on the planet.  When the sandwich arrived I was first a little disappointed.  It looked about the size of tuna fish sandwich that I would make about three of at home and I would stll be hungry.  After a half I reconsidered, the filling was an amazingly tasty mixture of chicken, spice, feta and all round surprising taste.  It was so rich in flavor and depth that by the last bite I was completely filled.  I really couldnt have eaten anything else but was a bit jealous of some of the egg plates that looked great..   . Suddenly, after the regular and Zak had joked about Kenny for a few minutes he woke up and started immediately into a conversation with his customer and pretty much ignoring everything else around him.  I don't think I have ever seen a food emporium with such a small size, not at all what I expected.  There are three counter spots, thee two tops in the corner and three more two tops in the hallway near the counter.  I don't know what happens on a weekend because even on a sleepy Tuesday.  the place was 2/3 rds filled and meals take a while.. Kenny had a cell phone (!) and called on some errand that he then left for.  I finished and paid and then thought about taking a picture, after a walk around and much deliberation I took a couple quick snaps that werent very good because I got a feeling that this wouldnt be appreciated, I don't know why.  Just as I was framing deliberately the perfect shot I heard a "hey, hey" from behind me.  It was Kenny who then wagged his finger at me as if I was a kindergartner and he made a sour face that made it clear that no pics were allowed.. Ill consider this a badge of honor even though the rebuke was quite mild. I think Kenny is probably taking it easy with the yelling these days.. The pluses: amazing food, if I lived in NY I would selectively hit the menu and taste all the good stuff which I'm sure is unique and marelous.. Negatives: Two big ones are size, the place is just too small, it's clear that Kenny doesnt really want to run a big place which I undestand because of the care that each meal requires but this place is like a phone booth with zero real atmosphere.  Stil some quirky stuff n the walls but clearly just a stab at recreating the atmosphere of previous locations.  Also cost, a sandwich (14 bucks) a shake (6 bucks) tax and tip 26 bucks.  Yes, that's NY and I should have ordered a more substantial plate but still that's a little steep for what you get.  I was glad I went though and didnt really experience any of the hostility of previous posters, I think thats because of when I went which if you want to do this picka weekday with an off time. Weekends here must be a nightmare
