ReviewID: ayLMO5PNyF_aghkiOvCSMQ
ReviewerID: ehhZiP7MmRI9-jU2UMbh7Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kopi Travelers Cafe
Category: Coffee & Tea
I'll leave what I wrote before (when I gave it 5 stars) below.  But here is the latest:. . My wife and I made a special trip on my day off.  It's not her favourite place, but it used to be mine.  She ordered an egg sandwich which is supposed to have fluffy steamed eggs and cheese on a bagel.  My wife informed me (only after we left) that the inside of her eggs was cold, and a bit black.  I asked her why she didn't send it back, and she said she knew I liked to go there, so she didn't want to make things weird for me.  That's just like my wife, always thinking of me instead of herself... I was really frustrated that she accepted something less than she deserved, but anyway...  the service was also lacking.  Only one waitress was working the whole place herself, with a second guy mostly standing at the counter, idle more than half the time.  The owners seemed too busy with other things to notice that the server was overwhelmed and the customers underserved.  Also, though I asked for extra salsa with my meggsicano, it was doled out as though they were running out of the stuff.  Quite disappointing, and I'm very likely to look for other coffeehouses to be my "home away from home".  The green-tea-chai-latte is very good, though, and so is the coffee, though you may die waiting for a refill.  It's just not worth the cross-town trip for me any more.. . Now, the old review:  This is my home away from home, and has been since I moved into the neighbourhood ten years ago.  Even though I moved to the Midway Airport area two years ago, i still make the 35-45 minute trip to have breakfast at Kopi when I can.   The food is of high quality, the coffee is excellent, the prices are reasonable and the service is usually pretty good, though sometimes the place can get really busy.  The owners are nice people, and Al Rose is also a damn good musician (check out his CD "Gravity of Crow" -- it's well worth it).. . There is nothing pretentious about Kopi at all, it's really comfortable and friendly, and they sell fair-trade organic coffee to boot!. . I highly recommend the green tea chai latte.  It's the ultimate comfort drink and tastes of honey.  I also personally love the meggsicano -- steamed eggs with onions, tomato and black olives served with tortilla strips and salsa.
