ReviewID: ayMSpc5_7_MAn85HeQAotw
ReviewerID: 4capVxc7JH2A92a4tF3KAQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
A birthday dinner from the chick landed us in the arms of Craft on a recent Saturday night. We arrived just before our 8:30 dinner reservation and were happily greeted by the two hostesses who promptly led us to our table. After settling in and trying to decide what to end our day long fast with, our waiter came by and took our order.. . I went with the warm spinach salad with bacon, the flatiron steak, pureed potatoes. the assorted mushrooms and finally a Chimay Bleue to wash it all down. Chicky ordered the short rib and a glass of wine to accompany her meal. . . An amuse bouche of a potato chip topped with potato salad(?) came out first, pretty tasty and hopefully a foreshadow of what was to come.  The spinach salad arrived at our table soon after and it failed to disappoint - well salted, the pork belly was very tasty, crispy and there was enough to share with my date. Our entrees made it's way to our table sans pomp and circumstance, stomachs ready to be filled. My steak was great although i didn't personally like the fact that it came cut , but it didn't take away from the fact that the food was still good. The short rib was insane - tender, juicy, well portioned and served in a little black pot i wanted to steal for my own kitchen at home. The mushrooms were the best I've ever had. Earthy, sweet, and buttery. Damn good. The potatoes were good too, rich, smooth, all gone in under sixty seconds. All in all, the food was great...but the service i was wasn't too fond of. I gotta say that the hostesses were the nicest people of the evening, warmly greeting us on the way in with their warm smiles and wishing us a good night on the way out. I know that's their job and all, but honestly, the staff in the dining area didn't make me feel all that special.  Our server seemed a bit uninterested in talking to us about the menu, we weren't checked on once by our main server while eating our entree, and the fact that there were no less than 5 different people waiting on us the entire night just didn't sit well with me. We were showed the desert menu twice - i know it's no biggie but with 5+ people tending me i would think that they would at least be on the same page. And being seated so close to one of the ordering computer stations put us within earshot of everything the chatty servers had to to say about fellow customers. Not so great. Anyways, the food was great, the service was average, and I'd probably go back one day. . . ***there ya go L...it's done.
