ReviewID: B-ig7jyoDmPpqQeRqvGoCg
ReviewerID: JTsIuvsmTlVLUxX42BkBIQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
#126. . Yamashiro has got to be three stars, I'm sorry. I know a lot of folks point out the view and the grounds, and rightfully so. Yes, the facility is beautiful and the view is amazing. My date and I got a nice, quiet table in the corner of the Sunset Room. With the large windows all around the restaurant's perimeter, it had a great view of LA. If you're looking to impress someone, request a window table in the Sunset Room when you make your reservation. While we didn't get a good look around the whole place, the combined dining areas seem to accommodate a lot of folks.. . As a restaurant, your main business is food, right? I found Yamashiro's food to be rather lackluster for the prices that they charge. It wasn't bad per se, but if you're going to charge in the mid-teens for appetizers and 30+ for entrees, I'm expecting to be somewhat blown away. Not only that, but you're charging me $8 to valet park too. I'm not sure if I missed the self-park lot, but I think valet is your only option. I mean, who's going to make their date walk up that hill.. . Anyhow, on to the food:. . -Seaweed Salad - $8: soy dashi, tofu, sesame. If you've ever eaten seaweed salad, this is your pretty standard fare. It was fine. $8 is a little pricey however.. . -Truffle Hamachi - $16: truffle-ponzu, teardrop tomato-garlic confit, micro-arugula. I could tell the fish was fresh, which was probably the most important aspect. Sometimes, that in of itself, is enough to justify a higher price. You could certainly taste the truffle in the ponzu sauce, but it wasn't overpowering. I love yellowtail and the flavors were great.. . -Seared Ahi Tuna - $33: sautéed spinach, caramelized onion smashed potatoes, white-soy tomato confit. This is what my date ordered. I had a small taste, and IIRC, the ahi tuna was sesame crusted. I might be wrong. She liked it.. . -American Wagyu Steak - $39: roasted shishito pepper &amp; brocollini hash, crispy onions, tomato-ginger salsa. I wasn't really sure what the Himalayan Salt Plate was. And as a $30 add-on, I passed. The wagyu steak was good, but not great. I suppose the name wagyu earns some style points, but American wagyu is not wagyu in the truest sense. It's really a half-breed of Japanese Wagyu and American Angus. I was a sucker for the tomato ginger salsa however. It did taste pretty good with the steak.. . The service was pretty attentive I thought, especially since we were stashed in a corner. I suppose weekends generally do have the A-team. The only mishap was when the busboy was pouring our water in the beginning. He knocked over one of the filled glasses, but quickly rectified the situation by changing out the entire table setting.
