ReviewID: b-xSRdz4TAFUMd_oaY-nfg
ReviewerID: dl2ef6ha0_nXvHodLCaKMw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Yeah! Burger
Category: Burgers
The service was well beyond my expectations though the food was only ok.... . I had the beef burger with bacon jam, sprouts, onions, lettuce, tomato, on wheat bun along with an order of the 50/50 (fries and onion rings), and concrete (soft serve with suspended candy chunks).. . The burger was probably the biggest disappointment for me.  It was a double stack of some pretty thin patties without much flavor.  I realize that the beef that it was made from was grass-fed and special but it just wasn't very tasty.  One might think if you would go through all that trouble to acquire such high quality beef, you would also season it adequately so that it wouldn't taste like those stamped frozen patties sold at supermarkets.. . The fries were dry and overcooked.  The way that they were made were slightly reminiscent of what In-N-Out fries are like out west (except those are usually pretty freakin awesome).  The onion rings were slightly soggy with oil when they came out.  The thin rings didn't quite hold up structurally to the process due to their thin profiles.. . The "concrete" was interesting.  It is advertised as vanilla soft serve blended at high speed with a topping of your choice.  The topping I picked was the chocolate almond bark.  The finished product arrived as a large cup of soft serve with large (we're talking 4"x1" thick) chunks of this candy suspended in the cup.  I don't quite get what the gimmick is since the large candy chunks neither fit through any straw or on any spoon provided and had to be removed from the cup by hand to eat.  I'm filing that one under "awkward for consumption". . . The burger toppings really had to pull their weight considering this meal costed $18 and I still had to squeeze two stars out of this review.. . My friend had the veggie burger and that was definitely not worth the $5 or $6 that it cost.  It was soggy, bland, and got very lost in the toppings.  I'll try the bison burger next time and see if that's where the star is.
