ReviewID: b3Wuh-6eiF3u9SoFAOaO1Q
ReviewerID: EiwxlbR8fb68lMgEXhcWKA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
Yummy deliciousness can be found here in the form of thousands and I do mean thousands of pastries, baked goods, sweets, salties, potato balls and sandwiches (I'm sure their drinks are great too but I have yet to sample ...).. . This place is packed, when I read the review about it being like disneyland, wow was it ever! The line for the bakery wrapped around inside the store and there were people everywhere. I felt like I was in the middle of Shanghai in China ... people looking for seats, people confused at the menu, people just confused in general.  Yes its not quite clear what you're supposed to do so I just got in a line and the bf went around asking. It turns out there are two lines except one of them is a coffee only line, one of them is more of a food type line, and one of them is dedicated bakery but also for food and/or coffee.. . I ended up in the bakery line, which I'm guessing was the longest and waited it out. 20 minutes later, or so ... perhaps longer, I found myself shouting (since it was the only way you can be heard across the counter amidst 20 other people shouting at the counter) to a lady who took my order by pure memory as I told her all the items I wanted (which I thought was quite a bit).. . I did get the potato balls as recommended and WOW what a surprise! The potato balls, as I unexpectedly bit into one, was not JUST filled with potato. I mean, I've had delicious fried potato balls before, which were, don't get me wrong, delicious. But these potato balls have MEAT in them! Ground beef specifically, seasoned and spiced perfectly with ... something or other ... so good. I think I could just order a dozen of those for lunch.. . Their breads are actually what was more notable than their pastries (although their muffins are MOIST!) as I always end up getting some kind of raisin walnut bread at these bakeries and this place had a delicious version of the raisin walnut perfectly sliced for a return trip from SoCal in the car ... **nom nom**. Big fan, not that I need to say anymore about this crazy place.
