ReviewID: b5duiVR1eyxiEGtuv0axdA
ReviewerID: 71MDmeY-Jhhs8o1Oof5eGQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Overland Café
Category: American (New)
Never again.. . All right, I'm officially done with this place.  This used to be one of my favorite spots in LA. I was a LOYAL customer.  I used to schedule meetings here, take my family here, brunch with friends.  Pretty much I made any excuse I could to dine here.. . But then things started changing. It started getting a lot louder for one.  The atmosphere wasn't nearly as laid back as it was.  Then, one time I went, there was this large group talking ENTIRELY too loudly and really disrupting all the patrons in our room.  We had just been seated and requested to be seated in the other room.  We were told rather bluntly that the other room wasn't any better.  We should have just left at this point.  No effort was made to speak with the disruptive party, and no effort was made to try to make the disturbed patrons any happier for having to deal with such a rude group.  . . After that I was very hesitant to go back, I really faulted the restaurant not on it's clientele, but on it's customer service.  You can't have 6 separate parties suffer for the benefit of one group.  I would think that as a restaurant you wouldn't want loud and disruptive people coming back, particularly when it's going to cost you business.  That's a failure of customer service.. . My last trip back proved that I was right about service falling off.  I stepped in to get some cake TO GO (I wasn't ready to spend more than a few minutes in the restaurant after my last horrible experience).  This is what clinched it for me, I ordered two slices of cake to go.  I saw this mangled piece of cake in the box (it looked like someone had tried to split that piece in half and failed) when i ordered but I assumed she wouldn't give me that one.  Boy, was I wrong.  When she replaced the cake in the case I noticed the mangled piece was gone.  I asked the server to open the box she was taping shut and upon seeing the "ugly cake" asked for a new slice.  Who does that?  Seriously, she was trying to pass of bad goods.  I was pissed.   I honestly couldn't believe she was trying to give me something so damaged.  I should also mention that I requested a larger box specifically because I was going to plate these pieces of cake for a party later and I didn't want them getting squished in a small box.  . . Anyway, another server fixed the situation and gave me the "ugly cake" on the house.  Which I guess is a plus. But I didn't want a third piece of cake, I couldn't serve it, so it just ended up in the trash.  So she gave me a free piece of trash and charged me full price for the pieces of cake I actually wanted.  . . If I hadn't had such good experiences in the past, Overland Cafe would be getting 1 star.  But good memories are worth 1 star, I guess.. . Good Bye Overland Cafe, it was fun while it lasted.
