ReviewID: B8qaa1UEuN98SvAC2WUgeg
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Top Flr
Category: American (New)
Though lacking the requisite number of Os in their name, Top Flr will elicit the O-Face from a certain population of intown clientele.  "OH, it's so CUTE!"  "OH, the food is so DAINTY!"  "OH, these drinks are YUMMY!". . Unfortunately, I am not one of those intown clientele, reserving my O-Face for more intimate encounters.  And in the case of Top Flr, my O-Face was merely an Okay Face.  Disclosure:  I've only been here twice.  Both times, I walked away feeling good, but not especially blown away.. . The space is small and up a flight of stairs.  If stairs vex you, there's SOME room downstairs, but not much.  Stephen Hawking, you may have a Nobel Prize in Physics, but you're SOL at Top Flr.  The upper room is (and I use this word sparingly in my life) "cozy."  Small, mostly black and white with some color splashed in between and patterns to break up the rest.  With the small space and acid jazz pumped through the PA, it felt fairly New Yorky, if such an adjective existed.  If you're going in a group of 6 or more, go early, go late or don't go at all.. . The service was efficient if not personable.  The food seemed to take a while, though I wasn't in a hurry in either visit so it bothered me none.  They need to upgrade to larger water glasses because I think I had like 5 refills as the thimble they provided didn't slake my thirst. I know we're in a drought, but c'mon.  This isn't Dune.. . On to the food.  The roasted vegetables were great--probably the best thing on the table.  The hummus was a close second.  My pork loin, however, was a little dry.  They grilled it a tad too long.  The prices aren't as reasonable as some would have you believe.  They're not bad, but they are higher than the typical T.G. McFunsters out in Norcross.  When you factor in the ala carte sides with your entre, they run you around $18-19.  However, the ala carte sides are appreciated when you're tackling portion control.  It also makes sharing them easier around the table.. . Overall, take Top Flr out for a spin. It's worth buying a vowel or two, but not the entire alphabet.  I'd give it 3.5 stars if I could, but I won't round up.
