ReviewID: b8qOzyb7vCkHqvTaGf1Hig
ReviewerID: _xFrjg55612CA61OQ4PrdQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
Dear Tom Colicchio,. . I love you on Top Chef. As a judge, you come off as knowledgeable, honest, respectful, with the right dose of levity. Your quirky good looks and sparkly bright scalp are a good counterbalance for Padma's almost unbearable beauty. . . But I've been holding in a secret for over a year now, and after last night's ironic turn of events at the Judgement table, it's time to let the cat out of the bag. Meow. . . First, I can't help but take note that you've been over-saturated in the public media as of late. Diet Coke, Credit Cards, Macy's--what's up, Tom? Has the recession hit your fleet of expensive restaurants that hard, or do you have some kind of gambling habit spiraling out of control? I liked your face a lot more before I saw it seventeen times a day. . . You see, there was a time when I liked you so much that I wanted nothing more than to eat at your Los Angeles restaurant, Craft. So, of all the restaurants that my boyfriend could not afford, I chose this one for my birthday splurge in the summer of '08. The guilt over those wasted $150 or so dollars compounded with the fear of dissenting from the accolades of the nation's best established food critics is what kept me quiet. That is, until last night when your critique of a contestant's misuse of halibut summoned the most traumatic of memories..... . I thought I would learn something about, well, the *craft* of cooking from eating your food, feel the same excitement I get from watching the innovative dishes from the bright young chefs that you mentor on the show, but to my utter dismay, I felt nothing. The beets were just beets, the short ribs were just short ribs. . . Oh, Tom, It's not the letter I would like to write you. But I have to mention the halibut. What's the preparation again, something like a bacon broth? It certainly sounded appealing on the menu, but...I have to tell you, I am not exaggerating-- It was inedible. There was some-forgive me- disgusting flavor that was neither halibut nor bacon that I just could not get past. As expensive as the meal was, I had to tell my boyfriend that I was too "full" to eat my share of it. . . Ever since that meal, I've had such a hard time reconciling the sage advice you dish out on Top Chef with the gross halibut and bland dishes. I want to believe that I was wrong, that I ordered the wrong thing or that perhaps my palate wasn't well that day. I want to give you the benefit of the doubt, somehow, in some way. I hope you prove me wrong, someday, because I would really like to believe that you are a master chef. . . But you really shouldn't use the words *halibut* and *ruin* in the same sentence. Like when Paris shows her hoo-hoo to the paps, Janet Jackson has no business commenting, you know? . . Your Fan Always,. Sarah Beth
