ReviewID: b98RZ3Q3dLTmXnwe_s5Qyw
ReviewerID: LJ8U5ZVnFpF8XNUR7DcUng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Perennial
Category: American (New)
It was restaurant week and I had dinner plans with friends I had not seen in quite some time. They kept telling me was, "Gee, I hope it got better than last time I came". Those reassuring words gave me just a slight twinge of nervousness, yet by the end of the night, raves and praise was coming out of their mouths. What happened in between?. . Let's break down the game footage. . . Our server, not only stunningly beautiful, but really, just stunningly charming and worked our table well. She joked with us, made us laugh and just really help to make our night go in the best direction possible. I think she quickly figured out that even though we were there for restaurant week that the three-course menu was just not going to suffice. While I went with a glass of prosecco to start the night off, my friends shared a bottle of malbec. We quickly dissected the main menu for possible additional starters. Going with our truffled gnocchi and risotto, we added a lovely himachi, (maybe?), crudo and sweetbreads to get the night going. The gnocchi was the clear winner and just amazing, however the risotto was an unexpected treat. It was certainly a change of pace with out really not making it risotto. The blend of squash and seeds and soft aborio rice certainly gave a textural twist, but the flavor was subtle yet complex. The sweet breads? Well, when you blend it in with the egg and the sauces and everything else, it got a little lost, but certainly wasn't gone. The special we had, the fish, was good yet the relish over powered the flavor of the fish and certainly was too much. . . We went with two short ribs, a duck and a salmon for our mains. I really enjoyed my salmon, it was crispy and flavorful and tender on the inside. A little on the overdone side, but really, pretty darn great. The braised short ribs were falling apart as you picked it up and when it was in your mouth, just melting away. The duck was a hit for my friend, although I never tried it. Oh, did I mention we got sides? Oh yes.  We did. The bacon mac and cheese was delicious, the bacon thick and chewy and added some great smokiness and texture. The polenta was good, but with the short ribs that came on top, (hell yeah there was short ribs on that polenta!), blended a little too much and made a little soupy of a mess. But really, who am I kidding? Of course all of it disappeared in to our mouths. . . The dessert were good, although at this point my lil' stomach was about ready to burst from all the goodies we had, but really, you just had to get dessert.... I mean it was part of the three courses. I went with their twist on the strawberry cheesecake forsaking the chocolate caramel dessert. (Seriously, I think I was being possessed by some demonic force not to go for the latter), but it was the lighter of the two, which made me glad I got that one. The "cheese" part was the whipped cream on top, the graham cracker crust ice cream in the middle was really good and the strawberry bottom was okay, although I wish a little smoother. . . All in all, it was a great evening. The service was top notch, the food was great and the company was, as always, enjoyable. The space itself lends itself for a girl's night out, (of which I saw many), to a cozy and intimate night for a couple, (which I also saw many of). Slightly dark with a natural woodsy feel to it.  I will say the waiting area is a bit of a pain, very crowded and I always felt like I was in the staff's way, but with warmer weather coming, (sweet Jebus I hope so), that outdoor seating will certainly make it less of a worry to crowd the indoor area and just wait outside.
