ReviewID: b9YcaCPnSgXjU3Uyu3MApg
ReviewerID: sFZwRMFDOHTzt9CyCvmj9w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Great space . . . easy setup . . . great value . . . friendly staff . . . decent, healthy food.. . I went last week for dinner with a group of friends. The place itself has a very new, very clean, very cool look--lots of light-colored wood and metal. Not a lot of seating available inside, but plenty of tables, chairs and cushioned benches outside . . . and plenty of patio heaters to make it comfortable on that somewhat chilly evening.. . The staff was very helpful and friendly. We had a party of six and two of the busboys, upon seeing us milling around outside looking for an available table big enough for our group, immediately went into action putting together a couple of tables and gathering up chairs.. . The menu is simple--beef, chicken or ahi served on a salad, as a sandwich (with a side salad and a side order) or as a dinner (with a side salad and a side order), along with a variety of salads and a few soups.. . The ordering is done assembly-line--style, a la Chipotle: Look at the giant menu board as you enter the line, decide what you want, and tell the preparers as they ask you along the way and make your order fresh in front of you. (The line, by the way, gets long, but it moves quickly.). . The counter staff, though quick in their questions to keep the line moving, were cheerful and happy to recommend a side salad to my brother who had gotten caught up in the "what kind of meat, what kind of way" portion of the game and didn't realize he was getting one with his sandwich.. . I had the grilled chicken dinner meal with mashed potatoes and the butter-lettuce side salad with vinaigrette dressing. The portions were big enough to satisfy without stuffing you. My chicken was a little cold and the mashed potatoes were bland for my taste, but overall everything was fresh and it only cost $10--definitely a great deal for a  hot, fresh dinner.. . Two of my friends had salads (one steak and one Caesar, both a plateful) which they both enjoyed, and my brother had the steak sandwich, which he said was good. Another friend had the potato leek soup, which she gave up on halfway through because it was too salty.. . Overall, a very good experience. Again, decent, fresh food, good atmosphere and friendly service at a great price. I'll go again.
