ReviewID: b_CFt4j5kGm3bS7zc8WYvg
ReviewerID: MnfeBPepD2WwhYZ8L7e0Kw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Belly Shack
Category: Latin American
So not that I am a big hot dog connoisseur, in fact probably far from it, but I have to tell you - I would highly recommend those of you who are hot dog fans, or even want an awesome hot dog, go to Belly Shack.  I went here last night, with unsure expectations but came out a fan of this place!  . . After reading the reviews I expected that since this place only had counter service it would be tiny, but Belly Shack is actually quite spacious for the amount of items on their menu.  (Meaning there aren't a lot of options here)  Also the service there is great, you pretty much order and pay at the counter, but they still treat you like you are in an actual restaurant in that someone pours you water and takes away your plate but you don't have to tip!  I mean you really can't get better than that. . . So the hot dog was special of the day - we came here on Thursday. This hot dog tastes like it has been grilled outside in the summer air, meaning it tastes as good as a hot dog can taste!  Plus this hog dog comes covered with this spicy yet sweet asian slaw and pan fried noodles, an interesting combination and its quite a feat to eat this hot dog without getting food all over your face or hands but it is worth every bite.  The bun is a huge piece of pita or naan and thebest part is...the hot dog comes with fries!  And wait there's more, with the fries, comes this satay mayo dip that is kinda funny tasting at first because the flavor is so unique but before I knew it I was practically drinking this sauce.  . . As for the sides..I wasn't too impressed.  The chorizo brussel sprouts were ok, I mean it tasted like just those two ingredients stir fried together, and the squash seemed a bit expensive for some sweet potato chunks and half an acorn squash.  I mean for $5 I would like two roasted acorn squashes with honey on top, thanks.  I did like the fried plaintains, Belly Shack's chimmicurri sauce is light and has a hint of lime, very refreshing and different from the chimmicurri sauce you would find at a brazillian steak house.  . . Belly Shack also has soft serve, yes this instantly gave this place an extra star because I LOVE soft serve.  My friends had the bacon chocolate chip soft serve..I don't like bacon (I know its like the only thing I don't eat) and I hate when my salt and sweet mix so I did not venture near that, but I did eat a lot of my friend's softserve with the blondie bites on top.  . . The hot dog was so yummy that I am definitely looking to come here again on a Thursday just to get that!
