ReviewID: bA6XhlMGPv3Se_uljlpqnw
ReviewerID: pRP-QwU_7ETmQwHjUirIiQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hide Sushi Japanese Restaurant
Category: Japanese
If you don't mind a bit of a wait or eating early on a weekday, Hide Sushi Japanese Restaurant is the place to get your fill of fresh, buttery-tasting sashimi.  Even though the prices have slightly increased, it remains a reasonably-priced place to get fresh sushi, sashimi, teriyaki and tempura dishes. Customer service is good. I've been going to Hide Sushi for the last two years and I appreciate that most of the waitstaff are friendly without being overly deferential, and are quick to place and serve our orders. They tend to question my judgement when my husband and I over-order, but I like to think they are looking out for both our stomachs and pocketbooks. They're still surprised at how much we can eat.. . My husband is not a fan of their dynamite-style dishes since he is not fond of baked shellfish and Japanese mayonnaise but the restaurant is well known for this speciality so you should try it if you come here, especially the Scallop Dynamite. We are big fans of their yellowtail and salmon sashimi which you can order a la carte for about $10 a plate or as part of their combination dinners. You can order fresh sashimi with chicken/salmon/beef teriyaki or tempura. Their combination dinners are a great value---you get miso soup, sashimi, and teriyaki (you have to pay a little extra if you get salmon teriyaki) or tempura with a side of rice, pickled ginger, and cabbage for about $15-20. Their beef teriyaki is especially good since they cook the meat medium to medium-rare and make their own teriyaki sauce. Their tempura is good as well and is a nice contrast when eating it with cool, fresh-tasting sashimi.. . Two important things about Hide Sushi: 1) Bring cash and 2) Write your name on the board as soon as you enter (sushi bar "S" or table "T" or "S/T" if you don't have a preference, and the number of persons in your party). Do this AS SOON AS YOU ENTER. They don't take reservations.  It's first come first serve, so getting your name down on their whiteboard ASAP is a MUST. Newcomers often stand by the door and end up having to wait a long time because they do not know the procedure . Also, valet parking in the back of the restaurant is convenient and free with restaurant validation. But don't forget to tip!
