ReviewID: baG1TXSHqvNY1RPCS1Ganw
ReviewerID: ptlR2spTF9WAhBt9d_QVpw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Alon&#39;s
Category: Bakeries
OMG, the best croissants in Atlanta, except the ones noon midtown used to have when they were open for breakfast on a regular basis - they could be one in the same, since I know Noon doesn't bake their own. So why the 2 stars? Service. I think the food I had there is 4 stars easily, although I've only ordered 3 things in my two visits, but I love the layout, the mini grocery with the fresh squeezed OJ, etc. But the service received on my second visit was so bad. They had run out of what I wanted so I was trying to figure out what to get, they were less than helpful and what I wanted was going to be ready in 15 minutes (the first guy told me half and hour). They were really proud that they ran out of what I wanted, but could not tell me when the next batch would be ready, kind of funny, a little annoying but whatever, that was fine. I had to get other things, so when I order my coffee, the rudest girl makes it for me, and when I turn around there is a coffee cup in front of me. Is it mine? Who knows? I tried to ask her, ignored, so I take it, since the other customers said it wasn't their drink. I go to pay and ask the cashier if they send their baked goods to other restaurants, so I could go there and avoid the rude staff and she says "I know who you are talking about but please understand, people are rude to us all the time." I am not a high maintenance customer, I always say please, thank you and would hate a food service job so I try to be extra nice. She knew who was rude probably because that girl gets a lot of complaints. I go to pick up my order, it had barely been 15 minutes, and there were flies on some of the items behind the sneeze glass, I can't reach back there so I said to the guy, flies, I didn't want to yell it, he gave me a dirty look and swatted them away. I think maybe it was just a bad day and I like the food, so I guess I will have to put up with the service. Go try the food, it is busy and popular, everyone loves it, but chime in if you also receive crazy service so maybe people who hate dealing with customers so much get jobs in the back or at least away from the food. They have a comment card but they don't say where to leave it, I wasn't going to give it to the staff because I don't want them to mess with my food, I hope that does not sound paranoid, but you never know. FOOD GREAT, SERVICE MEAN.
