ReviewID: BbGBT9yps7tJL_bJpIX7nA
ReviewerID: JozaD0E6fVMFnWL7DTaTCw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: La Pasadita
Category: Mexican
OK I'm 95% sure I got the right La Pasadita for this review, which seems to be a constant source of confusion in these reviews. According to my detailed analysis, 37% of La Pasadita reviews are posted on the wrong location. Don't take that statistic too seriously though; also according to my analysis, Tina Fey and I are BFFs.. . Anyway, this is the biggest of the three Las Pasaditas (LPs from here on out) on the west side of the street, slightly to the south of the other one. You can get table service here if you decide to eat in. I got carry-out. The menu here is the most expansive of the three LPs. You can get tacos, tostadas, tortas, burritos, fajitas and probably some other stuff I'm forgetting. This may also be the best location for us gringos. I haven't been to the one just north of here, but the one across the street can be a bit intimidating at times for someone as lily-white as me (even though I do speak a little Spanish).. . The service was OK. Not super friendly, but not mean...just a bit cool. It took awhile to get my food after I ordered, but not quite long enough to be too long. My order was completely accurate. I really enjoyed my chicken torta. It was messy and tough to eat, but there was a generous amount of flavorful chicken on it and they didn't skimp on the other toppings. My steak taco (with only onions and cilantro, the default taco toppings at all LPs) was also good. Finally, my horchata was delicious.. . I think the prices here are quite fair for what you get. The torta was 3-something, and it was very big. I got a torta, a taco and a regular horchata for under $8 and it was plenty to fill me up. If you're dining in, the place is nothing special. The seating is typical of what you'd see at a carryout-oriented taco joint. I'm not sure if you get free chips &amp; salsa, as I haven't tried it. One little FYI, they take credit cards but there's a sign saying they require a $10 minimum purchase.. . Overall, I'd say this place is muy buena! Me gusta La Pasadita y creo que voy a volver pronto!
