ReviewID: bbjmwEAcxybD7eefOg-JXA
ReviewerID: NDCEEfxf62TkKk61ztMAHw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
So let's just get this out of the way - Cut is expensive. But it's worth it.. . Honestly, I was not too impressed with the decor or furnishings. The desk chairs and table made me feel like I should have been at work attending a conference call. The large pictures of famous people's faces on the walls were kind of odd too. . . Since we had never been to Cut before, the server brought three different slabs of meat to the table to demonstrate what each cut looks like, etc. I thought it a bit gross, but I got over it. I ordered the regular old USDA Petit Filet. It was a good size at 8 oz., but cost $50. I like my beef cooked well, but the server seemed put off by that - I'm the one paying $50 for it, so I don't care what he thinks anyway. I ordered their homemade steak sauce ($2) with my filet. Mr. Biscuit, Steve and I shared the asparagus appetizer which was very good, but small for three people to split. With dinner we shared the French Fries, Onion Rings and Summer Corn, all $12 each. The fries and onion rings were good, the corn was okay. It tasted burnt and really not any better than fresh corn I can make at home. My filet was absolutely amazing. Great flavor, cooked perfectly and the best steak I have had in any restaurant - ever. It had a light salt and pepper crust that complimented the meat beautifully. The steak sauce was a wonderful compliment. They also served additional salt, 2 types of mustard and some other sauce when our meat arrived.. . I noticed that all of the food we ate had a noticeable salt taste to it. From the bread sticks to the side dishes, salt was easily identified in each bite. I did not think it overbearing, but noticeable. Mr. Biscuit and Steve noticed the same thing. For dessert we shared the Chocolate Souffle and homemade vanilla doughnuts. Both were excellent and done perfectly. I highly recommend these to anyone. The souffle can be easily shared by 2 to 4 people.. . Service was a bit odd to me. I understand that good meal should be paced, but at times it seemed more like a lag than pacing. We got breadsticks when we sat down. After we ordered we got some warm cheese bread things. When our appetizer arrived, a bread "valet" arrived and doled out fresh breads to us. The breads were excellent. The bread "valet" returned when our meat was served. There seemed to be a lot of staff swarming tables here and there, yet who I believe was the manager is the person who served our appetizer and side dishes. Service that night seemed to be an issue across the restaurant. A nearby table with a West Coast, yet older, version of Carmella Soprano had the manager at her table two times because of slow service.. . I would definitely go back to Cut, but I need to try Mastro's first. If you go, be prepared to spend about $100 per person excluding alcohol.
