ReviewID: beexTIuL6GSigXZdJ6VdAw
ReviewerID: BJO0qHeqEI2tp3uSHefrNQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I liked Sepia and I thought ONE thing right when I walked in....SEPIA, IT REALLY IS SEPIA.  If you stay too long, you think something is wrong with your vision.  You're truly seeing in Sepia.. . But anyway, everything LESS than our experience with the door staff was great.  If I had to base my review on my first 35 minutes inside this restaurant, I would give it  0 stars.  In fact, I almost didn't try the place because of the borderline "short bus" status of the two girls at the front door.. . My friend Matt and I had both put in a long day, he had just gotten out of school and I had just left work.  He phoned around 9PM and asked, "are you hungry" and I was, so I met him at Sepia around 9:30 PM on a weeknight.  There was a convention in town, so they were busier than usual but we wanted to be seated in the lounge and even with TWO OPEN TABLES the dumbbell hostesses couldn't pull it together.  Neither one of them made ANY effort to get someone to clean the two tables that sat open for about 15 minutes until finally Matt wanted to ditch the place.  I turned to dumbo #1 who was clearly ruling over dumbo #2 and said, "can you get someone to clean that table because we would like to sit now or we're leaving".  It was only then that she sensed any urgency at all.. . Anyway, once I got "over" it, we tried their flatbreads which were to die for.  I am not an entree eater, I prefer multiple small courses and usually order two to three appetizers over a main course, but the server insisted I try an entree.  Nothing really appealed to me that was left on the menu - they were out of two items and I was allergic to one.  The server pushed the short rib on me and I buckled under pressure - it was mediocre.  . . Overall, I would say it is worth a try.  Go on a weeknight if it truly has gotten to be too busy or overly loud - if that bothers you.  I think going to a restaurant is a social event and I prefer the loud, fun atmosphere but if you don't - go on a Tuesday!
