ReviewID: bEg-DaKQDCRRWrnGcmoq_g
ReviewerID: zjekxY1oWhwHLMYb6J-19g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
I'd cross the ocean for Portos if I had to. Luckily, I'm blessed to be only 40miles away.. . If anyone's familiar with the asian bakery 85C, which is a leading coffee, cake and bakery franchise chain that was founded in Taiwan, then Porto's bakery is the Cuban version of it. . . I would have to agree that almost everything on the menu are proven crowd pleasers. My friends and I entered through the bakery side from the parking lot and first time being there, I had an awkward first impression because we had to walk through this long, somewhat-narrow hallway where the restrooms were located. I almost questioned whether or not we were in a bakery but I doubt I was lost because being lost in a split-second, the heavenly smell of fresh pastries saved me and led my beast of an appetite to the world of Latin American deliciousness. . . You know you are at the right restaurant if there are hoards of people in line not only during lunch time. It was almost 3pm and although there was still a line, it didn't take long until you were the next to get assisted. I honestly think the line was not long enough because i had such a hard time deciding among the varieties of mouthwatering showcase of sweet goodies and sandwiches made with perfection. If my waistline permitted, I would have ordered the whole café and taken the bakery to go. . . First time I had Porto's I ordered the amazing:. 1.) Cheese Rolls (cheese filled pastry). 2.) Midnight Sandwich (Croquettes, ham, roasted pork, swiss cheese served w/mayo, mustard and pickles on a toasted sweet roll). 3.) Guava Pie (flaky puff pastry with guava filling. I love guava.). . This time I had with my friends:  . 1.) Spinach croissant (would've been better if it was warm). 2.) Almond Danish . 3.) Guava and Cheese Strudel (most popular choice I heard) . 4.) Stuffed Potato Balls! (mashed potato filled with seasoned ground beef, fried). 5.) Cuban Sandwich (the Cuban bread used was the best bread I've ever had on a sandwich. Crisp, warm and just baked to perfection) . . By the way, don't worry about who knows how many pounds of butter, sugar and delicious heart attack ingredients were used because duh, that's why Glendale Galleria's down the block for you to shop until you drop those consumed calories. If that's not enough, then that is the reason why they built the Americana.
