ReviewID: bfDjgVk4Xp3BHMxGSbNNZg
ReviewerID: CaD1dbfZ4uB5PAQ61g6fUw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
This is one of those Hollywood places with an amazing history - two Asian art collectors built it as their personal estate in 1912 on the peak of a hill overlooking the heart of Hollywood (directly above Grumman's and the Magic Castle). . . It was built as an exact replica of a mountain palace in Japan - built with hand carved teak and cedar and laid out in a circle facing an interior courtyard that is a giant koi pond. The surrounding hill was landscaped with lavish Japanese gardens.. . In the 20's the estate was sold and Yamashiro became an ultra private club for famous Hollywood stars and studio moguls. . . During WW2 Yamashiro became the target of anti-Japanese sentiment - a rumor going around Hollywood was that the building was actually a watch tower for the impending Japanese attack of LA. The building was boarded up and vandals destroyed much of the gardens. The original hand carved wood work was painted or covered over and the Japanese architecture was disguised. . . The building changed hands many times after the war and only later, when the building was going to be demolished did workers discover the ornate detail below the surface and began a long and painstaking renovation to bring the building back to the state it is in today.. . As for the restaurant today, although there is certainly better sushi in LA, it's not as bad as many of these Yelp posts would have you believe.  In fact it's pretty good.. . My tip is to bypass the dining room and head to the cocktail lounge on the east side and get a table facing the window. You can order sushi ala carte in the bar. The view is much better, it's less expensive and the vibe is cooler. . . Most cities are laid out over hills. LA is unlike most big cities in that it is almost completely flat. When you step out of Yamashiro on a hot night and you see the view - that long grid of lights stretching out into eternity, it's like you're looking down on the stars. Don't miss this place.
