ReviewID: bGDjeqoLED-sA2E8dR2Yww
ReviewerID: baYgR06U1__VqQbEUZmR9g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ria&#39;s Bluebird
Category: Southern
I'll admit it, I'm biased towards this place.  I'm a fan of independent establishments, independent people, and fantastic food.  And this place has all three in spades.. . I've been there twice, both times on a Saturday early afternoon, and the wait wasn't too bad.  Can I just say that the hostess, while I didn't see much of her up front, was model-like in beauty?  And I'm a gay man, but she looked amazing.  The servers were all competent, nice, etc.  And our fellow diners were pleasant to be around as well.. . Anyway, the food.  The first time we went, I had breakfast.  I was hungover as hell, and I opted for the tofu scramble.  It was unlike other scrambles I've had; customarily most places serve a soy/Asian type of sauteed tofu scramble with veggies.  Ria's was unique; it was blocks of seared tofu in a bowl of black beans, with onion and tomato, and pesto to top it off.  It was simply fantastic.  Every bite had intense flavor; so good.  The biscuits are pretty great too, but I'M NOT SOUTHERN so don't take my word on that, cause this dude ain't no expert on that matter, ya hear?  My man had the breakfast burrito, and he fell in love basically.  He liked everything in it; really good ingredients make for really good food.. . The last time I went, I opted for lunch.  The choices all sounded pretty interesting, but I went with the peppered turkey sandwich.  You get a side, and I chose the soup (cream of mushroom).  The sandwich was on marbled rye, the turkey and cheese was excellent, and it came topped with avocado, which I love.  God damn, the ingredients were perfect, and again, bursting with flavor.  The soup was runny, which I'm not used to in a "cream of..." soup, but shit, it was tasty as hell.  "Pick up the bowl and slurp it down" tasty.. . The only downside, to me, is the portions.  They're not as big as other breakfast spots...but that's a good thing I think.  I don't need to get any fatter than I already am.  Ria's will always be my first choice for breakfast in ATL.
