ReviewID: bgko8MCLLEE_szzmGu29uQ
ReviewerID: N_e10oqcGqLPVoXXzJF_gw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
Some people hate garlic, but I'm an absolute garlic fanatic! When I first found out about The Stinking Rose, it was when I was watching some show on the Food Network eons ago. I finally came here with a friend the other day, totally gushing on what was in store for me. Once we pulled into the parking lot, we were greeted by valet (BTW, valet is $4, plus some change). Afterward, we walked into the restaurant, and were absolutely floored by the ambiance; it kinda felt Moulin Rougish. Each table was also housed underneath a black &amp; white cabana. It was totally art nouveau. Our server came by &amp; we ordered our grub, and our entire meal literally took 10-15 minutes to arrive; it was quick! Alas, this was when my visit had the potential from being so awesome to...eh:. . Our appetizer was the Bagna Calda which is pretty much garlic soaked in EVOO with a hint of anchovies in a small pan &amp; focaccia on the side; it was diluted &amp; bland. My entree came &amp; it required better presentation; it looked like one long turd on the plate served with creamed spinach &amp; mashed taters on the side.Although the taste was close to spot on &amp; was pretty hearty, there wasn't a significant hint of garlicky goodness. When my friend &amp; I were done with our entree, we decided to try their garlic ice cream. It took a while for our server to check up on us but when he finally did, we ordered the ice cream. The ice cream was really good; it was sweet and had a subtle garlic punch to it. After we paid &amp; walked towards the exit, the only person who actually bid us adieu &amp; to have a good day was the busboy. The host &amp; some other servers on standby were chattering amongst themselves. . . Honestly, I expected more out of this place. I mean, it was aired on the Food Network for crying out loud. But sadly it wasn't as memorable as I hoped it to be.. . Ambiance - 1 star. Cleanliness - 1 star. Food - 1/2 star. Service - 1/2 star. Value - 0 star
