ReviewID: bGy-oGObiFXy_mOv8ANnXQ
ReviewerID: XQ_JSYsiymIw51Ni042M-A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
So I'd been living here in WeHo for about a month. And I'd been feeling the pains of being without fresh, hot ramen (my Shaolin Supper). And being that I'm allergic to MSG, I couldn't even chase the dragon with the freeze-dried stuff from Chinatown. I was so sad and I felt this anger in my stomach that cried out, "WHY?" . . Every time I saw a Japanese person, or a Chinese person who had their hair parted down the middle, I'd say, "Hey you, where's there good ramen?" But no one had an answer. Some pointed me to questionable fast food chains...I was unimpressed and usually a bit scared. . . Thankfully, an acquaintance pointed me in the direction of Daikokuya by saying, "It's the best ramen I've ever had." I took that as a challenge so off we went immediately. After my Fu Lin restaurant in Seattle, it better be good or I was gonna noodle slap him and the chef. . . When we got there and saw the line, I got excited. If this many people were waiting in the streets, it had to be good. Some people were complaining, I was simply poised for noodling. That's right, I said it. Noodling: it's like spooning but with chopsticks too. . . Once we got the seats, I had the Diakoku Ramen. And you know what, it was really good. The noodles were cooked perfectly, the broth tastes like porkiness and the bean sprouts were crisp. Moreover, the hard-boiled egg they put in there, its yolk was still a little gooey. It was the best hard-boiled egg I've ever had...(and for scientific purposes, I've eaten there a number of times since to make sure the egg is always cooked so precisely) . . While not "...the best ramen I've ever had," it comes close. The place is legit, and all the staff have accents. The gyoza questionably amazing and the green tea is the absence of bitter. I've put this place on my list of regular spots. If your near, I suggest you do the same. . . Go there and tell 'em Moonshine sent you. Step up to get your rep up.
