ReviewID: BHmK9jgZES8QgI5kNm3zrQ
ReviewerID: VNkM5LH4eKrmVP8mBiUcdg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: El Carmen
Category: Bars
So I've been coming here a couple times only since recently. I don't know why I haven't been in here before, but now I can say I have.. . This is a great date spot! A couple years ago I would come here for dates! There are two memorable experiences I had there,  neither of them were for dates! . . The first one was Christmas day night about a year ago, I came here with a friend of mine at 7:45pm, there were two other people here, I think they may have been on a date, but it was dark and we were drunk so I can't quite confirm that right now. It was this angry chick who seemed like they just went shopping at an army surplus store and was wearing all olive green, the other was this little korean girl who was weary sequins and looked ready to party, somewhere.  painted . . They have portraits of wrestlers on the arc like ceilings, a juke box filled with sweet musical notes of the likes of MSTRKRFT to Kinky. The bartenders are flirty(but thats for story number two), we got a mochido I think it's called, where it is beer and margarita mix, veddy interesting! The food here is good, and all of it is at a decent price! . . Their tequila menu is the equivilant of the vodka menu at Nic's vodka bar in beverly hills. It has a pamphlet of about 200(give or take 1 or 2) tequilas, from the cheap shot to something you tequila loving golddiggers would go after. They also have a homemade pinneapple tequila, which to be honest with you I thought was just ok, but I was close to black out status by the time we got to trying it. . . The 2nd memorable time I was here was about a week ago for my best friends birthday, it seems to be more of a date spot than a place to have a corner drunken party with 10 people! The bartender was flirty, which is good if your straight :       . . I asked what song was playing and he responded by telling me my necklace looked like anal beads, shweeeetttt!! . . This place is a great place to go(minus comments roaming about anal beads), and I will be back!
