ReviewID: bHspYgO6Wd_yvrLzML13Vg
ReviewerID: 9Cb8SPoKY01GckoS4qvujQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Belly Shack
Category: Latin American
I agree with many of the other reviewers about this place.  I'd heard about Belly Shack through the typical foodie media (blogs, TastingTable, Time Out Chicago, etc) and decided to go with a friend for a casual Sunday night dinner.. . The decor is minimal but urban and cozy.  The lighting is very minimal, so if you were driving by you might not even realize it was open, especially because it is more or less hidden under the El tracks.  The small number of people inside on this Sunday night also probably didn't help.  But that was to our advantage.. . I had the Korean BBQ Kogi sammich.  It was the typical bulgogi beef with a small amount of kimchee on the side, and four pita squares for you to fill yourself.  Tasty and satisfying, yes.  But nothing you can't do at home yourself with decent Korean bulgogi and pita.  My friend had the blackened tilapia sammich.  I'm not huge fan of tilapia, but I had a bit of his and it was pretty good.. . We had the hot and sour soup and roasted squash as sides.  The soup tasted more like a standard tortilla chicken soup.  I couldn't taste much of  "hot and sourness" that I expected (thought it would be more of the chinese hot and sour soup taste).  But I really liked the roasted squash with maple syrup and pho spices.  I couldn't make out the pho spices in the first few bites I had, but after going back to the dish from having some soup, the spices really came out.  I enjoyed the contrast of the spices with the sweetness of the syrup and squash itself.. . Gave it 3 stars for some of the same reasons others did.  Prices are a bit high considering its counter service (especially the sandwiches-$10 each) but some of the combinations of Asian and Latin flavors were quite surprising.  Not a place I would go out of the way for dinner on busy nights, but if I were in the area and had a taste for a light but flavorful meal, I'd stop by again.. . Next time will try the tostones; I hadn't researched enough of what to eat before I went this first time.
