ReviewID: BI6hffAHs-zZ7EHrsKchHA
ReviewerID: c83L6AaUE-uZ1IvgCfq_9w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I'm all about keeping it short and sweet these days, so here goes --. . Service - fast and professional. Waiter and host did not appear to be unemployed actors with attitude problems, so I'm guessing those guys mentioned in other reviews show up on the late shift (I was there for lunch on a Saturday). Reservations definitely recommended, though, even on a weekend.. . Fried squash blossoms -- fun and tasty with an unexpected but not unwelcome tang.. . Mushroom pizza - fine, but honestly, kinda boring. No discernible seasoning beyond olive oil. Didn't stack up with expectations which, given the raves, would be impossible to meet anyway. Crust was a bit burnt with blackened parts (only on this pizza, though -- the other one we ordered was fine). . . Fennel sausage pizza -- pretty darn good. The homemade sausage, man, can't beat it.. . Overall pizza comment -- I was kinda hoping this would be traditional Italian pizza, and though this is good, really good, it's been tweaked a bit in ways I don't love. More crust than I'd like, and it's a little sourdough-hard on the outside, though lovely on the inside. But really, I'd like less of the stuff overall. But don't get me wrong -- good pizza. Would definitely go back and get it again. And with the euro being such a bitch and a half these days, it's cheaper here. . . Butterscotch budino - great for the first few bites, then gets to be a little much. Very rich, and the salt is wonderful until it's not wonderful anymore. But definitely good stuff. My recommendation - split it, and you'll die of happiness. Eat the whole thing, and you'll feel like you've been at a fattening salt lick. . . Mint Chocolate Chip Ice Cream - fabulous. Husband loved it loved it loved it and now talks about coming back to order pints of the stuff to go. I liked it, but suspect that if I'd ordered it, it would have started reminding me of spearmint gum after a hot minute. . . Nice, creamy latte. Good prosecco by the glass. . . Overall -- great, great place. About a million other things I'd like to try on the menu. Saw people swooning over the bone marrow, and the people next to us had that good garlicky bread that comes with the prosciutto and made me want to reach over and snatch it off their plates. It's a fun, bustling atmosphere, and yes, you may be sitting in the laps of the people next to you, but you hardly notice because the whole joint is jumping.  . . And I wish people wouldn't bring their damn screaming babies who are too young to even eat. Seriously, it's not so loud in the restaurant that a screeching infant doesn't cut through you like glass. Go to effing McDonald's or get an effing sitter. At $30 - $40 a person, other people shouldn't have to listen to that shit. Sorry, but it's RUDE AND OBNOXIOUS. And yes, people are giving you dirty looks for a reason. The baby can't help it BUT YOU CAN. . . Okay, I'm done. Go, it's good, don't get too wrapped up in the hype or you won't be able to enjoy it. And leave the baby at home.
