ReviewID: bkEhkD6AWqGW8F5PiUltFA
ReviewerID: PZlToKr0F8phjppcoDuDkA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Feast
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
The food here definitely saved the night.. . We had a group of 12 with dinner reservations at 7:30 for my friend's birthday.  Because of the snowy weather some of us were a little tardy, but they held the table for us and sat us right away with no problem.. . We had a long table in the back corner of the restaurant.  It was a little cozy, but good.  The lights were dimmed just as we sat down, and with the candles on the table it really set the tone for a nice romantic evening.  Except I was dining with 11 other people... so maybe not THAT romantic.. . My one complaint about this place (other than the maze to the bathroom) is that I don't think our server was on top of things at the beginning.  We were seated at about 7:50, and after ordering drinks and apps, he did not come to take our entree orders until nearly an hour later, long after we were onto bottles of wine/round of drinks number two and finished with the apps.  It struck me as odd, and I'll admit I was annoyed because many of us were starving and filling up on the bread, which you never want to do.  Good thing the bread was yummy.  (And that butter - it's very sneaky!  Sweet at first, then a minute later it's WOW, hello SPICY aftertaste!). . Even though it took forever to place our order for our entrees, they came out fairly quickly.  Out of 12 people, only one order was screwed up (her filet was cooked too much, she sent it back and was promptly served with a good one).  I think my steak was a little undercooked than what I requested, but it was still good so I didn't send it back.. . I had the skirt steak, and it was DIVINE.  Seriously, I think I'm already dreaming about it.  The presentation was nice too.  It came with a small helping of potatoes and some sauce that was delish.  There was some green stuff on the plate as well that was super spicy, so I didn't make that mistake twice.. . Everyone at the table truly enjoyed their food.  That's hard to do with a group that large - someone is bound to be unhappy, but that was not the case.  I think nearly everyone at the table ordered something different, so some of us sampled each other's dishes, and everyone was pleased.  The birthday girl got the salmon which came on a stack of pancakes with corn - um, yeah, they were freaking awesome.. . After we all ate, I think everyone was in a food coma...  But then the server (who seemed to be with it during the second part of our meal), brought out creme brule for the birthday girl.  I did not partake, but everyone who sampled it seemed to be in heaven.. . Would I come back here?  Yes, absolutely.  Perhaps not with such a big group next time, but I truly enjoyed my meal here, despite a rocky beginning with the server.  The rest of the staff was totally on top of everything as well.. . Big thumbs up, Feast.
