ReviewID: bLhAXrAgrj4_yiReBwPV0g
ReviewerID: zGBpg4CRQn72YK0WRTrabA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Real Food Daily
Category: Vegetarian
How have I never reviewed this RFD? I LOVE RFD. If it wasn't so damn expensive I would eat here 5 times a week. By far the BEST things on the menu are the Club (which they raised the price by $5 when it cost $10 to begin with...ABSURD!), the nachos and the burrito. The tempeh bacon has kept me veggie. So smoky, crunchy and satisfying. there are many other good "healthy" options on the menu, including their salads (the ceaser is bomb chicky bomb bomb), but I know how to steam veggies at home and make a darn good salad, so it's not something I would pay much for at a restaurant. . . In general I have found the specials at RFD are very hit-or-miss, usually miss. They are the most expensive dishes on the menu (now $17 or $18) and i have been disappointed with them one too many times to keep trying them out. I think the problem with the specials are they overload on veggies that tend to be undercooked and the flavors of the ingredients all taste too similar rather than a blending of unique tastes. . . Desserts at RFD are also meh. Usually vegan cakes are dry, and no exception here. The chocolate pudding is really good though, as is the coconut cream pie.  the cookies were good but make sure they are fresh or they will too be dry and crumbly. If you do go for dessert get something that is creamy and moist, not predominantly cake.. . The other week I had their brunch (a rarity for me to not get one of my top three choices from above) and the pancakes were THE BEST I HAVE EVER HAD. I could not believe 1. that they were vegan and 2. that maybe they were healthy! they were the perfect fuffly, nutty, crispiness you would expect from the best pancakes ever. they came out pipping hot and my dining companions agreed that they were darn good. i also shared no huevos rancheros and they were average. i eat eggs and so can't get too excited about scrambled tofu. overall the dish seemed like it was missing something, too. it was a little dry and they were chintzy with the salsa.
