ReviewID: BLQA3l73R1E-e-NQnYerOg
ReviewerID: TcMgLChkfdvO_3k1Fjrwww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Little Bangkok
Category: Chinese
I went here the other night for dinner with my mom and brother, and we enjoyed it. Food was a solid and satisfying (but not unforgettable) 3.5, and service was a 5, so the review is rounded off at a 4. Everything has pretty much been said, so I'll comment on the dishes ordered:. . Tom Yum Soup - tasty lemongrass broth served piping hot, and only $3.25.. . Tom Ka Soup - also just $3.25, good, but very, very creamy (creamier than other Tom Kas I've tasted).. . Squid Salad- very filling and a surprisingly large portion. My only complaint is the lettuce was iceberg and in large, hard-to-eat leafs at the bottom of the bowl.. . Shrimp Basil Rolls - these were not the best I've had, but they were definitely enjoyable and an incredible value... 7 small rolls for under $4!. . Masaman Chicken - very creamy curry sauce, large portion. My Mom couldn't finish it, but she said she liked it.. . Pad-See-Something with Shrimp (not Pad See Ew, the other one...) - This dish is almost all vegetables, and I didn't see any noodles. My brother hates veggies, but he still said this was really good, though too big to finish in one sitting.. . It was crowded for a Monday night but the service is inconceivably fast. The staff is incredibly polite, professional, and well-versed on the menu. If anything, they are overstaffed, but I can't complain! The price is unbeatable. I do wish they had a few more sophisticated seafood main dishes on the menu (I only saw shrimp entrees, and I'd love some mussels, scallops, squid etc.).. . As another reviewer noted, if you want quality Thai, go elsewhere. If you want fast, cheap, good Thai food, this is a great option. The portions are ginormous, and I won't even order half of what I ordered last time.. . Ambiance is kitsch and quite interesting (my brother was fixated on the brightly lit aquariums behind our table). The ambiance is nothing special, but I come for the food and the value. I'll be back.
