ReviewID: BlRMr7FCpippDxijwtKLbg
ReviewerID: DbzXxPFI20gbJk5DCuedRw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I think this place is right on the cusp of losing its edge because its too popular.. . First of all, the space is fantastic. Beautiful clean lines, high ceiling, huge windows, lots of bright white light, marble floors, stunning bathroom - this place seems like a renovated old style bank. I don't know what it was before, but they did a wonderful job with the redesign. I like the way all the tables are old Italian style dining tables. Unfortunately, such a cavernous space with little soft elements like wood or carpeting to absorb sounds leads to a very noisy space. I got there and within 15 minutes developed a headache. There's a lot of competing noise - its a strain to try to hear your companions.. . The service was dreadful! We had reservations for 5 pm. We were seated at 5:30 (no apology). We ordered within 10 minutes of being seated, and the entrees arrived an hour later. I ordered iced tea which took 40 minutes to show up comprised of 90% ice and I was never offered a refill. That was a $3 glass of ice. After we completed the main entrees, the waitress came by to tell us that their signature dessert is a chocolate souffle and it would take 25 mins to make. Hello? Couldn't she have told us that when we initially ordered or at least while we were dining? At the snail's pace they move, no one wanted to risk ordering it and being there until 10 pm.  . . There is a cute cafe/deli area at the front which can occupy your time while you wait to be seated. Although there are interesting gourmet items - they are outrageously overpriced. A small box of argula (labled a salad although there was nothing included but a tiny carton of oil) is $9. You could eat in that area if you die from boredom while waiting for your reservation to be honored.. . The food was very forgettable. The portabello fries were interesting - a bit overspiced, but anything tastes good deep-fried, including snickers bars, bacon, and twinkies, so no extra points there.  We were told the fettucini was the only pasta made in-house and that it was very flavorful. Of course three of us ordered it. The pasta was good, but not sure what excess flavor the waitress was referring to. It was quite bland, and the kiss of death is when I see everyone dumping salt on their food to wake it up. A friend ordered the Trenne, which she was upset about because it came out lukewarm and tasted like plain old beef stew.  Lastly, the dessert menu was disappointing. No tiramisu, no cheesecake, just a few sorbets and fresh fruit. Nice, but not daring or extravagant.. . I cannot see me ever having an urge to go to this place again. It is too full of itself, with little substance. . . A tip - skip the valet ($7+tip) and drive 20 more feet to the adjacent parking lot ($5).. . Good luck!
