ReviewID: BM6drPJk7WF88ExyxiE9cA
ReviewerID: hoPA4iBItEUMWUH7bIqrmA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
People are sheep.  I like to imagine that there is a giant ghostly sheepdog herding people at it's will.  This is how I make sense of the success of Jack Black and his movies.  This ghost dog must roll over laughing after he herds a group of sheeple to the movies to see his latest film.  I picture GD whispering in the ears of his sheeple, "Ruff, that cave man movie looks HEE-LAR-REEOUS!  You will go see it this weekend.  Ruff!"  And without understanding their motivation, the sheeple gather in herds to go watch latest "outrageously funny" Jack Black movie.  . . I think the ghost dog is behind the Kogi fascination, as well.  I can make no other sense of the long lines and the long periods of time people spend in line waiting to Kogi it up.  Well, the ghost dog and possibly the late media hype.  (Seriously, this truck has been out for quite a while now and I just heard a news blip on the radio last week about the "hot new food truck."  Where they hell have they been?).  . . The ghost dog got to me too, because I was all a-twitter (get it - Kogi, "a-twitter?" Ha!) my first Kogi trip.  I couldn't wait to check out the truck I had heard so much.  And when I did finally check it out, after waiting a mere envy-worthy 30 minutes, boy was I unimpressed.  The food is decent, but it's not worth waiting 30 minutes for.  In that time, I could run to a Food For Less, pick up some tortillas and carne asada and head over to the Korean market to pick up some kimchi and I'd be set.  . . Nevertheless, I have to give the Kogi founder much credit.  His story is inspirational and his entrepreneurial spirit is admirable.  Food trucks are where it's at these days and I think Kogi was a big influence on that.   There's nearly a food truck for everything now.  I'm just waiting for Petco to start shilling cat food around town.  They could pull up in front of my office building and save me one more errand this saving me time and money!  Time I won't be spending hunting down the Kogi truck.  . . Now, the ghost dog may be mighty powerful, but that's not to say that everyone that likes Kogi is a member of the herd.  For some people the ghost dog is spot on, for others maybe not.  But, I think we all have our likes that others suspect the ghost dog is behind.  I know I have mine.
