ReviewID: bmvBnco3BpJ_eJ5b0v7UKw
ReviewerID: c_0i4RsbxtsIvPd2e9kYYg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
The drive up was very narrow and looks like bigger cars might have a little trouble maneuvering. Valet is mandatory and runs about $7.50 the last time I checked. Since it's up the hill, you can get a great scenic glimpse of Hollywood from above. There's also a walkway which leads you to an oriental garden. The place could get packed with people fairly quickly so I suggest making reservations ahead of time. Restaurant is quite large so it does fit quite a lot of people. Inside is very dark with extremely dim lighting (which I like actually). I ordered a Sapporo and a chilled Sake. The Sake was not worth it because it came in a special ice-filled center which means you don't get the full amount as if you were to get the actual bottle. For my meal I got the Sushi Entree which was about I believe 10 pieces, each one a different type of Sushi. I also ordered an extra Uni &amp; Salmon to go along with it. Food took awhile to come out. For $30 something dollars, the Sushi Entree was definitely not worth it. However, as far as freshness, it was up there and was surprisingly really good; melts in your mouth! The waiters seem too occupied and tend to either forget things you asked them or simply take too long.  The restroom was somewhat hidden as it's an opening to the side which leads you downstairs. Overall I had a good time with friends, enjoyed good food, and got a buzz going. Might I add it is not cheap at all. Sushi by itself is already double the price from other places. I probably will only come back for only birthdays or anniversaries considering the drive, parking, wait times, and location.. . Pros:. - Raw fish was fresh and tasty.. - All my friends enjoyed their dishes.. - Great food presentation.. - Lovely restaurant decor.. - Great hill-top scenery with a garden.. - Tons of seating.. . Cons. - Mandatory valet parking.. - Long wait times in general (table, food, valet). - Pricey because of environment.. - Hard to find location and narrow driveway.
