ReviewID: bnBZ_tuM3rgXAzcV64FeHg
ReviewerID: svPIVy4mGcmPKV5ej93skA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Thank goodness for the shot before dinner because it was needed.  I almost asked for a second one after the first course.  We read all of the reviews before going and were so excited for this dinner.  It was the celebration of our 11 year anniversary.  We are psychotic foodies and host 10 course multi-course dinners in our home for fun.  My husband trained under a master chef for 11 years so we are not idiots when it comes to food.  We were both really excited about this meal but have to say that we were sadly disappointed after going. Here is our story.  We arrive at 9:30 pm (a great time to have dinner) and are seated and given a shot of I am not sure what but it was a good idea based on what was to follow.  The sommelier (looked like he encountered hair dynamite on his way to work ) came out and I just mentioned that I hoped the wine pairings would not consist of a large amount of sweet white wine because we are serious red wine drinkers and this has happened before,  He told me that pretty much explained what was about to happen with the wine pairings.  He was 12 but had a bossy attitude and was tall for his age and obviously in charge.     Anyway we asked if he could substitute some red wine for all of the white wine and he told us he could not.  Shocking response for the price they charge.  We were told if we wanted to spend additional money on a half bottle of red to get us through we were welcome to.  Really, are you kidding me??  (The starting price was about $60 for anything decent.  How understanding of them???)  The first course was Sturgeon Roe covered with foam and I was seriously disturbed by the textures.  Small postules that popped in your mouth and screamed fish more than you would ever want or hope for.  One bite and I was done.  Actually I was seriously traumatized.  They noticed that both of us did not touch the first course and offered to bring us some thing else.  Humorouly enough after the dinner we realized that they just brought us the second course, not something additional.  Go figure! Hot potato cold potato was amazing thank goodness.  The next course was razor neck clams and scallops in a bunch of gelatinous goop with more foam (which I now hate) which could have been good without the creepy slimy textures.  So this restaurant is all about textures but it is about bad textures not good textures.  The rest of the courses were a mix of creepy slimy mayonnaise like textures.  One spoonful is tasty but cups of it become creepy and gross.  The highlights were the pork belly and Wagyu beef (amazing and was almost worth the $600 dollar price tag of our dinner). but considering that 9 out of 12 courses were creepy and gross I have to give it 2 stars.  Service was good but did not equal Charlie Trotters.  The popcorn course was exhausting and contained way too much mayonnaise type goop.  I did not get it and after dinner we made a pact to never do another multi course again for the rest of our lives.   The dessert course were right out of a weird science fiction movie.  We had to suck weird things out of tubes (it did not taste that good by the way)  Okay and then we have the bacon on a trapeze. What was up with that?  Silly to say the least.  These people spent money on a wire contraption to suspend the bacon like it was in traction.  The aromatic things were a waste of time.  I got yelled at for putting a dirty spoon on the pillow.  Summary was we would not go back if you paid us $600 dollars.  The decor was boring the food was creepy and the service was basic.  For the same money we went to Spiaggia the next night and were blown away.  Now that is a restaurant.  If I never encounter foam for the rest of life it would be too darn soon. I am not sure why everyone loves this place.  Maybe they are not eating enough mayonnaise in their diets are are craving it immensely and that is why they love Ilinea. I cannot figure out how everyone rates this restaurant a 5 because I do not see it.   If you agree with this review we would love to hear from you.  I did not complain because after Trotters let down I gave up on expensive multicourses and really am over it!. P. S.  The wine pairings were a joke.  I could have gone into their cellar and done an eeny meeny moe picking and come up with better wine pairings.  And that really pissed us off! There were only two wine pairings that actually made sense the rest were a joke.  So the 12 year old was not very good and needs to go back to wine school and get a hair cut.  Yes my husband and I are spoiled brats and make better food in our kitchen every day. If you are a truly serious foodie please do not waste your money on this restaurant!
