ReviewID: bo1JKR2-Gcl1JURp9G1z4Q
ReviewerID: yOi3du7-JJQHAcYCC7ClbA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Nuevo Laredo Cantina
Category: Mexican
Came back to Nuevo Laredo against my better judgement because my wife likes this place and she humors me from time to time. At 2 p.m. on a Saturday, there was surprisingly a wait, though a brief one. The second surprise of our visit: they actually had a lunch menu on a Saturday. . . Trying to find something I'd like, I ordered a combo plate with a taco, burrito and enchilada for about $10. The taco had a hard shell and was filled with chunks of chicken, diced tomatoes, lettuce and grated cheese. It was OK, but got better when I added some of the bottled pepper sauces. The burrito, actually, wasn't bad either. It was bigger than I expected and had some flavor, thanks to the pico that was inside. But I can't say I loved the chicken in either dish. Though it's partially shredded, many of the pieces were larger than chicken nuggets, which is off putting to me. Would it kill them to shred it all the way, like every other Mexican restaurant does?. . Finally, after working through the taco and burrito, I got to my enchilada. The sauce that smothered it was so salty I kept draining my drink. Ultimately, I gave up about halfway through it. It was like trying to eat a salt lick covered in cheese. Proving it wasn't just me, my wife even complained about the sodium level and she salts everything! She'd salt salt if she could. And don't get me started on the accompanying rice and beans, which were respectively flavorless and runny. . . So really, at the end of the meal, I felt as lukewarm about this place as I did after my last visit. In my opinion, it's just not that good, especially when you factor in the wait. I really get the feeling this place is just coasting on it's rep. I actually liked the food here when I moved to Atlanta in 2003, but haven't enjoyed anything I've ordered in a few years. And the fact that very few of the "Best Of" awards on the walls go past 2004 shows I'm not the only one who feels this way.
