ReviewID: BOG5Wn-E9AOpUVMlHl7BjA
ReviewerID: ML0rNXpMFZhz4EuEAw5NwA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
This place is all about the burger and fries. And microbrews. If you're into that sorta thing.. . I'd been here before, but in my non beef eating days. Not eating red meat makes eating out difficult. People kept feeling sorry for me! So after ten years of sticking to poultry and aquatic life, I've swung the other carnivorous direction and Father's Office was high on my list of burger places to try/revisit.. . Now that I've finally gotten around to tasting it, I have to admit they've created something worth talking about. It's a medley of sweet caramelized onions, bitter arugula, salty blue cheese, earthy mushrooms and juicy medium cooked patty on a chewy french roll. They hit all the key flavor notes: sweet, salty, bitter. It's definitely up there on my favorite burgers list, but not life altering good.. . Also, their sweet potato fries are amazing. They're thicker than most and fried to soft perfection, not overly crispy. They come with a yummy aioli but I think the fries are pretty darn awesome on their own. If you're here with a group order a basket of the regular garlic fries too. They're good too but my heart will always belong to the sweet potato fries, seriously some of the best I've ever had.. . Now for the gripes: . For a place known for great food they have awful table service. You have to hover over people in order to snatch a table before anyone else. Then someone needs to head to the bar to order. Would it kill your waiters to take orders in addition to bringing out food? Or to have a hostess seat patrons in a less chaotic fashion? Secondly, what's with the no substitutions? I eat everything and think their food is pretty spot on. In fact, I'd like to try some other items on the menu. This is about principle. What about people with food allergies?. . They seem a bit snooty. The food is fantastic but the attitude needs to go. They seem to think their menu justifies horrid customer service. I've lucked out and never had to wait long for a table which is why I'm giving this place 4 stars. Lose the 'tude and I'll anoint five.
