ReviewID: bON4V9_HXNsfU7zEwMbhVg
ReviewerID: stlSeNQ-sjAYcXBFzXv3gQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
The Griddle is one of the few really hyped up businesses that I would actually say deserves the hype. This is hands down one of the best breakfast spots in LA. I have been here at least 20 times and I can honestly say that a meal from here is always a treat. Here are a few of my favorites :. . Mom's French Toast - I really want to know who's Mom makes french toast like this . These are by far the biggest, fluffiest pieces of french toast I have ever had. Not overly battered or cooked which I usually find when I order french toast. This is hands down the best french toast I have ever tried (sorry Mom...). The bread and batter are both amazing and then they top it all of with powdered sugar and delicious whipped butter. YUM!. . Chicago Charlies Scramble - I love this dish so much! It's simple but done so well.  This delicious breakfast feast consists of Italian sausage, bacon, bell peppers, potatoes,  onions, garlic, basil and mozzarella cheese! If that's not enough it also comes with a side of garlic bread but the marriage of flavors in the scramble is so good I usually just opt for a side of sourdough toast. . . The Golden Ticket - A delicious banana pancake filled with warm caramel, walnuts and streusel and then topped with the exact same ingredients in addition to whipped cream! Talk about decadence. This is the end all of all pancakes. I can never eat more than one. . . Ham and Eggs - Talk about a huge piece of Ham. When I say huge I mean that this mammoth piece of pig swallowed the plate whole and ran over all sides by about three inches. The first time I saw this dish ordered it came to the table next to me and the stranger that ordered it was so in awe of it's size he asked my company and I if we wanted some ! I ended up ordering it the next time I came to eat here an it was delicious!!!. . French press Coffee - The coffee here is SO good and fresh. I love that they bring it out to you in a french press and they definitely keep it coming. . . Service at the griddle is always good. I come here with some of my bike friends and they always let us pull our bikes up to an outside table and create a mini bicycle parking lot on the sidewalk. Orders are taken quickly and the staff is really friendly. Also considering how PACKED this place always is I have never once felt like I was being rushed out of my table.. . The Griddle is a must try!!!
