ReviewID: bpoAAbpsT-SMBrhpidLAPg
ReviewerID: WbOcP1w7Bj-PdEs_IPnu0Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
This is another case of needing a half star. I'd be more comfortable giving them 3.5 stars rather than 4.. . Went this Monday night for dinner. I got the Umami and my sister and friend both got the Truffle Burger. We ordered 2 fries and 1 side of onion rings.. . Service was quick. Helpful with answering our questions. The only problem I had was that our water/lemonade glasses weren't refilled. That is a big thing for me. Not only does it keep the patron happy, it shows that your server is still being attentive. It wasn't crowded, so there was't an excuse for not refilling our drinks. We weren't offered dessert after - which i think should be automatic at all restaurants serving dessert. Portions are not gigantic, but I was satisfied.. . The Umami burger was delicious. The  burger comes medium rare, which all meat should be (hiss and boo to people who overcook their meat!). The oven roasted tomato and mushrooms really make the burger. Granted, I was burping that tomato all night - but the taste was really worth it. Apparantly, the Umami has a parmesean crisp in it - I didn't taste it, but that didn't stop me from enjoying the hell out of that burger. . My two problems with the burger: . 1) the buttered bun. It was super tasty, but had to wipe my hands over and over because it was so greasy. I would ask them to toast it just on the inside and keep the butter off the outside to keep my fingers clean. 2) The patty was a bit loose. Again, this didn't affect the taste at all - In fact, I enjoyed the chunky texture of the patty. But, it's not fun when your burger falls apart and stains your shirt. Umami could stand to pack their patties a little firmer. . . Even though I had these problems, the taste of the burger was still very good.. . Fries and Onion Rings - Boo! For having such a small menu, Umami Burger should be masters at making both fries and onion rings. The fries were bland and very soft. Came with the ketchup, which was nothing special. . The onion rings were too large and had an overwhelmingly yeasty flavored batter. I know it says they're beer battered, but the flavor of that batter was overwhelming. The ring size was too big, so you ended up biting into one, pulling out the slimy onion and eating the batter by itself. I am a lover of all onion rings - but these were just not good. Came with the aoili, which was good, but could have been a wee bit thinner. I make my own aoli, with tons of lemon juice so it's less of a mayo than it is a dressing, so that might be personal preference.. . So overall, the experience was Umami Burger was good. The fact that the burger was so tasty made up for the weak sides. . .               burger : 4.5 stars. fries and rings : 2 stars.               service: 3.5 stars
