ReviewID: Bqc6h7jm9-86l72lwbXAiA
ReviewerID: WuEO5WKWhP1mhQwex6QJTA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Overrated Hollywood hot spot.. . I have been here twice, and both times I left impressed with the breathtaking view and decor and the mediocrity of the food.. . Always make reservations.  Depending on how filled it is, you can request to be seated in different parts of the ginormous Japanese-castle-like restaurant.  The Dining Room provides a wonderful view of LA's cityscape at night from the top of a hill, and the Garden Court has a lovely little Japanese garden with a koi pond.  There's also a Pagoda Bar in front of the main restaurant building that I haven't been to, but it definitely looks like a nice place to lounge around with a couple drinks and a nice view.. . The food is good but nothing memorable in general.. Things I've had on the menu:. Snow Crab &amp; Spicy Tuna Napolean: good but extremely small portion; mine came with only one tiny napolean and a bunch of arugula on the side.. Truffle Hamachi: good quality fish, decently-sized portion.  One of the better dishes I've had here.. Shoyu Glazed Black Cod: overpriced; good but not memorable.  I've had better at Geisha House, where it was about half the price.. Seared Ahi Tuna: Again, overpriced and good but nothing remarkable.. Darth Vader roll: supposedly one of the most popular rolls here, but I didn't find it amazing.  Black rice with spicy tuna, cucumber, and fish roe on top.. Reclining Buddha: Big disappointment.  The ponzu, peanuts and cilantro were overpowering and I could barely tell there was shrimp in the roll.. Strawberry Preserve-Filled Doughnuts: Definitely the highlight of my dinner.  Comes with a large scoop of ice cream and a nice, light cream to dip your donuts into.  Not too sweet and perfect with the strawberry filling.. There was also a pumpkin dessert that I had sometime around Thanksgiving.  It was a temporary item, but if you ever see it back on the menu I would definitely recommend.. Mixed drinks here are generally good; especially memorable were the Yama-Jito and the Yuzu Pom-Pom Martini, but they're slightly on the girly side of drinks.. . Overall, Yamashiro is a nice date spot for its atmosphere, but this is not the place to go if you're a foodie looking for good Japanese food at a reasonable price.
