ReviewID: Bqd_vuoBP4ULSk3XTTDcHg
ReviewerID: a4DNRLl7Wc9FyuU8l2zxqQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Hae Woon Dae BBQ
Category: Korean
I have been dining at Hae Woon Dae for over 5 years now (on average about once a month), and all I can say is that they have been consistently excellent every single visit. I'm giving this restaurant 5 stars because for authentic Korean BBQ in Atlanta, it is simply the best. I can understand other reviewers' complaints about it's location and the decor, and if those things are most important to you, then you'll be very disappointed here. Yes, it is in a strip mall next to a shady strip club, and yes, it is very plain inside, but what do you expect from Buford Hwy? This isn't a place for you to get all dressed up (yes, your clothes and hair will soak up the smell) and be seen on a Friday night. Do I wish it was more centrally located in the city and more hip like Woo Lae Oak in SoHo, NYC? Of course...but I go here for the food...I mean, really good food. . . I think others have covered the menu pretty well, but here's my 2 cents... . 1. If you're going to order just one type of meat, you can't go wrong with the short ribs. I've had their bulgogi beef and spicy chicken as well, but they're definitely not as flavorful. . 2. For appetizers, I always go for their Pa jun (seafood pancake) or the fried dumplings. . 3. For those times when not in the mood for something as heavy as BBQ, their other entrees are equally as good. Some of my favorites are their Bibimbop (spicy meat &amp; vegetable rice bowl), Nakji Bokum (spicy octopus stir-fry), and Mool Naeng Myun (cold buckwheat noodle in broth). . . I know some people have complained about their prices and I too have noticed the price hike the last time I was there. Blame it on the economy, I guess, but having dined at numerous famous Korean restaurants in NY, LA and in DC, I can assure you that their prices are very reasonable.  As for their service, I've never had any problem here nor have I witnessed any rudeness to other customers.  Yes, there is some language barrier but they do have servers that are proficient in English and they're always very accomodating in explaining the menu and making recommendations.
