ReviewID: bRQPoiLbxuut9FVb4T_nIQ
ReviewerID: Y-NNQeAU85lNF78CIIETUA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Dantanna&#39;s
Category: Sports Bars
Another example of how outstanding service can turn a good dining experience into a great one.. . I used to be a server. In spite of or perhaps because of that fact, I tend to be skeptical of servers that remind me of myself as a server - early twenties, skinny arms, that sort of thing. So I had low expectations for our young, relatively skinny-armed waitress, and she blew me away. As did the helpful attitude I sensed from all the staff at Dantanna's.. . First, our table for eight was waiting for us when we got there, complete with high chair. The first group of people was permitted to sit at the table before the remainder of the party arrived. I am always extremely pleased with a restaurant when I don't have to wait for stragglers.. . Second, the server handled the baby situation well. Without being asked, she brought the almost-two-year-old one of those disposable placemats and crayons. The baby's mom asked the server to bring her food out as soon as it was ready, and the server did so, and quite quickly too. . . Third, when I asked whether the fish tacos could be made without shrimp, she said she thought so but that she would ask. She immediately ran off to ask, and then returned with an affirmative answer. Score! When I asked for a box later, she offered to do it for me, and did so quickly.. . Fourth, she split the checks without our asking (to my knowledge no one asked), didn't make any mistakes, and was very efficient when running our credit cards. . . As is probably already evident, I had the fish tacos with no shrimp.  They were served with two sides even though the menu suggests you only get one.  I picked asparagus and garlic mashed potatoes.  Everything was delicious except for, ironically, the fish. It was too... fishy. It tasted like cheap tuna, but I can't be sure. The desserts looked AMAZING, I'm going to have to go back to try them sometime.
