ReviewID: BrsVHI_ne2hkBYBwxZr5cw
ReviewerID: RRx1qYv3CvJHiYUvP9oeKw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Taqueria del Sol
Category: Tex-Mex
I am once again going to date myself.  I have been going to this place since it was Sundown Cafe (a full menu restaurant that brought you menus and you ordered at the table).  While it has since changed to taqueria, it is still a standard in my opinion.. . First, lets get to the good stuff, the margaritas.  They are to die for and don't be deceived by the fact that they are in large plastic tubs that are whipped up in a blender.  They will pack a punch and there have been several nights where I was glad I lived right around the corner from this joint.. . Second, I am sure others have said it, but let's not forget about George.  If you have ever been to the one on Cheshire Bridge, you know him and you love him.  I really don't know of any other place in Atlanta where I feel like Norm from Cheers.  George goes out of his way to say hello to you and ask about your life.  He is currently on tour in Athens, GA, opening a new TDS, but he makes cameo appearances!  If you see George, please give money for the Breast Cancer Walk.  He has walked for the past few years and he raises a butt-load (yes, that's a word) for the cause.  He is over his 10,000.00 mark now!  . . Third, corn chowder.  All I am going to say is creamy, creamy goodness.  A little goes a long way and it is amazing.  Also, the green pork chili packs a bit of a punch but it is excellent. . . There is always a taco of the week/day and there is also an entree.  I have never been disappointed with the entrees and the tacos are all good.  However, my personal favorites are the Memphis (coleslaw, BBQ sauce and pork), the carnita (you know it) and the bob (fried shrimp).. . Note ~ you stand in line to wait and order at the counter.  Be prepared to always see the line out the door but don't be deceived.  It is generally not that bad...you will wait maybe 15-20 minutes but once you order, it comes quick.  Also, you can order a drink and stand in line chatting with your friends while you wait. . . A week does not go by that I don't go there!
