ReviewID: bRVT7B4nyBr0obhA9T_tDg
ReviewerID: 8Ka14AKwEGRYiA3rPCiP8A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
For those people that gave this less than four stars... I really don't get it? I know the wait is long but doesn't that tell you something? This place has the best beef you will ever find in a Shabu-Shabu restaurant and believe you me I've been to a couple that did not even compare to this place! . . First of all the old man is a genius! To make sure that he serves everyone who flocks to his place he made some pretty decent rules!           . . 1.  If you are not there when he calls your name you lose your seat and have to wait more which is fair considering he needs to move people in and out as efficiently as possible. . . 2. You cannot use your cell phone due to courtesy and of course to make sure you enjoy your meal and be on your way so the next person can enjoy theirs. . . 3. NO RESERVATIONS! It really does make sense not to reserve in this place... We would all think this place was crazy for having empty seats and a lot of people outside waiting! ( DAMN you SHAAB!). . *IMPORTANT NOTE: Shaab is a Shabu-Shabu place in Pasadena who does this crazy reservation thing! THEY ARE CRAZY for making this hungry monster ME wait.. while most of their seats were empty! . . So on account of all these rules this old man... is a genius for just making it easier and have a fluidity on serving the hungry people who wait for his delicious melt in your mouth beef.. MMMmmmm! The BEEF! . . Did I mention that they give you plenty of veggies and beef to make sure that you are very well satisfied?! Just make sure that you eat every single thing in that pot. And savor that soup that you make out of your meat.. that's the best part! So for those who haven't tried this place yet please be patient cause it really is worth the wait! . . And for you first timers who don't know what to do.. the Old man will gladly show you how it's done! Enjoy your SHABU-SHABU!
