ReviewID: brzghuWHJyhHpWbKRmO9bg
ReviewerID: 8_GSnrTYzuS1GqHkkahTMQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
I've been waiting for an establishment to challenge the monopoly Father's Office has on the Westside on gourmet burgers. Looks like Umami Burger has answered that challenge.. . I am loath to admit I found out about this place through Thrillist. 99% of their emails I consider spam, but every once in a while, they let me know about a restaurant that I might be interested in. So when they announced that Umami was having a soft opening a few days ago, it piqued my interest.. . I drove by the place on Saturday night, but they were already closed. Today I called them around noon and someone answered stating they would be open between 5 PM and 10 PM. I arrived around 6:30 PM. The parking lot is tiny. If you can't find a spot, perhaps you could try using the valet service of the neighboring restaurant. Or take your chance with the meter maid on La Brea (its free to park after 7 PM) or permit only neighboring streets. Or try parking at the Car wash across the street when its closed.. . Like the parking lot, the restaurant is small. It can maybe seat 30 people tops. It took over a lease from a Korean restaurant that didn't make it. I kind of chuckle at comparing this place to Father's Office (FO). FO is founded by a guy of Korean descent that modeled his establishment on 1950's Anglo Father's Knows Best type of genre. Umami is founded by a white guy who who went for the Asian genre instead. The owner is Adam Fleischman, who sold Bottlerocket in Culver City a year or two ago. Umami is his latest love child with his biz partners.. . For those of you that don't know what Umami means, its basically the Japanese word for savory. For those of you that love booze with your burgers, sorry but this place isn't a gastropub. Its strictly a burger joint with a straightforward menu. There are several burgers you can choose from, most of them in the $8 range, which is actually a very good price for a gourmet burger. Most gourmet burgers tend to cost $12 or up in other establishments. . . They also have a few side dishes. One major plus is that they serve Mexican Coke, which is made with cane sugar instead of the acidic tasting corn syrup. I took pics and close-ups of the menu, so all the names of the burgers, side dishes, etc. have their pricing included.. . I ordered the house specialty Umami Burger, the roasted garlic potato salad and a Mexican Coke. Total damage was $12.45. Not bad. I thought it was interesting that the Umami was the only burger on the menu where the contents weren't listed on the menu. If my memory serves me correctly, it has the following: oven roasted tomatoes (which is very similar to sun dried tomatoes, just a bit more moister), shitaki mushrooms, oven roasted Parmesan cheese (almost like fried cheese), Umami ketchup, and the burger itself. So how does it taste? Really good. Its a juicy burger. I couldn't taste the mushrooms though - their taste was overpowered by the oven roasted tomatoes. I will point out that though I found the burger to be filling, the heavy eaters (you know who you are) out there probably won't be satisfied unless they eat 2 burgers.. . What was disappointing was the garlic roasted potato salad. I really wanted to like it since I love the Russian blue potatoes. But the potatoes were barely cooked. Some of it tasted like I was eating a raw potato. I think steaming the potatoes would be much better in preparing them.. . I saw some neighboring diners order the fries and it just looked very skimpy in portion. I understand they are trying to get that Zen like ambiance you get at sushi restaurant, but for heaven's sake, this is a burger joint. Then again, its great if you are on a diet.. . Overall, I liked Umami burger I had that I want to try their other offerings. I'll probably come back with my foodie friends in a week or two so that we could order everything in the menu in one sitting. The only problem with meeting here in a group is the tight parking, which I pointed out earlier. I would recommend a party no larger than 8 people, and carpool if you can. The place also currently has limited hours. They are open for lunch and for dinner, but its not continuous between the two. Your best bet is to call ahead to make sure they are open when you plan to dine there.
