ReviewID: bsnucEj2ejUTEYQs2Cwpmg
ReviewerID: u3jxB3gHF8pZK6OCr2ik9g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
A few weeks ago, I was at a loss for a place to eat.  I felt like getting something familiar, yet exciting - slow, yet fast.  And then my friend said, "I've been wanting to try that one place you posted pastrami pictures of."  . . Eureka!. . Enter: Oinkster.  "Slow Fast Food."  Ah, the use of oxymoron is titillating. . . I've frequented Oinkster many a time over the past few years, and have had a chance to try at least half the menu.  I must say, they very very seldom disappoint.   . . I very much dig the chill, laid-back atmosphere of the place.  There's a good amount of space to accommodate the faceless throngs that have caught on to the Oinksterifficness.  They also have outdoor seating, which is a big plus for me.  Additionally, the waitstaff have always been super helpful.  Kudos, people.. . As far as food goes, I count Oinkster as a happy food place.  Every time I go, the experience releases a veritable flash flood of endorphins that is only amplified by the quality of the food.  . . The Oinkster pastrami is an excellent place to start your Oinkster journey.  You can really taste the care they put in the stuff.  I appreciate that you can actually taste other flavors beside the salt and meat... which isn't necessarily a bad thing... but, you know.  Accompanied by the Gruyere cheese, red cabbage slaw, and cradled neatly in a soft roll, it really is the bidness.  See, it's so good, I had to misspell something for emphasis.  Another sandwich of note is their pulled pork.... good stuff.  With all the other stuff on the menu, you wouldn't think that they'd pay as much attention to their burgers.  But they do.  Oh boy, do they. Experiencing the tastiness and juiciness of the meat patty was cathartic.  It has seriously inspired me to find burgers in Los Angeles of like quality.. . Not only do they have good food, their drink selection is great!  Beer, Oinksterade, Ube shake.  Ube?  What's Ube, you ask?  Well, it's a purple yam related to taro.  Maybe that doesn't sound like an appealing basis for a shake.  If you assumed that, however, you'd be absolutely wrong.  Go.  Try it.  They'll let you sample it.  I dare you to deny it once it assaults your taste buds with a raging torrent of purple yam power.  It'll bring you to your gastronomic knees.. . Let's not even start with the Belgian style fries paired with their garlic aioli.  If you like fries well-done, welcome to the paramount.. . The only menu item I've ever been unsatisfied with is the plantains.  They were super dry and bore little semblance to bananas.  But alas, that is but a small transgression.  I'm even willing to give them the benefit of a doubt and say that it was just a bad plantain day.. . Anyway, I just started drooling while writing this review.  Sounds like a sign to me - a sign pointed squarely at Oinkster!!  GO!
