ReviewID: bVbpP3zyH7TLYGaJrsap4A
ReviewerID: ZRbfDZxpq4b8lZO-RabeyQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Verde Taqueria
Category: Mexican
Okay, this was my second trip to Verde...I gave it two shots...one with the family and one with my friends.  All I can say is AWFUL!!!!!. . You know why I gave it one star...because that is as low as I can go. Seriously, I would give it NO STARS.. . This restaurant presents itself as a taquieria... cheap eats, flour tacos for the gringos, low prices what could go wrong, right?. . Both times I have been there the service has been awful, slow, they forgot to bring silverware, took forever to bring drinks.  When I came with my kids and family, they did not even bring napkins to the table and served half of the order and made us wait another 10 minutes for the other half.. . So my last trip there and IT WILL BE MY LAST.  I ordered the buffalo chicken taco and the steak fajita taco.  Seriously, the other 5 guys that I was with ordered one salad -( completely uninspiring - like they went to Publix and dumped out the pre-cut salad and brought him two small buckets of ranch dressing - Voila $7 wasted) and each of the other 4 guys ordered two tacos.    It took them at least 20 minutes to bring the food and when they did it was COLD.. . There is nothing to the tacos, a couple of pieces of meat, bland sauce and a cold flour tortilla.   . . ARE YOU KIDDING ME?  . . The sad thing, is that a place like Verde will survive.    Propped up by a Buckhead crowd that is excited about tater tots on the menu.. . The clientele is exclusive Buckhead that would never dream of driving less than one mile the other way to experience a real taco served on Buford Hwy. . Save yourself, drive to Plaza Fiesta or Buford Hwy or go to Taco Bell if you want safe Mexican.  At least the food will be warm there... . Read the other reviews...people are comforted by the fact that they serve Tater Tots.   Just like home, straight out of the bag.  . . Read my other reviews and see if I care about food.  If you are the owner of the restaurant, feel free to email me.  I can direct you to couple of places nearby, where you can hire a new cook to at least give you a chance.
