ReviewID: bvIfZIsNxGQ_8naHppYmGQ
ReviewerID: 8akUnYbmNLjB5A8bAymVOw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
Been here once before and I didn't even know it was Savoy, fast forward a few years and I come here again after a friend said the hainam chicken here was the best EVAR so I naturally had to pop back and see what's what.. . -Interior/Exterior. I never sat inside but it's incredibly small, a few tables for couples and maybe one table for a group of four. It's awfully cramped and as a result they have outdoor seating, they bolted a wooden bench to the outside wall and have tables and chairs sitting alongside it. The outdoor seating can seat the larger parties but all in all they can probably seat maybe 50-60 total. So they have a clipboard sitting out front so you can put your name down and wait, the outdoor seating also has a mister that they use when it gets hot.. . -Service. The service here is what I expect from an Asian restaurant: not that great. It didn't take too long for our food to come but when I asked for a refill on water it took about 10-15 minutes, I thought she remembered when I saw her with the water pitcher but she was refilling a different table. Eventually I got my water along with the check; like I said, don't expect good service.. . -Food. The hainam chicken that everyone raves on about here is the real reason why I came again, it's pretty cheap from what I recalled, $7-$8? Our table ordered two hainam chickens, chicken curry, and some pasta of some sort, I forget. The hainam chicken comes with two dipping sauces (chili and ginger) and I believe soy sauce on the side, you can ask for refills on the dipping sauces and they'll give you a big jug of it. As for the chicken, I didn't think it lives up to the hype. . . Granted my only other experience with hainam chicken is with Banana Bay and Coconut Bay, but they all taste the same to me. Steamed chicken is steamed chicken, it will lack flavor unless you add some other stuff to it which is what I suppose everyone likes at Savoy, the sauces. The rice was OK, cooked just how I imagined it would be for the hainam chicken dish. I also ordered a chrysanthemum tea which was sweeter than what I'm use to but a little sugar won't do much harm, if you want a drink besides water or soda I suggest the iced tea because you get free refills.. . This place is average in my book, and I would consider that to be slightly generous considering how everyone says any dish aside from the hainam chicken is mediocre. Savo(r)y Kitchen is a small restaurant among the many other Asian restaurants in the S.G.V., known for the hainam chicken but I implore you to venture out and find another restaurant that serves it and tell me what the difference is because I can't see or taste the difference. If you're looking to dine here come early and put your name down and come with a small party is all I can say, and try the hainam chicken.
