ReviewID: bVxYHJpWweGJfX2UvXKifA
ReviewerID: W8MlgzACF88yMeWNxQNiRw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Rose Angelis
Category: Italian
I haven't lived in Chicago since the early 2000's (how depressing does *that* sound?!?) but remember my experiences at this restaurant fondly. The back patio was the scene of many a romantic meal with my beloved, as well as casual summer outings with friends. Fast-forward to this decade (seriously, how depressing could *that* be???). My friend's bridal shower was held here recently, and given that she's one of my all-time besties, I was privy to some of the details going into the event.. . This space is a great idea for bridal showers for several reasons:. 1) no room charge. 2) patio seating. 3) the restaurant is closed on Saturday afternoons, so you can have yourselves a nice little private party. 4) ridonka-donk portions of good, hearty Italian food, for a pretty good price.. . The day was unseasonably cold and dreary with a threat of rain, so we had to move operations to the back room. It was perfect anyway - there are large skylights that opened up the space and highlighted all of the wall murals. Very cute.. . Getting to the food: yum, yum, delizioso, soooo much food, too. The appetizers were passed and also located on a table. We had a few different kinds of bruschetta (my favorite was the olive tapenade), grilled asparagus and portobello, and even a vegetarian pizza. I was stuffed beyond comprehension from snacking on all that good stuff, but we had yet more and more food to plow through.. . The meals are plated, another excellent touch for a shower-type event. We all got huge, HUGE plates of Caesar salad to start, and then our choice of the mezzaluna al burro, the rotini alla puttanesca, or the fish of the day, which was mahi-mahi. I am all over puttanesca, though the words "brown butter sauce" on the mezzaluna were beckoning...but I was not disappointed. And holy cow, I honestly got a pound of pasta for my dish, as did everyone else who ordered the pasta. The puttanesca is proper - an olive and caper explosion, punctuated with crunchy pine nuts.. . Do you not doubt that I couldn't turn down dessert, too? Strawberries drizzled with caramel sauce. Tiramisu, which I didn't sample, because...Italian bread pudding was also served and when I see the words "bread pudding" I just cannot turn it down. This was utter decadence - the caramel sauce was divine.. . To top it all off, the service was utterly perfect. We had a server, who passed the apps and tended the tables, and a hostess/waitress, who did an amazing job of corralling the ladies, directing the traffic, and pacifying a few guests who played prima donnas.. . What an excellent place to spend time celebrating loved ones! A five-star experience, for sure.
