ReviewID: bwhycKX1TxzbkCQvcYTx-g
ReviewerID: BI4lPhrUpmEySIJUywjIjQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Buona Terra
Category: Italian
I lean towards 3.5 stars for this review.  Somewhere in between 3 and 3.5 - maybe 3.3?. . I understand that we did have 20 people and it is a large group for this smaller restaurant - crowded but cosy ambiance.  First of all, parking was doable around the area - looped around a couple of times, but it was okay.  We did have to wait a while to get seated but it was also more or less waiting for everyone to arrive.. . The bread was warm and really yummy - the best part was definitely that garlicky spread/dip.  I ordered the Carpacio: sliced tenderloin of beef drizzled with truffle oil and topped with portabello mushrooms, capers and shaved parmesan as my appetizer and it was good, decent good.  I tried a little of Mr.Slapnuts' fried calamari and it was decent good, too.  (When I say decent good, I mean that it was good, nothing to complain about, basic, but it wasn't like mouth-watering good) and I tried a little of Rachel G's Prosciutto e Mozzarella alla Ferri which was also pretty decent.. . For my entree - I got the Bistecca alla Crosta di Parmigiano: grilled 14oz. N.Y. strip steak with a parmesan crust and served with roasted potatoes and natural jus, when I was debating with the porkchops and the other ribeye that was on special.  I kinda regret it and wish that I had gone with the porkchops or the ribeye.  My meat was a bit tough and when I ordered a medium, I felt like I had received a medium well.  Rachel G pointed out that maybe Leang has received my medium instead.  For dessert - I got mine to go for Mr.Slapnuts to enjoy at a latter time but everyone looked like they were enjoying their dessert - Mr.Slapnuts said that his pecan tart with fruit on top was the best part of the meal and Rachel G &amp; Leang said that their cheesecake with raspberries was amazing.. . Overall, service was pretty friendly and accommodating for our big group.  Their Thursday prix fixe dinner (only $19.99) was definitely a good deal and I was in GREAT yelp company =)  And the best part of yelp company?  Everyone paid what they should paid and we weren't struggling at the end to toss in more money - great thanks to BoA (Bank of Andrea W) and her helper Vanessa in collecting!
