ReviewID: BwLPncp8axFl7Ip9dQVJHQ
ReviewerID: uO6th8EuZPQipjNIluS1pQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Aja Restaurant &amp; Bar
Category: Dim Sum
On my third visit to Aja, I still want to put them in the "Just Ok" column. My first was for a private business dinner on the top floor. The setup was nice, the servers were cool, the food ok. Second visit was for a Sol Fusion party where they had a very limited sushi menu. It was quite hectic purchasing food/drink as well as trying to party, so I wouldn't judge Aja on that occasion. . . This third visit was for an after work GNO, which was sooo needed after this work week. As usual, I was a few minutes late (I'm getting better at that) to meet my party which were already one drink ahead of me :-( so I needed to quickly catch up haha. . . We were seated next to the sushi bar and opening to the kitchen. In normal circumstances, well just about in all, I would have asked for another table. But seeing as the restaurant was jumping with large parties, I kept my mouth closed. . . The highlight of the night was the Manager, I assume he was the manager. Dude has major personality and he and a couple of the male waiters pulled our chairs out (while he asked for my number, which I thought was a joke, until he said something else about it...hmmm, kinda weird). But nonetheless, when I waitress took more than 20min to come take our orders, he was quick to start the process when one of the guests got his attention. As my girl says "don't mess with hungry women who will call corporate and report you" lol. . . Food - the spicy seafood entree was tasty, but the sauce was a little over the top....still made for good leftovers the next day. We order a few apps, calamari (which I love, but there was a HUGE bed of lettuce and only 6-7 calamari rings, disappointing), edamame (I had it during a previous visit and recall they were on point) and I had the rainbow roll (fresh!). . . Drinks - the raspberry margarita was good! Its made with Chambold*(spelling) which was my first time trying that type of vodka. . . I still think they are a little pricey for what it is...but considering its Buckhead, free valet and a pretty pricy-looking decor, guess they gotta make it up somehow.
