ReviewID: bWzUhEKmq9KinQlJ_F3gXw
ReviewerID: 0PhEiKbv5BsHE9ygSNhLRg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Oh, Boiling Crab....just the name alone brings hunger!. . If you're into seafood, lots of spices, and getting down &amp; dirty with your bare hands, then this place is for YOU!  The whole dining (and waiting) experience is unforgettable.  Yes, I did say "waiting."  Regardless of when is your dinner time, the waiting game is usually at least 2 hours! (Yes, AT LEAST TWO!!!).  I got there at 7:30PM and didn't get seated until 9:55PM.  Thus, as a heads up, do not arrive when your stomach is howling at the moon--bring a light snack as you wait (ie. popcorn, chips, etc.) that would help tame the animal within you (for a bit).. . Well, if the wait is that bad, does it say something about the food?  *Howling*......yes!  Usually I don't follow the hype, I have to taste it to believe it, but they do live up to that expectation!  I ordered a pound of cajun shrimp, a basket of fried catfish w/seasoned fries, and a basket of fried calamari.  They have a number of fried items for those fried food lovers and their main event items (ie. shrimp, crawfish, lobster, oysters, clams, and, of course, the crabs--blue crab, dungeness crab, and king crab) come in all sorts of seasoning and spiciness-levels.. . My shrimp flavor was the original cajun, which I haven't tried before and probably wouldn't order this flavor again.  Unfortunately, this tasted more watered-down than mouth-watering.  I should have ordered the garlic butter or "The Whole Sha-bang" (a combination of cajun, lemon pepper, and garlic butter) which really gives that BANG in the taste buds!. . The fried catfish was also banging!  I had this before and no other place can fry catfish like Boiling Crab.  The fillet is so soft, moist, and meaty and the outer layer is fried to golden crispy perfection!  The most interesting part to notice is that inside this catfish continues to remain warm after several minutes of go-time as you munch on the other creatures of the sea.  I figured their fried breading was able to lock in the heat and retain it throughout your meal--it's like an edible heating lamp (minus the lamp)!. . The fried calamari appeared like sloppy French fries because they mainly used the tentacles of the squid instead of the mantle (ie. body), which would have appeared like onion rings.  Nonetheless, my stomach says either form of preparation is delicious!  The chef definitely knows what he/she was doing since frying squid doesn't require much time in the batter.  Any longer than a few minutes would have turned the calamari very hard and all sloppy and chewy consistency would have disappeared and covered up by the fried grease.  And speaking of fries, their seasoned fries are an awesome alternative to the regular potato fries.  Try them if you can!. . So the verdict?  If you don't mind your eyes seeing illusions of seafood floating in the air as you sustain yourself for a couple hours of stomach-solitude, then this is a must-taste-place!  If you're starving and want a quick-bite-on-the-run, then it's highly recommended to go elsewhere.  The wait is unbelievably long and this restaurant can do take-out, but you still have to wait a while anyway.  Nevertheless, the wait is worth a try for any newcomers out there seeking great seafood--I'll definitely make a return (with a bag of chips).
