ReviewID: bXQiYKlAD6A1yjlOraUlEQ
ReviewerID: -C0hanWEsi5y0OZllOoasA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
I would like to start off by saying two things...A.) this review is nearly two weeks past due and B.) as a yelping virgin I am proud to say that this is my first. (Could possibly be my last as I would rather read others comments about various establishments rather than writing my own).. . WITH THAT SAID.... . Joan's on Third is a spot I've frequented after moving to LA from NYC about two years ago. This is in part due to its proximity to where I live and in part due to the fact that I have not once left this place without being completely and utterly satisfied.. . BUT, what this review is really about is the killer service I encountered while there. I am speaking mostly of one person in particular, but I get the vibe that this little anecdote could have been about a number of the Joan's on Third staffers. . . Forgive me if I have got your name wrong, but I'm speaking of Jeff (I hope) the cheese guy. While I didn't buy any cheese from Jeff a couple weeks back, I did have the pleasure of meeting him. As I made my way through the gauntlet of an alley way behind 3rd to park behind Joan's, I inevitably hit a pothole...bad. As I pulled up behind Joan's oblivious to my misfortune, Jeff walked up to my car, tapped on my window and informed me that my front right car tire was spewing air and quickly flattening. Panicked and almost late for a birthday dinner at Red O (the new Rick Bayless spot which wouldn't get the same five star review as here) I realized it had been at least 12 years since I changed a car tire, and even that was a practice during driving school. . . Well, the cheese guy appears 30 seconds later and proceeds to change my filthy tire without skipping a beat. It was then when I realized that Joan's truly is a FULL SERVICE gem. I've always loved their cupcakes, fancy cheeses, gourmet bites and also a muffaletta to die for. But, not until this encounter did I realize how truly helpful and genuine the people at Joan's on Third are.  I LOVE this place. Just remember to never attempt to part in the back.. . Thank you Jeff (if this is in fact your name)...you were amazing. . . PS. I will be back any day now to get those cupcakes and espresso that I sadly had to forget about during my last venture.
