ReviewID: bXSyJb2GocWnmgst1gd-oQ
ReviewerID: cufhYFdyrUAt4SWe-m0grQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: HB Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Forgetting the fact that I need to tell you about the food, location, decor, blah blah blah... the thing that sticks out most to me is the service. When we arrived for the multi-course family-style meal (they knew I needed some meat on my bones; not really, but let's go with it), I set my Guinness™ cooler backpack on the back of my chair. A co-worker had introduced me to the underworld of icing and I was in too deep to get out now. Our waitress bumped into my bag a few times and asked if she could move it. I pleaded with her not to do so, so that I would not get iced.. . "What the hell is 'iced?'," she asked.. . I told her. She laughed and exclaimed, "Boys!" exasperatedly and went about her business. In the mean time, she poured glass after glass of wine, replaced plates of artichoke cheese fritters with truffle fries, eggplant/roasted red pepper/feta incredibleness succulent seafood, perfectly prepared fish, crisp veggies, mouth-watering chicken, and some of the best desserts I have had in a while (chocolate + sesame seeds = [redacted]). By the end of the meal, my icing victim had left his bag unattended -- as had I. Noting that there was an icing to be had, the waitress notified me that my buddy's bag was sitting in the chair.. . "Oh yeah. Danny must have forgotten his bag. I should get it to him.". . "Don't you want to stick one of those things in there?". . Blank stare.. . "Those nasty vodka things in your backpack.". . "OH! Yeah! Right!!". . "Well, you better hurry up. He's coming back.". . Sensing sabotage to be afoot, she DELAYED my buddy so that I could place a WARM raspberry Ice in his bag. He came back into the dining room, saw his sad fate and my glee was paramount. Thankfully, in Chicago, you can get a pretty good meal in more than a few places. But how many stellar meals come with a girl-Friday co-conspirator? I think I love that waitress.
