ReviewID: BZ82YEG99R9tlYzyE5axTg
ReviewerID: u27CZfQJbC6keG5iU9tKPQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I'll admit, after being disappointed by Fleming's Steakhouse, I was pretty hesitant to try this place at first. But, boy am I glad I did! Mastro's can not compare to Fleming's. Everything from their food, ambiance, and customer service is excellent! . . First of all, we arrived 45 minutes late to our reservation due to traffic. I gave them a call about 10-15 minutes prior to our reservation time to inform them of our situation and they assured me that it was no problem at all. When we arrived, our table was ready without a wait. However, the party sitting next to us was rather loud and, since we were celebrating an anniversary, I wanted to sit at a more private table. The waiter not only accommodated my request but also gave me a tour of the entire restaurant and sat me at the table of my choice. . . After getting cozy, we familiarized ourselves with the menu. I ordered the 8oz. bone-in filet (my eyes are a lot bigger than my stomach so I didn't want to get ahead of myself) sauteed garlic spinach, and lobster mashed potatoes. The bone-in filet was beyond delicious! The meat was cooked and seasoned perfectly. I didn't even need to add any salt, pepper, or sauce. It was perfect! The garlic spinach was also delicious, flavorful, fresh, and not soggy/watery like most places. However, the lobster mashed potatoes are definitely Mastro's star side dish. I'm willing to bet that there at least 3 lobsters on top of those mashed potatoes. They definitely did not skimp on the lobster at all! The sauce that it was sauteed in was also very flavorful yet, not overpowering, which made it the perfect compliment to the steak. . . After chowing down on what I still rank as the best dinner of my life, our waiter surprised us with a complimentary slice of chocolate cake with "Happy Anniversary" written on the plate. The cake was moist, delicious, and the perfect ending to our dining experience. I should mention that the slice was also very generous--another aspect they didn't skimp on.. . As fabulous as this review already sounds, it's not over yet. The next morning, one of their amazing staff members gave us a follow-up call to make sure our dining experience was everything we hoped for and more.. . Mastro's definitely earns its 5 stars. It is the only steak place I rave about and the only non-homemade steak I eat. Definitely well worth the dent in your checking account!
