ReviewID: C0qBSFN4MAjojrCIujEDFg
ReviewerID: C1_AvND8ApbjfZlKbtbbEA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Glenn&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
Went here based on a recommendation, although their location was a bit far from where we were in Chicago, the recent talk about them on divers, dine ins and dives made it a trip we were looking forward to.. . Overall, it was quite good. Worth it for some good fish, and this is coming from a guy who isn't a big fish fan.. . A friend and I split the diablo char and the catfish. Both were quite good. The char came with roasted potatoes (although I subbed in a potato pancake) and veggies (mostly green beans with a few carrots). All were covered with a "shrimp diablo" sauce. Overall 8/10. I was impressed with the fish, which was a good size and the sauce had a good flavor, although when I ordered it they said it'd be spicy and it really wasn't. Also, there could have been a bit more shrimp in the sauce.. . The catfish probably gets an 8.5 / 10. It was a quite tasty breaded fish and came with a delicious cornbread stuffing and some veggies. The only complaint I had was that much like the char the veggies weren't that intersting and the whole meal seemed to fall apart very quickly (stuffing was very hard to eat on a fork and the catfish filet was a bit small) . . Appetizers: I had crab cakes, very good. Also snuck a bite of someone elses crab dip; I'd say it was above average but not great.. . Service: We had a big group the day after thanksgiving (11 people). Unlike some of the other reviews on here, they were quick and had our table ready ahead of time. Still, it's clear that they are more of a diner and they end up lagging a bit; for example, our appetizers came just as we were wondering when they would and our dinner came a bit after we would have liked. We had a nice accommodating waiter (forgot his name though) and they really tried to manage the group well (only flaws were forgetting a wine and beer order at various times throughout our group's meal) . . Finally, although they have breakfast; I didn't have any. Someone in my group just had plain pancakes, and they didn't look to be too special. Lobster Benedict sounded good but not good enough to prefer for dinner. My friend and I claimed at the beginning of the meal that we might get some cereal for dessert, but were just too full. At $4.95 though per bowl, you pretty much could get your own on the way home if you really wanted it. Still, they do pretty much seem to give you the entire box, with 2nd and 3rd refills being free.
