ReviewID: C1l1Z80_P0oqkjZEkbF6wg
ReviewerID: wxrX3_4TjEfeBF1LASZV5A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
I suppose at 900 reviews, another one doesn't really matter, but I wanted to write my "twin" review to the Cole's one I just made. . . Remember the Sweet Valley High twins, Jessica and Elizabeth Wakefield? One of the twins was more serious-minded, down to earth, practical, and had less glamorous friends. The other was more polished with better clothes, make-up, and ran around with richer and hotter friends.. . Phillipe's is Elizabeth Wakefield. While Cole's is polished, better decorated, has a bar and servers in fedoras, Phillipe's is a bit more authentic and spunky. The iced tea is under 99¢. They have ginormous pickles in glowing green mason jars. Pigs feet bob as their next door neighbors. Middle aged women wear 50's waitress uniforms, deftly taking money, writing tickets, and grabbing your food in under a few minutes at the sprawling lunch counter (never mind that you just waited 30-45 minutes to get to the front- bring good company to chat whilst you wait). There are large cream pies of every variety in their refrigerated cases for you to order a healthy slab from.. . Dude, this place is all about the authenticity and realness. You aren't going to spot some trendy young thing from a Fox network primetime show here, but you are probably going to share a booth with a hearty trucker from Minneapolis who's sweating into his coleslaw (delicious!) and beef double french dip. I love that! Sit me next to the real people that work hard for that dollar please. Save the hobnobbin' for the jerk offs.. . As far as the food goes...I'm sorry. I like the french dip's at Cole's better. I hate that there is no au jus (is it REALLY a french dip without the meat drippings? i contest) to make my bread soggy, and the meat has always seemed a bit dry. Maybe i should try it with cheese, as some people do (but then it ceases to be authentic, my opinion) to get a little fat in there. Coleslaw is awesome with the meat and bread. I'm a fan of the pickle too, but find it superfluous if you order the coleslaw. Iced tea is awesome, basic, good brewed stuff like I had at grandma's.. . Worth it for the experience, food is just okay.
