ReviewID: c2LQsmi6BgjDvqWQ60-8XQ
ReviewerID: -_r4S5VwlcDQMWIxB8JM8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Farm Burger
Category: Burgers
I am so glad that Farm Burger has given everyone something to bitch about. Sheesh you people. . Those of us at Memorial are all fans of Chef Terry's. As such I decided to do things I normally would never do.  I braved the long line, downtown Decatur and trying a newly opened, trendy restaurant. . Malia summed up the wait as "daunting but do-able".  She was dead right. It's not that bad. And I feel well worth it.. I can name 10 perennially popular joints with a much longer line.  . The waitstaff was super friendly considering the pace at which they were all working. it was balls to the wall. . We showed up at rush time, cued up and ordered nearly everything on the menu. . I will admit that I was a bit worried about seating while waiting to order. But as soon as we all ordered and got our drinks, a larger group cleared out. As soon as we were seated we had appetizers on the table. . The boiled peanuts were cooked perfectly but could use a bit more salt. . The pickled egg was very beety. . The Brisket is good and very stew like.. The pork and beans were insanely fuggin awesome. So good in fact that even the vegetarian tried and liked them. . The chicken livers were god's own nuts on a stick. Jeebus Christo, gimme more. . The Corn nuts were crunchy lil bad asses in a jar, get some! . The Chicken Croquettes are everything good about pot pie, deep fried! Gotdam! And the cranberry chutney that they're served with makes me miss my maw maw's thanksgiving dinners. "sniff" . I could live forever on this dish alone. . But wait there's more!. They have burgers too!. I had a plain burger, tomato and mustard only. The meat is super tasty and good enough that you don't need to smother it in stuff to make it eatable. .  They have a mind boggling variety of toppings. But I came to sample the beef!. The fries are great but the onion rings are stellar! Crispy, crunchy and not too greasy.   I normally hate onions. . I had a bite of the veghead's quinoa burger,  Shame on all the other resto's that serve those horrid black bean patties. This sammich was outstanding. I'd order one myself. . My only complaint is that the sweet tea was very, very weak. But that is honestly all I can say that is negative. . If you want a quicker burger, hit a drive thru. . As far as the pricing, I felt like I got more than my money's worth. And I am as cheap as they come.. They could use a bit more seating. But the turn over seemed to move smoothly due to the employee's vigilance. . I thoroughly enjoyed my food and the dining experience.
