ReviewID: c3FohCMT-8PQD-LNDoJJaA
ReviewerID: 5YqgLIDUo40Fw7EqxQJU8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Oh my goddddddddddd.. . Some things you must know before eating here:. 1) To get a reservation, you must do it one month (30 days) in advance.  No earlier than one month before the date.  Otherwise you can wait for a couple hours showing up the night you wanna eat there, or come in at 10:15-10:30pm and you just might score a seat.  Looked like it was clearing out right around then (by clearing out I mean two tables looked available and there wasn't a mob surrounding the door). . 2) Yes it's loud in there.  Inexplicably loud for how small the dining room area is.  Get over it.  It's a restaurant, not a social lounge.. . 3) You must order the chicken liver appetizer.  (Chicken pate on La Brea bakery bread with a fat slice of guanciale (translation: BACON) in the middle of it).  I know, I know.  If you are like me, chicken livers are a no-go because pate just isn't my thing, at all.  Holy chicken livers!  One of the most scrumptious plates of food I've ever eaten in my life.  The chicken liver mixed with the briny capers and BACON?!  And toasted to perfection La Brea bakery bread, oh god.  I'm having flashbacks.. . 4) Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.  Butterscotch Budino.. I wish that they offered an unlimited refills option on this dessert.  Yes it's $9 but it's amazing.  The texture of the dessert is like a pudding but a little different as the generous amounts of salt layered in the dessert give a sweet and salty flavor to the dessert and that is what makes it out of this world.  Can you do unlimited refills on this one, please?? Pizza Mozza!  Hear my plea!. . Don't even get me started on the pizza.  The "meat-lovers" pizza.  Just look at your calendar, and call them to make a reservation right now.
