ReviewID: c3gWasN_-DdOl-EdvP3rqg
ReviewerID: OMr4L_mbsMG__NQoWoDFJQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Grey Dog&#39;s Coffee
Category: Coffee & Tea
I'm quickly becoming a regular at this place. It's by far some of the most delicious breakfast/brunch fare I've had in some time. The Grey Dog breakfast is around $10, with hearty servings of your choice of eggs, with bacon or sausage, and pancakes or French toast. The home fries are out of this world. Stringy, crispy, lightly seasoned and just a touch of sauteed onions. They are seriously amazing. The pancakes are sweet and perfectly round with a side of real maple syrup. The coffee at Grey Dog is also consistently delicious. It's not cheap to dine there but not outrageous either. It is, however, really, really crowded. BUT - the ordering, payment, and food delivery system keeps things moving swiftly and by the time you get to the front of the line and order and pay for your food, a very friendly dude has a table nearly ready for you. I've never waited more than a few seconds, really. You get your own silverware and water but someone from the kitchen calls out your name and hands over your plates when your food is ready, which isn't usually more than 10-15 minutes after ordering. The pastries look fresh all the time and are served in dinosaur sized portions. The first time I went, I was convinced that there was no glass case guarding the pastries until I stuck my hand out, which says a lot about how clean they keep it. I was impressed. The decor is kind of funny and subdued, with exposed brick, a couple kitchy paintings of grey dogs, and ironically painted skateboard under bellies-turned-wall art. Beware of groups... It's a regular inconvenience to everyone else in the place if you show up in parties of 3 or more. It's just so small. 3 or 4 are manageable, but the restaurant is more suited for 2 at a time. I can only imagine a time at Grey Dog where its understated charm wasn't trite with hipsters, but I suppose that's the price the west village pays for being so damn cool.
