ReviewID: c6yGccVZ7IloB8vQ9ZhbgA
ReviewerID: K6tCRVk5cF_Qu81xah6xuA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
This review is for the DineLa Menu for Jan. 24, 2010. . . I wasn't too crazy about the menu when I first saw it posted on the Dinela website but I figured I'd have to give Top Chef Creator Tom Collechio's restaurant a try. . . As soon as all 5 of us arrived we were asked to sit at the bar while our table was set up. This restaurant is beautiful and had a modern feel. The dinela menu was very simple. The only thing that we needed to decide on was our entree. The appetizers and desserts were just brought out family style.. . Food. Bread - Olive bread and a dark squaw bread with a hint of star anise. Good crust and a nice way to start. Nothing as fabulous as M Voltaggio's bacon bread or his brioche black truffle bread.. . Appetizers . Red Lettuce Salad - This was a sorry dish. Huge leaves that were over dressed and just looked limp and old on the plate. I was actually surprised they would serve something like this at the restaurant. It was like old, leftover salad in the fridge you toss up in dressing and sprinkle a couple of nuts into. Worse than a side salad at the Olive Garden.. . Smoked Trout with Pickled Onions - Also another very average dish that tasted like any other smoked fish you find at a buffet. . . Slices of what looked like Pate with pickled cucumbers and carrots- Another bleh dish that was probably added to this menu because it was cheap and was easy to prep ahead of time.. . Salmon Mousse, Duck Rillette - This was like a 3 layered pate. This was actually the my favorite appetizer because it appeared to be the most exotic. The top layer resembled a red berry gelee, middle was a smooth salmon mousse, and the bottom layer the duck rillette. This was accompanied by crostinis.. . Entrees were also served family style. Ribeye with Fava Beans? - We had 2 orders of this which amounted to 4 small medallions. So everyone had about 2 bites. The beans were quite good but were on the salty side. The quality of the meat was average.. very chewy. . . Roasted Pork Shoulder - This dish was really dry. I was expecting something a little more succulent and tender.. . Blue Prawns with Grits - This was a fun dish, I enjoyed the grits a lot. The shrimp was cooked perfectly. There were only 2 prawns in the dish so some of us did not get to have any. . . Pasta stuffed with Ricotta and Sauteed Mushrooms - Surprisingly this was my Favorite dish of the night! The texture of the house made pasta was heavenly. The textures was smooth and silky. The assortment of sauteed mushrooms were also excellent. Could of had more of this one.. . Sides . Roasted Vegetable Medley - It didn't sound very exciting but they were all quite good. I loved the root vegetables and the radishes. They were al dente just the way I like them.. no mushy veggies. . . Mashed Potatoes with Cream and Chives - We ordered this in addition to the Veg Medley that came with the dinela menu. It was explained to us that it is run thru a Tami so it comes through extremely smooth. Everyone enjoyed this dish.. only complaint was that for $11 you only get like about half a cup of it. . . Dessert . Chocolate SemiFreddo with Peanut Crunch - Pretty much a frozen souffle that tasted like a frozen mousse. They were quite generous with the dessert in comparison to the actual entrees. I enjoyed this dessert but after a couple of bites it got to be too rich.. . Meyer Lemon Tart- Loved this dessert! Flavors were very bright and you can really taste the intensity of the acidity. It was nice to finally have something that was not overly rich like our entrees. This was a winner dessert.. . Caramel Corn - House made Cracker Jack. Tasted just like Cracker Jack. Nothing special. I was expecting some creative more fun treats like from Michael Voltaggio's restaurant such as specialty sorbets, pop rocks choco lollipops. Jean Georges has their house made marshmellows and macaroons. . . I have to say that the service was 5 stars. From the Host, Bartender, and Server .. everyone was terrific. There was not a bit of snootiness in the air which you quite often find at these fine dining restaurants. In comparison to some of the Top Rated Michelin Star restaurants such as Providence, Jean Georges (NY), Le Bernadin (NY), Craft had by far the best overall service. The staff just made you feel really comfortable and explained the items on the menu to the t. All in all I had a very good dining experience. I just wished that the menu that night was a little more innovative and special. Maybe I need to give Craft another chance and come and order their Chef's Tasting menu? I guess I'm a sucker for the new showy molecular gastronomy stuff. Sorry Chef Collechio but Chef Voltaggio's food to me was a lot more up to date and was more fun to eat. Craft's concept to me was like Classic Americano food executed with French cooking techniques.. but at the end felt like it was steering towards Steak House Dining. If you 're into that type of dining where you  order your protein and then your sides a la carte you might enjoy this restaurant
