ReviewID: c7ygVOfWalrGllyXrphedw
ReviewerID: UQa9RqoJZWAawzqN-2pT2Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
Well maybe my expectations wasn't that high since I went to The Little Next Door and it wasn't as hot as I thought it would be. The Little Door was a little it better that is why it gets four stars! . . You might miss it but since The Little Next Door is right next to it yodu just have to go into this big brown door to get into The Little Door. Once inside if you are sitting in the front, that is considered to  be a smoking area. Towards the back of the place is non smoking. This place is very dimly lit and lots of candles around the table. Very personal and nice. Something that I didn't believe from the yelpers. . . OK lets get down to business we had a table of 5 for my birthday dinner and we sat on little blue chairs and a wooden table. Very cute and something different for once. The bread was paired with vinegar sauce mixed with olive oil. More vinegar than the oil. . . Also ordered two bottles of red wine, Merlot. The bottles were a little bit pricey and we ordered the cheapest bottle which was around $45 or $48.00 I'm not quite sure but that was the cheapest. There were a few bottles that were $100.00 for Merlot. But yea...we aren't trying to blow all our money on just wine. I did enjoy the wine a lot and it was just a nice pairing with the food that we were eating.. . I had : The Duck that everyone was saying was good. It was delicious but a little bit dry. I did like how it was sliced and the sauce was literally on the side where you can dip your duck into it. So that was pretty good. Also the duck had a little bit of pepper on it as well. The rice was maybe a hand size of rice which wasn't that much at all but it did taste pretty good.. . I also was able to try their special lamb shank which came in a cute ceramic shaped plate. I'll post the pictures of it later. It also came with this little grain rice which tasted very well with the lamb. . . My other friend had the halibut which wasn't that great so I wouldn't suggest to eat this dish.. . Another friend had rib eye and that was neatly sliced as well and it came with potatoes and a small tiny bit of vegetables. The rib eye was really nice and juicy red which tasted very good.. . For dessert we had Creme brulee(think I spelled that wrong) in Vanilla with two blackberries on top. The sugar was quite crispy and I love when that happens. I don't like it when it is soggy. So this was good. . . Overall I had an enjoyable birthday dinner and everyone in my party liked there food except for the halibut. So if you want to blow quite a bit of money this is the place to try. Just at least once. This place reminds me of Disneyland in Pirates of the Caribbean ride, where that restaurant is inside. Pretty much looks very similar to that. . . Our total dinner was $330.00 for a table with 5 people and two bottles of wine. Not that bad, I've been to more expensive places before so this wasn't at all bad. Oh yea and the service was very good.. . One tip: I forgot to mention this but if you see the soup where it says seafood in it.....for $18.00 do not get it because the soup has no seafood in it. It pretty much just smells like fish sauce in tomatoes based soup. Not at all what I had expect.  Also halibut wasn't that great. But the other dishes are quite good. . . This place is worth a try just if you go out on a date or something. :)
