ReviewID: C_Yk_OKKjVD3JUnivN4IcA
ReviewerID: Ta3V5b98z48RaV3fmmlqrQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I chose this restaurant for DineLA before I even realized the owner was Tom Colicchio and before I realized it was a chain. I want to hate on chains but I suppose you can make exceptions for chains owned by the judge of Top Chef. . . Clearly the whole Top Chef thing raised the bar. I've listened to this man ruthlessly tear apart the dishes of other chefs so now it was time to see what he was bringing to the table. That and the fact that this place was on the high end of the price scale for DineLA. . . First things first: Very nice service, in every way. Great maître d', great hostess, great servers. That really bumped up the rating having everyone be so polite and accommodating. I also really liked the decor and the whole vibe of the place. While the whole concept of the restaurant was a little pretentious (fresh seasonal ingredients, all organic, blah blah), the interior was warm and inviting and not overly done. I especially loved the outdoor seating. . . On to the food (the most important part).. The  biggest revelation I had was that you get all the appetizers, sides, and desserts as part of the DineLA package. Meaning two appetizers, three sides, and three desserts along with a choice of entree.  Appetizers were OK, tasty enough but I wasn't blown away or anything and it was ironic that there was a salmon rillette after he just blasted a competitor on Top Chef for making a pork rillette that tasted like "cat food". . I had the scallops as an entree. They were large, sweet, and very tender. I think they were cooked very well and I got  maybe one tiny grain of sand. The sauce they were in was pretty salty and rich so go easy on dipping the scallops in that. The potatoes were simply adorable, the smallest I've ever seen and they were also cooked well. My favorite side was the squash medley. Extremely rich and deeply flavored. I've never had squash quite like that! The market veggies were a nice assortment, mainly because of the colors. White parsnips with purple broccoli and carrots along with some mushrooms. No faults on presentation! Overall the main course was very heavy, and salty. This is not a light meal, even if you just get seafood. The dessert was also beautifully presented. The chocolate espresso truffle thing was way too rich for me but it would delight coffee and dark chocolate lovers. The cheesecake was really nice, not sweet at all (think it was made from ricotta) but my favorite was the hazelnut ice cream. Never had it before and it was delicious!. . Overall, I left full and contented. We were also each presented with a $10 gift certificate to the restaurant good until 03/2010. Was it worth the money? Ehhh, maybe. I think it was still slightly overpriced (Drinks are all at least $12 on top of the $44 per person). The portions are a little smaller but the food is so rich that it makes up for it I think. The service is what definitely bumps the rating. Sorry Tom, but you don't get a 5 from me.
