ReviewID: CbFIz0RXfJy8Rglo0JiOgQ
ReviewerID: Bzbna6x9SSYXd3RZem7Lbg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
I am sad to be writing this review - sorry family, but I have to.  So we decided on Lala while I was in town.  We were seated right away and under the heat lamps it was comfy - nice low lighting because you know we all look better in low lights - we all look tan and pretty!  The menu actually looked promising and my mojito and the yummy bread and garlic oil dipping sauce was delish!. . But then we ordered.  So everyone's order goes in - a few requests of no rice, no skin on the chicken come out and our waiter says sure no problem.  So the food comes out pretty fast and immediately faces are like I didn't order this - annoying. Seriously it's not that busy and there were four main dishes oirdered, but with a semi annoyed and puzzled look the waiter fixed the problem.  So we began to eat.  My cousin ordered the Mahi Mahi - it tasted like old, rubbery fish (awful and I am never anti-fish) I seriously think they cooked this the night before and was not used so why not flop it on my cousins plate.  It was not editable.  My friend ordered the Salmon salad and because he was hungry ate it but said this was not that good.. . My dish the flat steak was actually not half bad.  I shared it with my cousin so he got some food for the night and the mashed potatoes were good - but in no way Argentinian...I was surprised this place was Argentinian it was more like American cuisine with Spanish names for things.  . . Then our inattentive waiter came up and asked if we needed water we said sure - it tasted like pipes...seriously it was bad.  Maybe it was an off night, but overall not that great of a place.  The prices are reasonable for sure - especially for LA standards, but the service and the food - was not good.  I may give this place another shot again, but after the bad water I am not sure...we'll have to see the next time I am in town.. . There are so many better restaurants to try that are reasonable I would not make this a must if you are visiting Lala land...
