ReviewID: Cc0YxJVCxWociJpHcqH7qQ
ReviewerID: CwgXzTGZOOI_8gA05aKM7Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Kamehachi
Category: Sushi Bars
It's time to play is it KameHA(WT)chi or KameNAWTchi?! . . Today's contestant is the Old Town location of Chicago's venerable sushi institution, Kamehachi. Let's check out this potentially sexy beast's vital measurements, shall we? . . Ambiance: Venerable is a nice way of saying old. Occasionally it also means out of date. Maybe when this location was first built, people liked being crammed together like sardines while waiting for raw fish. But I personally accidentally elbowed the person next to me in the head twice as I stood up. I swear. Accidentally. Nothing to do with the fact that it was St. Patrick's weekend and the couple at the next table were acting drunky-douchey. The lighting was great, not like a normal classy sushi place, but unfortunately on this visit, it was bright enough to see the drunken idiots there on a Saturday night.  NAWT! . . Food: Nothing mind blowing. Definitely serviceable maki. The AAC (avocado, asparagus, and cucumber), their vegetarian choice, was a little bland. The Tekka (tuna), however, didn't taste overly fishy and was delectable.  One thing I have to say is that the menu isn't overly experimental.  But I think that's a good thing.  I like my restaurants like my women, a bit predictable.   HA...NA...HA...NA...HAWT! Um, cute? . . Price: Relatively large portions. A group of four of us went in with the $50.00 Groupon and ended up going about $20.00 over total each getting two to three maki with a couple of sides of seaweed salad. At between $4.00 and $6.00 for six pieces of maki, they've got a good thing going. We didn't get drinks, but about $20.00 a person was not bad, not bad at all. In fact, HAWT! . . Service: The word "ignored" comes to mind. But our server was friendly when she passed by us to go to the kitchen when she did acknowledge us. NAWT! . . Wasabi: HAWT! Deary me, HAWT! . . Boobs: Always HAWT! Wait, restaurants don't have boobs! Wrong review! . . I think this place is a lot like Betty White. 40 years ago when it was Chicago's first sushi place, it was hawt and you wanted to see it in all its naked glory. But now, even though the pictures are still circulating, I just don't want to see that! Either nude Betty White or Kamehachi again. Sorry, to the legion of fans of this place, but I have to go with KameNAWTchi on this one.
