ReviewID: ccxTqtfo1zs-hkUZjGt08A
ReviewerID: PJwyYfwsI0CJto1eYxuKtA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
FIVE WORDS:  Where is my shopping cart!?. . The good:. . - Draft beer selection.. -  Compared to the Santa Monica location, this place is the Taj Mahal in size, with both indoor and outdoor seating. You come here for beer, bar food, and banter. There are no waiters and hostesses, and it's not that big a deal to order at the bar. Just remember, it's a burger pub that serves a single burger, a duck dish, beet salad, and a few other random items. This is not a full service restaurant.. - Sweet potato fries. Because of these little orange crack sticks, I will need to form a therapy group for myself and other SPF addicts. And, for once, SPF does not stand for Sun Protection Factor.. . The bad:. . - Only open for lunch on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.. - Bathroom concept is very inefficient and you need night vision goggles to wash your hands. Would it kill them to install some proper lighting so I can actually see what I am doing?. - No ketchup or condiments in general.. - Considering how militant they are about their rules and standards, where the hell is my mini shopping cart??? I want my sweet potato fries to arrive in a shopping cart. They taste better snuggled into a paper-lined shopping cart... where the hell was the shopping cart???. . The ugly:. . - Pretentious price point.. - They card you at the front door during broad daylight. Say what? Maybe this is a city ordinance, but either way it's lame.. - I can eat cheese so have no issue personally with ordering the burger "as is" but I was still blown away by their ridiculous policies regarding substitutions. They preferred to sell my friend NOTHING, rather than simply omitting the cheese from their burger due to a dairy allergy. I understand that they have a "no substitution" policy, but there is a huge difference between a substitution and a complete OMISSION of an ingredient, especially when it means that you lose the sale entirely and someone would get deathly ill if they ate your burger "as is."
