ReviewID: CeWGccXRfThr9Nhf5n0Qag
ReviewerID: p6gGVgpHfLG9BdniCx6L2g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
I often drive by the many Tender Greens restaurants around LA, curious to try their food just based on the name: green and tender? Sounds good to me! And with easy-access locations in Culver City, West Hollywood, and Hollywood, it was only a (brief) matter of time before my culinary curiosity turned into a new found love for Tender Greens!. . After much deliberation over the extensive menu and endless customization choices (Paralyzed by foodie indecision! Overwhelmed by harmonious salads!), we finally settled on a grilled shrimp salad with added avocado &amp; beets (custom, as always) with a side of seasonal grilled vegetables, rustic tomato &amp; basil soup for each of us, and an enormous carrot cupcake to satisfy my sweet tooth. This was a perfect light lunch to split for two, but the salad itself, possibly with a side, would also be a well-portioned lunch for one. The staff was courteous, helpful, and they didn't even flinch at my personal requirement to always customize my order. And this place is not simply skimpy salads: every salad comes topped with a protein (even the vegan option), which includes your choice of chipotle chicken, salt &amp; pepper chicken, flat iron steak, albacore, and a special option such as shrimp. Soups, sides, and desserts are in constant rotation, so there's always something new and delicious to try beyond the luscious leaves of lettuce!. . Anyway, fantastic fresh produce, reasonable prices ($11 salad is a steal in LA!), and friendly staff. Most ingredients are organic and locally sourced from Oxnard, and meat is hormone-free. There is a pleasant outdoor patio area for enjoying the fresh air and chatting with friends, or indoor cafe seating if you need to finish up writing some emails. And this is a great lunch spot for those that aren't sure of their fellow diners' dietary needs: there are carnivore, pescatarian, vegetarian, and vegan options. No dietary discrimination!
