ReviewID: CezkHG-WtiM328Izz7HJPQ
ReviewerID: 4D2Zw1AfbBh-VHwV0yiZww
Rating: 3
Restaurant: La Fonda Latina
Category: Latin American
Last night was my first visit back to La Fonda Latina in probably, oh, 8 years? I'd only been once before, right when I first moved to Atlanta, and for some unknown reason, it'd been all but erased from my memory. I was wanting to try something 'new' last night, so La Fonda it was!. . I thought I'd remembered it being a little more Spanish than Mexican, but when they dropped some chips and salsa as we sat down, I stood corrected. The chips were a bit heavy and not warm, but the salsa was tasty. We also ordered a bowl of guacamole, which was a very generous portion, and fairly tasty.. . I made the mistake of ordering a mojito. I know better than to do this. I've become pretty skilled at judging a restaurant or bar's ability to make a mojito that I would consider passable. I think I was just beaten down from a long day, and it sounded really refreshing. It turned out to be pretty unpleasant, and I only made my way about a third through it before abandoning the drink. In a place like this, I think I'd steer towards safety, and stick with margaritas or sangria. They just don't have the time or staff to give the tender loving care that's required in the birthing of a proper mojito.. . We decided to split the "paella del mar" (seafood paella) for 2. It could have easily been for 3 or 4, the portion was quite generous. It was a mix of shrimp, calamari, salmon, scallops (allegedly, I didn't spot a single one) and mussels (isn't the rule if a mussel doesn't open while cooking, it's bad? only two were opened.....). It was tastier than I had expected for paella (another dish requiring skill, time, and love) in a place like this.. . All that said, at least the Ponce location probably won't be frequented much by me. It was solidly adequate, but in a town like Atlanta, there's to much competition (even at this price point) that stands out to tolerate mediocrity.
