ReviewID: cglXvRuzIXSBjGHOR7f0IQ
ReviewerID: KVlLvyS2WNRgE1nochgMVg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
We had a perfectly nice meal at Spago.  We ordered the 5 course tasting menu, one with the wine pairing.  Right away the amuse bouches started coming, fast and furious.  In order they were:. . - Tuna tartar cone. - Ceviche. - Giant bean humus. - Tomato bruschetta. - Bacon stuffed gougere (or something like that). . All of that was followed by a savory tomato sorbet with tomato water and basil oil.  All of these were great.  I especially liked the bruschetta and gougere.  But when I say they came fast and furious, I'm not kidding.  Before we were even done with the tuna cone the ceviche arrived.  Just when we finished the cone, the humus arrived, and we hadn't even started the ceviche.. . We still hadn't started the five courses but then they came at a rapid fire pace as well:. . - Tomato salad with micro greens and Harley Farms goat cheese. - Skate with maitake mushrooms. - Sweet corn agnolotti. - Lamb chops with blood sausage, chestnut puree, figs, and chanterelle jus. - Dessert thing with raspberry, sorbet, and nuts. . They really wanted us to get out of there it seemed because everything came so fast.  As soon as we were done with one dish out came another.  All of the portions were really small, but I didn't need or want a lot after all of the amuses.  . . The meal finally slowed down when it came time for coffee.  I would give them 4 stars if they didn't rush the whole event so much.  Everything tasted good and I think that the meal was worth every penny.  The tomato salad was excellent.  The skate seemed like it was prepared way ahead of time and left sitting around so I wasn't wild about that.  The angolotti was the essence of corn.  The lamb was good but cold and raw at the bone.  Some of the wine pairings were a little on the budget side, or tasted that way anyhow.. . Spago is a big restaurant.  Maybe it has grown to keep up with demand for its fame.  It seems that it has become like a little factory churning out meals and shuffling people through as fast as they can.  Factory foreman Wolfgang Puck showed up at about 9:30. . . We had a Spago in the Bay Area for several years and it was a much more relaxed affair. Maybe that's why it's not here any more...
