ReviewID: ChP_JriC4SAESaHbNeBzQA
ReviewerID: asD4vuiGE_A7Hvoup8EA7A
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Okay im gonna try to not completly lose my shit on this one. I gotta keep my composier thats my made up french for composure. With that being said what the fuck is this crap. Im from Chicago a city that is synonymous with hot dogs actually synonymous with good food. So can someone please tell me what the hype is other than people just being  followers and loyal to popularity. . . Seriously  assembling a good hot dog is like building a solid home its all about the foundation. So Pinks is already in some serious shit cuz the buns suck and the wienie is a wienie. Okay now this next part gets a bit wierd but I gotta do it outta my love for food. Im not gay nor am i a woman but no one wants a thin little wienie thats all pale and thin and blah. Everyone should want a grand Wiener full of flavor, plump ready to explode all its sausage deliciousness and juices in your mouth. and it should be served on warm fluffy perfectly shaped buns. not saggy soggy droopy wrinkled buns. So already we can see that the foundation of pinks is "Weakaaa than Bambieee trying... trying to walk fo the very first time" (by the way that should be sung in a R Kelly kinda way).. . So Pinks since your foundation is weak it doesnt matter that you shit stack the doggs sky high with toppings cuz when you get down to the fundamentals the truth is so obvious. Plus chilli cheese turds and whatever whatever whatever the hell else you put on hot dogs is whatever. The wait is retarded like really retarded. Basically i felt like i waited in line to give someone money to kick me in the nuts and rub their nutsbagsack on my car key chain.  ugh i gotta drive home with that thought in my mind. Actually i didnt drive my cousin did and he paid cuz he thinks its the shit. But then he admitted they sucked. he just wanted to show me something cool from Cali. and he though i would like to be an idiot for two hours. . . my appologies to anyone who is offended by this. mainly cuz it means you have no idea what a good hot dog is and food at that matter. shazaam
