ReviewID: cI177pMzM-Mvpa3WYtuXIQ
ReviewerID: EeuMSQKWED07Rmbal0ytgQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Giordano&#39;s Pizzeria
Category: Pizza
Oh Giordano's - why do all of our out of town guests want to eat your pizza???  I am personally not a fan of "chicago-style" deep dish pizza - I just think it's waaaaay excessive, in terms of cheese (and I'm from wisconsin - i love cheese), crust, sauce - everything.  It just seems so heavy.  But that is my personal taste, so I can't knock this place for serving deep dish - that's what they do.  However, I do prefer deep dish at Lou Malnati's, just because their crust is more flavorful and buttery....for someone who doesn't like deep dish, Malnati's is the best I can get.. . This Giordano's location is closest to where I live, hence why we end up taking all of our visitors who want deep dish here.  One thing i've noticed is that this place always seems busy.  There is always a wait, make sure you pre-order your pizza when you get in - but check with the hostess first.  You don't want to immediately pre-order, and then still be waiting for a table when your pizza is done.  . . Serivice is generally good, and the bartenders are usually friendly.  I just guess I don't like the constant "busyness" of this place - as it can take away from the quality of the food.  For instance, last time we went, i think our pizza had been sitting under a warmer for a bit, because it wasn't very hot - and the cheese didn't stretch out when you cut into the pie - it just broke off :( . . Therefore - to sum up - if you want deep dish, i'd recommend trying Malnati's first - they just seem to have better flavors and fresher ingredients.  However, if you are a Giordano's fan - go to another location.  This one is touristy and busy.. . Oh - and one last thing - I've tried the hand tossed/"thin" pizza from Giordano's - ICK!  Also not good AT ALL.  If you want awesome pizza in Chicago - go to Brick's on Lincoln.  Now THAT is pizza (they also have an awesome beer selection).
