ReviewID: cJseugecBYjgof0HB3YKYw
ReviewerID: PZ-NfEPWUxPuOCHSsfCLLg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Last night I went to Cut restaurant for the first time and the evening was close to perfect. I have eaten at the major steakhouses in LA, New York and Buenos Aires and have eaten at several Michelin three star restaurants in Paris, I have also lived and traveled in one hundred-twenty-seven countries so I think I can make some points and comparisons.. . I arrived with a friend before our reservation due to unusally light traffic and we sat at the Side Bar and had a cocktail. We were seated actually twenty minutes before our reservation which is a near first for me. Although there were just two of us, we were seated at a table for four in the corner next to the window which could not have been better. . . If I had my druthers I like my steakhouse decor to be dark wood and subdued lights and of course this restaurant is the opposite but that was OK since I knew what to expect. Sitting there in the dazzling white looking at a picture of Marilyn Manson was actually kind of trippy.. . My friend likes his cocktails as do I of course but I was the designated driver so I was prudent. Several years ago when the Side Bar had another name, El Padrino, my friend set a record of drinking thirteen martini's in one session. Knowing this we decided not to get the most expensive food since we knew the final bill would be substantial anyway.. . I was hungry and wanted a significant piece of meat so I ordered the Nebraska 16 oz ribeye charred and rare and it came just like I ordered and was quite possibly the best steak I have eaten. There were two dishes that were outrageously good and in a class by themselves. One was the steak tartare which was so incredible that I can't imagine ever ordering it again unless I go back. The other was the polenta which was like none other. Instead of being a rectangular piece of food, it came as a super hot bowl of golden grits reeking with butter, parmesan cheese and other wonderful flavors. I may never order grits or polenta again unless I come back. My salad of lettuce, avocado and blue cheese was extremely good but not world class but close enough.. . They have on the menu eight home made steak sauces for two dollars apiece so I ordered all eight. They were all very good but my favorite was the shallot red wine bordelaise but a close runner up was the Armagnac and green peppercorn sauce. I cut the steak into tiny pieces so I could try al the sauces but the steak was so good that I actually preferred it without any sauce.The french fries and the onion rings were very very good but not the best ever but close.. . My friend had the three pound Maine lobster which was excellent and taken from the shell and plated. The wine was a French Pinot Noir for less than a hundred dollars and it was very good.. . For dessert we had the Baked Alaska and the vanilla doughnuts. They were good but I have had better baked Alaska.. . In summary, the food, the service and the ambience were top notch. The only thing to detract from a perfect evening was the music. It was Pink Floyd which was OK but the volume was incredible. In fact, I have never been in a restauarnt with such loud music. We were redced to sign language because we were literally unable to carry on a conversation. We comlained to the waiter and soon it was turned down a bit but very briefly and it became louder than ever. When the maitre d' came by to make his rounds we again complained and he very nicely said, "Mr. Puck insists that we keep the volume at this level.". . Cut is not for a casual night out but to commerate a significant event.. PJ
