ReviewID: CkuRHQXY1ciqd2-h6Mjasw
ReviewerID: EKBat5jR0PQDk-pUXvBvVQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Sunday: Our reservation was at 2:45pm and we got there around 2:30pm. Parked on the street because valet is $$.  Although it was super crowded with many more people waiting for their reservations to be honored (as well as many walk-ins), we were seated by 2:45pm exactly.  Nice. . . On to the food:. . I read in one of the reviews that a couple was seated next to the window and there were flies.  I have to agree!  We sat towards the back where the booths are, right next to the window.  I noticed a few fruit flies and one big one buzzing around.  I was half-inclined to just catch it, throw it into the food, JUST to get their attention!  (Yes, the waiter forgot about us a few times.). . Insalate: Mozza Caprese ($12) - though popular (and what people talked about over and over again on . http://Yelp.com. ), left more to be desired.  I liked the fact that the baby tomatoes were so juicy (they were exploding in my mouth!) and the cheese was outstanding but was it worth $12?  NOT REALLY.. . Bruchette: Pane bianco with olio nuovo ($3) -  The waiter suggested the garlic bread to complement the caprese but uh, it was slightly burnt and it tasted too oily.  DON'T LET THEM TRICK YOU INTO ADDING ANOTHER $3 TO YOUR TAB WITH THIS DISH!  I can seriously make so much better.  Come over and I'll show you.  Be sure to make a reservation first, though.  :P. . Meat Lover's Pizza: Tomato, mozzarella, sausage, salami, bacon &amp; guanciale ($18) - I wanted to order this pizza but didn't because my fool date wanted to order it but I'm glad I didn't because I got to order something better!  It was good but it didn't stand out.  For the price, I would've expected a cow to come out and serve it to me directly.. . Coach farm goat cheese, leeks, scallions &amp; bacon ($15) -  I liked my pizza so much more.  Mmmmm... totally worth it.  I was only able to eat 3/8 of it because I was saving my appetite for.... . May I mention that the crust is delicious?  So thin... so perfectly shaped... just like my waistline.  ;)  Ha!. . Butterscotch budino ($9) - Now everyone was ravinggggg about this dessert and although we were full, I decided to order it so we can at least try what everyone is hyping up.  Creamy and smooth in texture, sweet and salty in flavor.  I have to say, though, that they sprinkled a little too much of the sea salt because the salty taste was a bit overpowering.  DISAPPOINTING.  Make sure you specify how much salt you want because you can actually tell them to put a little less or put in a good amount... if you know your butterscotch pudding.  :). . Total bill: $73 + $12 tip = $85.00. . Was it worth it?  No.  (Am I a cheapskate?  Definitely not.)  Would I go back again?  Sure, but I wouldn't order the overpriced drinks (unless it's wine), the mozza caprese, garlic bread (I didn't order that, my fool date did), or the meat lover's pizza.  Maybe my goat cheese pizza and the budino (sans so much salt).. . More pics, go to . http://akikokim.wordpr.... 
