ReviewID: Cljk8MwwqH0SQAqZVarupg
ReviewerID: AXgPRrA1dy47_Vlj0543iw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Weekends in Los Angeles are made for late nights followed by lazy mornings spent in the pleasant warmth of the rising sun at one of the many sidewalk cafés scattered around the city.  From what I've heard Alcove generally has quite a line and wait on the weekends but I did not find that to be the case on this particular Saturday.  Evidently, either the LF hipsters don't rise from their drunken and hungover stupors before 10am, or they were still snorting lines off each other's Macbooks in the midst of a 3 day coke binge and couldn't be bothered with something as silly as breakfast.. . The set up at Alcove strongly reminded me of another favorite, Aroma Café in Studio City, in that you order at the register, get a number, grab a seat, preferably on the patio at a table in prime people watching position, and then wait anxiously for your food.  Also in similar vein, the prices are a touch higher then you'll likely be accustomed to paying for breakfast, but ultimately will be worth it given the size and quality of the dishes brought forth from the kitchen.. . I went with the steak benedict featuring an NY strip over warm focaccia topped with the traditional poached eggs and hollandaise but sans the spinach.  The steak was cooked a bit past the medium rare I requested but was still enjoyable and I really liked the focaccia bread twist Alcove threw in the mix.  It was dense and doughy and soaked up all the runny yolk and sauces perfectly.  Only complaint was that the poached eggs contained a bit of cracked eggshell that ruined my last two bites as I had to discard them in my napkin rather than swallow shell.. . My dining companion selected the seafood omelet complete with lobster chunks, shrimp, and veggies, topped with a crab meat vinaigrette.  Truth be told this item was the reason we came to Alcove as the online description trumped all other options.  However be warned it is not for the faint of heart, and she was unable to take down the massive portion.  We also split an order of the over roasted rosemary potatoes which were some of the best of this variety I've encountered.  For drinks we both went with iced teas which were tasty and large enough that I made it through my meal without refill for the first time in forever.. . All in all the damage was a little over $40 for two without tip; a little pricier than your run of the mill weekend café but at the same time the food was a cut above and entirely satisfying.  I'm rarely over in the neck of the woods but when I am I wouldn't hesitate to hit up Alcove for some comfort food and may even have to make a special trip here and there when my weekend meals need a change of pace from Toast Café et al.
