ReviewID: Cmgo-Ulnym4gTbrbF03NKA
ReviewerID: CKUcw3knlVYrDoqP4e33tg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
Hi, this is EJ's stomach. . . It's 7:30AM and I am up early because I couldn't sleep (a little worked up), even though we went to bed at 3AM. So, while everyone else is sleeping, I thought I'd report in:. . Well, after EJ heard about this place on NPR Saturday morning, and having worked out REALLLLY hard this week (okay, he went to the gym twice this week--but that's twice more than he went to the gym last week), he apparently couldn't get the idea of going to Orochon for the Special #2 ("S#2") out of his mind (yeah, we have a real problem dealing with the consequences of the decisions that his brain--and that other part of his body with which he often uses to "think"--makes sometimes).  So, before I could pull the ol' indigestion routine, he went with a friend on a spur of the moment Saturday night and made it there before they closed, with 15 minutes to spare.. . Yep, we tried and took down the S#2 (the face is on a picture on the Orochon wall to prove it, even though I had to hold everything).  From what the taste buds told me, the hardest part was finishing the soup, and not because it was spicy (that it was, although not as spicy as a good bowl of Pho with lots of Sriracha sauce and jalapenos), but it was because it was soooooo salty (2 stars).  The mouth told me the ramen was good (nice consistency), and the pork wasn't too bad either (mmm, fatty pork, not like the gallbladder doesn't do enough as it is with all the butter and other fats EJ consumes) (4 stars).. . I don't knowwwww, and maybe it's because I'm just the stomach and not the ego, but other than going there for the challenge of finishing the S#2, I don't see the point.  It's like going down on those double diamond runs or dating hot psychotic women--I mean, I guess it's something all guys will do to say they have done it, but doing it any more than once is just foolish, and/or potentially life threatening (ask EJ's knee how he feels about what happened during the last ski trip of '06--wait, actually don't.  I DO NOT need to hear the bitching again: "ooo, my ACL was shredded" or "ooo, I was bent in a way I wasn' t supposed to be moved." HEY DUDE, MAN UP, you never hear the weiner complaining.). . Well, better get back to work before the intestines start complaining about all the crap THEY have to work through.  Thanks for letting me vent, I feel a little less upset now.. . Oh yeah, EJ's wallet tells me that Orochon still has a minimum if you want to use your credit card.. . Stomach, out.. . ***Update: 09/06/07***. Hello. This is EJ's stomach again. We haven't spoke in a while but I thought I'd give you an update as EJ ended up taking his girl to Orochon because she had never been and wanted to try it, despite my muted, grumbling protests (I guess the heart wins out over the brain and me, every time).. . I am happy to say that the experience was much better this time, given that the soup seemed to be less salty, but the ramen just does not rate the great marks everyone give it. Hakata (or "HaKA-Ta" as she says it's pronounced), is a better place, even though it is in Rosemead: . . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . I will say the fried rice was AWESOME, which bumped up my review of this place. We also ordered the gyoza (only so-so), and the cold tofu (nothing to write home about--go buy some bonito flakes, tofu, soy sauce, and sesame oil, and make it yourself at home).. . Oh, and they took the picture of EJ's face down for finishing the #2 in 30 minutes, which probably allowed them to keep their "A" rating. We're not going back just to get our picture up again.. ******
