ReviewID: CMUGw_J_h95Tr5YKzUCZCA
ReviewerID: oMFp8WnSbhLJiwZ0LYublA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Do you love waiting in line? Do you love having to stand for hours? Do you like overpriced food and snotty staff? You'll love it here. . . Father's Office is badly laid out, too tiny for the amount of people they try and cram in, and very badly organized. The "seat yourself" policy is completely ludicrous for a place so popular. It just guarantees that you will have people walking around the bar aimlessly, trying to snatch a place to sit the minute another customer gets up to use the bathroom. Oh, this was your seat? I'm sorry.. . The bar is lacking. Like Sheridan S. said, there's not a lot of choice in spirits because supposedly your father only got his drink on with whiskey, scotch, and kentucky moonshine. Well my dad loves a Belvedere straight up with a twist of lemon when he's out, thank you very much, and I would too, but I suppose Father's Office knows best. No vodka for me. How about a nice glass of wine? Or a belly-expanding beer? Or a mouth-numbing whiskey? How about we pretend Prohibition is still in effect and not drink at all?. . The food, like the bar, is similarly substandard and the no substitutions policy may make it easy for the staff to fill orders quickly, but it's kind of shitty for us customers. A tiny menu means that if you don't want a burger, you're SOL. The lack of any kind of vegetarian option is staggering and the snooty bartender simply doesn't care. No substitutions, remember? If you're vegetarian, just take the pork off the salad, the burger off the bun. Or you could just fill up on the aggressively average sweet potato fries.. . Picking ham out of a salad does not make it vegetarian, my friend, and no one truly can make a meal out of the Patty Hearst burger (2 buns without the Patty, get it?). And just because a bar is popular with the dummy gallery that is Los Angeles, does not mean it is cool or worth my patronage or yours. REJECT.
