ReviewID: cOgs453o-GXoAU9xXx0aiw
ReviewerID: zTBG-Cf0dVCQ2c5cU4_Giw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Prepare to wait and wait and wait.  I went on a Monday evening at 8 PM and didn't get seated until 9:20 despite being told a 40 minute wait.  Of course, they have no control over how long someone sits at a table, but still.... . The waiting area is like a porch outside complete with park benches and outdoor heaters. When you finally get in, you can smell the delicious food boiling away. It's now hours and hours after having eaten and I still smell like it.  Leave your nice clothes at home.. . Coming from Texas I had high expectations for this crawfish eating experience.  You are greeted with a bib, a roll of paper towels, and some laminated menus.  It basically boils down to fried seafood and/or crawfish, crab, or shrimp in various arrangements of seasonings.  . . We ended up getting a pound of crawfish, a pound of shrimp, 3 potatoes, 12 sausages (think 1 sausage sliced into 12 pieces), and an order of fried catfish for just about $40.  we had also ordered a dunganess crab, but ended up sending it back since it didn't appear to be fresh (shell was rubbery).  They took it back upon inspection so it wasn't a big deal.. . These people are geniuses for getting away with any sense of decoration (there's a bunch of graffiti done by customers on the wall with a couple of mardi gras beads) and have a fairly efficient system of putting paper on the table, letting you eat on it, and then wrapping the whole mes up for the next patron to take your seat.. . I'm not giving it 5 stars because of the old crab.  The flavors were good, but I think the shabang is too much.  I would have rather preferred getting just 1 flavor.  I'll do that next time.  Also, it's a lot of work for a little food, but that's the nature of crawfish.. . I think I'll come here annually or bi-annually at best as I left feeling smelly, dirty, and full of oil.butter. It's nice to have one of these so it's available if you want it because the mess of preparation, cooking, and cleaning makes this one meal you definitely don't want to do on your own.
