ReviewID: CP9RwckLpBTwR60ykY9bYg
ReviewerID: a3DEijJwpvGUkgdWpv3bbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ann Sather
Category: Scandinavian
Update for the new location:. . Food Quality / Taste (40%):  4.5. I still love the Swedish pancakes, the potato sausage &amp; the cinnamon rolls here.  No complaints whatsoever about the food.. . Atmosphere (20%):  3. This is a new location, and it is cute-cute-cute!  However, I was disappointed to see that they did not take their popularity into account when designing the lobby / waiting area.  That is, there IS no waiting area.  Walk in on a Sunday morning, and you are going to squish yourself into a tiny space by the door with no real idea where you should be standing.  Servers will squeeze past you with trays of food so you will definitely understand that you are in the way, but there is no logical alternative for you.. Had Ann Sather been a new restaurant that became unexpectedly popular I could cut them some slack for this, but this is a new facility for a place that outgrew its former space.  They needed to design it better given their known busy spells.. . Service (20%):  3. Five stars for our waitress Cathy, who had one of the most adorable smiles I've ever seen in my life.  . Two stars for the host.  Not particularly friendly, and not particularly helpful.  There is no system for getting your name in, they just yell out "how many?" and you put fingers up.  Good luck getting seated in any logical order (that is, first-come / first-served).  Once we were informed that they had a table for two, she just pointed across the restaurant &amp; told us to sit by the wall.   This chapped my ass.. The woman at the table next to us had eggs that were too runny.  She sent them back with the hopes of getting them thrown back on the grill or replaced.  Instead they apparently just put the whole plate under the food warmer for a few minutes.  This lady was the complaining sort, but I would have lost my cherub-like demeanor at that.  FIX the problem, don't just sit on it until it goes away.  Jeez.. . Value (20%):  3. About what we usually spend for a nice breakfast.. . Overall:  3.6. I'd gladly come back for the food any day, but would probably avoid busy times to keep myself chill.
