ReviewID: CPbBzDXe1i7Jye8BGKT6Pw
ReviewerID: QG4woWg7xagorSImgjg3_w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Aja Restaurant &amp; Bar
Category: Dim Sum
I think the recurring theme for Aja over time will be "average" unless they crank it up a notch.  I went for lunch and had the green curry chicken with eggplant.  It was quite good, just the right amount of spice, but not remarkable @ $11.. . Our waiter was courteous but the food was slow (and so was the restaurant), and they were out of green tea (bad news for an asian themed restaurant) and only half our table got brown rice because apparently all 5 of us ate them out of house and home and they ran out after 3 of our orders.  . . Lunch is served per-person and dinner is served family style.  They also have a dim sum server that travels around to show you the food.  If it looks good, she gives it to you right away.  Honestly they all looked really tasty but maybe it's like shopping hungry...I can only vouch for the potstickers though.  You feel like you're being upsold during your meal after her second visit but it's still a nice touch because of the instant delivery.  . . It's worth noting that they have a $9 daily special that includes a soup and entree.  All the other meals seemed to be in the $11 - $16 range (for the most part).. . I really hope they get their kinks worked out quickly.  Buckhead is full of great restaurants and the few buildings around Alliance Center can't support a restaurant on their own, no matter how many happy hours, pre-fixes, or other gimmicks they try.  The folks at Emeril's learned that the hard way.. . I will say that the decor is a nice change.  The space is similar to Emeril's in the bar area but the rest is much refreshed, with red walls, accent lighting, an extra bar, extended patio (with tons of heaters i noticed), but everything is tasteful.  Even the ridiculously (but somehow appropriately) large Buddha statue.  It is Buckhead afterall.. . Too early to tell, i suppose.  Run by there for a power lunch.  It won't be busy.  Then post your own review and render my 3 stars null and void.
