ReviewID: CpH0SbfyLL6nKwQZGcCfCg
ReviewerID: vD3l2PRoJ-zI3OlJo2c1KA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mercer Kitchen
Category: American (New)
Went for restaurant week with 3 other friends on a Monday night. Quick run through:. . Walking in:  Much bigger than I thought it would be - which explained a lot about the negative to mediocre reviews here.   Not enough waiters to go around to provide the sort of service I expected for the prices.  . . Checking in with host:  We got there on time (8:30pm) and we were told to wait until the full party was here.  Informed the host that the full party was in fact present, and he said something to the extent of  "Oh, well, you can wait by the bar."   I suppose this is standard but his attitude was a little flippant.  . . Sitting down:  Had to wait several minutes for a while for our waiter to approach us and offer menus and glasses to be filled.  I dont mind waiting for an order to be taken on a busy night, but it's difficult for us to help speed up the process if we can't peruse the menu.  . . Bread:  Not special, but I ate it anyway because I'm a sucker for carbs. . APPS: . -Tuna Wasabi Pizza - 3 out of the 4 at our table would recommend.  1 out of 4 was a wasabi wimp who thought it would be just a hint of wasabi.  Consider yourself warned - it's more than a hint, but less than a punch to your sinus.  You'll most likely enjoy it if you like wasabi with your sushi . -Shrimp Avocado Salad - Delicious!  My non-shrimp-loving friend enjoyed the shrimp I generously let him try.  The dressing is magical.  . . ENTREES: . -Cheeseburger with fries - Delicious.  Huge. I got it (was sick of ordering salmon) along with one other person, and we both agreed that it was juicy without being greasy.  It came with what must have been the equivalent of 3 potatoes worth of fries.  . -Salmon - Looked good, and my friend seemed satisfied with it, but  I caught him eyeing our burgers and fries a few times throughout the evening. . DESSERT:. -Warm vahlrona chocolate cake with ice cream - perfect combination.  the 2 who got it both complained of a "horrible cookie" that came in the dessert that tasted of "carcinogens".  I suspect this was the cocoa bean brittle - consider yourself warned.  . -Exotic fruit salad with white pepper ice cream - I'm a fan of unique ice cream flavors so I enjoyed the ice cream that tasted like.. well, pepper.  The fruit salad wasn't very exotic though - pinapple and citrus fruits mostly.  I can cut that stuff up at home.  I mostly went with this because I had a giant burger and roughly two potatos in my stomach and felt like I was going to explode if I had chocolate cake.  In that sense it was a nice light dessert to round out the meal.  . . Wine:. Glasses of Zinfandel &amp; Shiraz were ordered.  Both were good with the burgers - a little on the heavy side but still somewhat fruity.  . . A noteworthy point of the night:. One friend opted not to go with the prix fixe - he ended up foregoing an appetizer and got the breast and confit of duck with pomegranate and wild rice.  It was out of this world.  He also got a drink (homemade ginger ale) and cheesecake for dessert.  His incoherent and somewhat inappropriate moans upon tasting the entree and dessert said it all - and he ended up spending around the same amount of money as the rest of us that night.  If you feel limited by the RW menu (and its not the best of RW menus), you might want to just go for a regular entree and skip the app or dessert if tight on budget.   But I can't speak for any of the other regular entrees.. . Fun evening overall due to the company and atmosphere - the food was just enjoyable enough to merit thoughtful slow nodding as we acknowledged we were eating something tasty.  But from the RW menu side, no delighted moaning.  Maybe if I went back for the regular menu, but there are a ton of other great restaurants I want to try, so unless someone plans a birthday dinner there, it'll be a long time before I go back.
