ReviewID: CPMixyMRM0H_-7CPsgSJ9Q
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wisteria
Category: American (New)
My experience at Wisteria was OK.  I'm not going to rush back there but I would not be opposed to returning if someone suggested it.. . I guess our night here just started out badly.  We arrived 15 minutes early for our reservation but we were still waiting on two people so we checked in and were cool with hanging out and waiting.  The other two people arrived and we proceeded to hang out longer.  We hung out for an extra 30 minutes past our reservation time (which was an 8:45 reservation, so kind of a late one already).  We were finally seated at 9:15 and, you know, fine, but it would have been nice for one of the hostesses to acknowledge us while we waiting without us going up to specifically ask them about it.  By the time I was seated, I was hungry and annoyed.. . It was restaurant week but I decided to order from the regular menu because I didn't want dessert and I did want a salad that was not on the lower priced fixed menu.  Before I could even utter what I wished to order, I was sternly instructed that I could not share anything with anyone at our table because I was ordering from the regular menu and since the restaurant week menu was "such a good deal".  OK, can I point out that it's really NOT "such a good deal" and that you are really only saving a few bucks IF you would normally order dessert?  I didn't want dessert, anyway.  I am certain I pulled a face at this point because that really annoyed me (note: I was already annoyed).. . So anyway, after my scolding, I ordered food and wine (from the big wine list which I liked).  My salad was good - the one with figs and blue cheese.  My fried chicken was pretty good.  I was really hoping the food would save the service and make me less annoyed and it sort of did because at least I was not low-blood-sugar-annoyed anymore but the fried chicken was really greasy.  Yes, I know it's fried.  But, I feel that good fried chicken is more crispy than greasy and several bites of this were just all grease.  It was a huge portion with little fried starch cakes (sweet corn fritters) and braised collard greens (loved these) and it was OK but not great.  My wine was very good.. . I understand this place is always crowded which scares me away somewhat because I don't really want to plan on waiting for my table 30 minutes past my reservation again.  Lesson learned: don't come here hungry because you'll be grumpy and enjoy everything less.
