ReviewID: csc-gE4qbzXTYO9Yj4hdng
ReviewerID: wGyf6l4cpFiBWgJoLHQ_WQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
A friend of mine suggested we try this place out for lunch today and I was NOT aware it was a bar.  . . So as we walk up, there are 2 people (1 male, 1 female) standing in front of the door w/ the headphone microphone's on.  The female asks for my ID. I'm confused a bit.  I'm thinking this is a restaurant and they're asking for ID.  "Who do you guys think you are"? I ask myself this silly question. She asks if we'd been there before, we say "No" then she continues to explain how the ordering process works.  If you've never been, here's how it goes:. . 1. Find a seat (if you can, it's crowded during lunch). 2. Walk up to the bar (smoothly). 3. Order what you desire. 4. Sit down and wait for your stinkin food!. . Okay. We're in. It's crowded. No place to sit (at least that's what it seemed) I'm annoyed, but we're already here so make the best of it.  We find a couple empty chairs at one end of the bar and sit.  We get our rounds of water and continue to put the order in:. . - The Office Burger. - Sweet Potato Fries. - Regular Fries. . First let me say this is one of the tastiest burgers I've had in my time.  Though let me just clear it up.  It's not in Hamburger form.  It's incognito in "sandwich form".  It's not between a pair of buns, it's more of a french roll of some sort.  And the ground beef is not molded into a traditional circular shape as one would expect, instead it is a squarish, rectangular, oval shape.  Eh, beef is beef. I guess.. . My MAIN complaint is they FORCE you to use this mayonnaise based sauce for your french fry dipping!!! They DO NOT HAVE KETCHUP/CATSUP or RANCH to accompany their DELICIOUS, petite FRENCH FRIES!!! I'm like "Who do you think you are, Apple Computers"??  Eh.. The owner must have the ego of the Man himself, Mr. Jobs.  Oh well, other than that, I must admit, the food is delicioso for sure! I recommend coming back, but if you are like every other person that enjoys ketchup/ranch w/ fries, sneak in a couple packets or something. Ha HA ;)
