ReviewID: CstUomQKkD5oXC4Uuq44Fg
ReviewerID: 4KPSUgMTLsKdnG6AwEk2kA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
Oldy but a goody.  Great dinner!  Excellent food!  Atmosphere could be better but the food made up for it.. . My wife and I recently went to Spago on a Saturday night for our wedding anniversary.  I've been there a couple times before, but not with my wife.  Part of the reason we went was because we had a $200 gift certificate that someone gave us.  How can you beat that?. . We had a 6:30pm reservation.  We were seated near the kitchen towards the wall.  In retrospect, it would have been nice to have requested one of the tables in the center "outdoor" atrium area as it wasn't too cold of an evening, and the ambience there seemed more romantic with the twinkle lights and all.. . I was a little surprised to see a few families who were eating there with their children, of all ages.  I don't think of Spago as "family dining," but maybe some people do.  It could also be because of our early reservation time.  It reminded me of going to Lawry's, another establishment where I've seen plenty of children dining but hadn't expected to.. . We ordered the 5 course tasting menu.  I think that's a great deal, I think $95/each.  You could easily exceed that if you ordered an appetizer, entree and dessert separately.  We also shared a wine pairing since neither of us drink heavily (another $45 or so), and it was more than enough.. . The food was fantastic and plentiful.  I always prefer the tasting menus because I feel you have the opportunity to try a bunch of different things.  For our last 2 anniversaries, we also had the tasting menus at Hatfield's and Providence.  You can't lose with those places either for a special occasion.  I will note that Spago automatically included a 20% gratuity on the tasting menus.  I didn't care as that was what I was going to tip anyway.. . The service was great, although it was hard to figure out who our waiter was (or even if we had just one) with all the people serving us.  We didn't feel rushed.  In fact, the time flew by and it was quickly a 2 1/2 hr dinner.    . . One negative is that the Spago decor admittedly could use some updating.  Some of the art reminded me of the 80s.
