ReviewID: CszxBTyR-9b4gN3wtnn06w
ReviewerID: 7KCN7pMqbQzIvfMuwSBj0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Glenn&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
What a great diner!  In truth, it's a diner plus fish house, and boy do they do it well - the specials are great, and the fun fresh fish boards are updated routinely.  They will make any fish with any prep; you just have to ask.  (I tend to get a seared tuna with whatever prep struck my whim.)  They have specials many nights: all you can eat king crab legs on Tuesdays, all you can eat baby back ribs on Wednesday, all you can eat "u-peel-em" shrimp on Thursday.  Tuesday through Saturday, 11a-6p, however, is the best: 1/2 lb of you choice of fish (there's 1 or 2 exceptions) and sides for $13.95.  You can save a ton of money with that offer.  They have a wall of breakfast cereals which is a really cute display - and also is an actual part of the menu for the breakfast crowd (served all day).. . I have enjoyed the soups when I have had them, which I tend to only if I win the daily quiz for "name that movie" (which makes it free).  Look for the little chalkboard by the kitchen entrance.. . The menus and store attitude are great; they're perpetually short a waiter or two, but we still tend to get decent service (of course, we go at off hours).  For those who care, they have wine and beer and some bar stuffs but are also BYOB - but you can't BYOB on the patio, only indoors.. . I can't speak to the quality of the general "diner fare" because I've never tried it.  Yes, it's pricier than a regular diner, but you go here for the fish and the fun, not the slung dime-a-dozen diner fare.  The owner really cares about making sure your order is right and the fish is properly done to your liking - or he'll make sure it gets done that way - unless it's physically impossible in his kitchen, in which case he'll tell you upfront.. . Parking is annoying, sometimes.  Public transit works well (if it's an option for you).  It's worth it to catch THIS fish.  Go see Glenn and find out what all the buzz is about.
