ReviewID: CTabAcLyGZS5-0v8kn07SQ
ReviewerID: GdawZ1FdT-fvZ0BP1PZV9A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I discovered THIS particular Boiling Crab when I was tired of driving out to the OC all the time for Cajun Corner.   . . Everyone else has already covered all the negatives, i.e. parking, long wait, etc.  But you know what? It's sooo worth it! I still prefer Cajun Corner, but I've come to really love Boiling Crab too.  I've come as a party of two and have brought large groups too.  The staff has always been friendly with me and never had a problem with seating my large groups.  (I called ahead of time to arrange accommodations for the "fooding" groups.) . . TIP:  Call ahead of time and order for take out to avoid the long wait.  Or offer to sit at the bar counter.  Hmm, not as fun, but when you need that fix, it works when you have a small party.  Or walk in, order for take out, and your food is pretty much ready in less than 10 minutes.  Sure beats the wait!   It's the only way I do Boiling Crab now. . . TIP: Come just as BC opens for (12 noon on Sundays) lunch or (5pm) dinner to avoid the infamous wait time. . . FOOD I'VE ORDERED:                                  All 5++++ out of 5 stars. - Shrimp in Whole Shebang Extra Spicy. - with extra sausage and extra corn. - Crawfish in Whole Shebang Extra Spicy. - Dungeness Crab in Extra Spicy. - Cajun Seasoned Fries. - Fried Catfish. - Fried Oysters. . THE YUMMY:. I prefer the garlic spicy sauce over at Cajun Corner, but I still really enjoy Boiling Crab's with shrimp, crab and crawfish.  The Whole Shebang Extra Spicy is the ONLY way to do it else things taste / smell a bit too "fishy" to me.   . . Seasoned fries are good, and again I prefer Cajun Corner's.  . . Now, this is where Boiling Crab excels:. - Fried Catfish and Fried Oysters!  So damn good! Catfish is flaky and not at all greasy.  Both are soo good with a mixture of cocktail sauce and tartar sauce.  YUM!! . . I always refer to my Louisiana ex to gauge how good a cajun joint is, and he gave the catfish a huge two thumbs up. It's also what he orders when we come here still. . . THE OVERALL:. This is my preferred location of all the ones in the SGV so far.  I've never been to the BC in OC though.  I stop in once every few months to get my fix. I've also celebrated tons of events here, birthdays, promotions, etc.  Always a good fun time getting sauce all up in your face and hands!
