ReviewID: CTeMbPI2gGt_u4uHJ9Yybw
ReviewerID: BgxkT3tWsDtxVf31_6Dtiw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Casa Bianca Pizza Pie
Category: Pizza
kinda perplexed at some of the bad reviews here, but given the sheer volume of customers casa bianca has and the number of pizzas it makes, there's bound to be some unhappy customers and some dud pizzas. that's just the reality of the numbers.... . given that, i've been to casa bianca maybe 15-20 times, and i know my pizza, both NY-style and Italian. I regularly travel to NY on biz and have family in southern Europe, so I have scoured, tested, and tasted my fair share. imo, casa bianca deserves it's reputation fr NY-style, no hype! i could care less about hype, celebrities, or the scene. in the end, the food's gotta stand up to the test, and it does. yes, it's an absolute zoo there every day it's open, from open to close. and it's been like that for as long as i can recall knowing about the place (which should tell you something about hype or the consistency of the pizza). you have to plan accordingly. if you're expecting to just show up on fri @730 for a quick slice, then yes, you'll be highly dissatisfied w/ the wait in line, the wait for the food, etc. but if you show up as early as possible, not starving yet, get your name in, then go to the pub next door for drinks while you wait, come back just about hungry, order as soon as you are seated, you're in for a freakin' treat. the staff is great, though ridiculously busy (and therefore harried), it's a family atmosphere (therefore noisy, chaotic, unpolished as hell), but OMG the 'za is just so delicious, homey, comforting, all that n then some. if you plan your evening around it, n most experienced casa bianc'ers do, you won't go wrong. if you want the refined, elegant, 4 servers-for-every-customer experience, then go to any number of the higher end Italian-style pizzaria's in BH. hell, my LBC's got a fab place call La Parolaccia which just nails true Italian-style individual pizza's. casa bianca is a specific type pizza and pizza place. plan accordingly and you'll love it. 4.5 stars.
