ReviewID: CtomBMSEZMQ5n8465fNXbw
ReviewerID: dQYJHRYHZyL9OixoAqh-aA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bite Cafe
Category: American (New)
While I was hoping my first review on Yelp could be one of a positive nature, Bite had other ideas.. . I've been talked into going here more than I'd like to admit by my old lady, and for the most part the reason I wince at every Bite experience is because of the atrocious service, and not so much the below average food.. . Not this time.. . I'm never the guy to voice my displeasure at a meal and usually find something redeeming in what I order, but Bite truly challenges that mindset.  I started with the buffalo tofu appetizer, which bore almost no similarities to what one would think buffalo tofu to be.  The closest I could approximate the sauce to would be an unpleasant mix of soy sauce and sri-racha hot sauce w/o the hot.. . My actual meal was supposed to be grilled cheese and fries - hardly what one would call difficult to execute.  However, what emerged (after an initial order screwup) was a stale pile of bread with what seemed to be Kraft singles in between, and some fries that were barely cooked.  Finally all the iffy prior experiences at Bite welled up inside me and I decided it time to say no and send that pile of trash back.. . On the bright side, while the food was terrible it was the first time our waitress wasn't a completely vacant/horrible person and she removed the offending offal from the bill.  Here's to the little things.  If only Bite could score in both columns.  Sadly, I don't see that ever happening.. . I'm giving this review two stars because they did give me water without having to ask and my lady sort of enjoyed her meal - but she's a vegetarian so her tastes are bound to be a bit skewed ;-). . If after this review you still insist on taking your chances, I'd advise calling ahead to see if what they list on their website menu is actually available.  It's been our experience that less than 1/3 of what's listed is really made in that kitchen.
