ReviewID: ctyZNAbapVLA2NOOHhEEow
ReviewerID: 9wlYxT-jCfJKcKchCjcEJg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
Oh sweet daddy, Papa! . . After months of hearing about Papa Cristo's, Sunny D. decided on having her pre-birthday dinner here. It was Thursday aka "My Big Fat Greek Family Style Dinner" with wine tasting and live entertainment. Apparently they require for you to have reservations on this night. We didn't know so we showed up with a hungry, party of 8. Papa Cristo didn't mind though. He remembered that Sunny showed up a few days before to order a dozen spanakopita. It's nice to have friends on top. The staff totally went out of their way to move tables around and make room for us. All with smiles too. While we were waiting for our table, we sampled Greek wine, hummus, pita bread and some kind of greek sausage. . . On to the meal. Yes, it was big and fat! Because it is family style (on this night), the wait staff keeps bringing out appetizer after appetizer. Our most fabulous and attentive waitress Catherina, took care of us all night, bringing us: . 1) Spanakopites (spinach and feta pie) and tiropites (cheese pie). . 2) A plate of stuffed grape leaves, feta cheese cubes and olives. 3) A bowl of Tzatziki (cucumber dip). 4) Pita bread and pieces of regular bread (?). 5) Greek salad. 6) Green beans - these contained a sweet, cinammony flavor. A little too sweet for my taste buds, so I just didn't have any more than a taste. . 7) Greek seasoned potatoes - wow! These might be the best potatoes I've tasted in my life. They had so many spices and I swear there was a piece of sausage. And it was goooooooood! Yes. It deserves all those o's, bc it almost made me O! Dipping the potatoes in the tzatziki dip enhanced the flavor of the dip and the potatoes. MMM. . 8) More spanakopita (bigger too). 9) Lamb - Now I know why Mary's lambs were missing, they're so damn tasty. Especially Papa Cristo style - slow roasted with garlic and greek spices. . 10) Chicken - I think it was the lemon-oregano chicken. There was a split decision at the table. Half loved the chicken and the other half loved the lamb. It's a matter of taste preference. Personally, I was a part of the lamb loving bunch. . . The birthday girl got her special, individual sized dessert. It was Galactobaklava - which is pretty much baklava with custard. I love custard!!! I was quite saddened when we had to share it with everyone at the table. *Sad face*. . 11) And finally, desert. Baklava!!!!! "Yaaaaaayy!!" our table yelled out when we realized we were each getting out own piece and we wouldn't have to fight each other over who is getting the bigger piece. *Happy face* It was really good, especially because it wasn't as sweet as other baklava. It had more walnuts than I was used to and less honey. Perfection! . . The entertainment for the night was Leila, the belly dancer who made all the red blooded males drool and swoon in delight. She was beautiful and her dancing looked so effortlessly. My hips definitely cannot even fathom moving like that. She was my hero. She pumped the crowd up and pulled each birthday person up to go dance with her. Insert Sunny D.'s bright, red face *here*. . . All this came down to: $24 a person! . . I have to give a super, stong shout out to our waitress Catherina. She was so awesome. She enthusiastically told us how to eat the food (using the dips), kept refilling our plates and never skipped a beat. She seemed very happy to be there and had loads of energy. Also, towards the end, she brought out boxes for leftovers and plastic containers! Yes!!! Free tupperware. You know, I'm resourceful like that. And because I was at the end of the table, when she asked, "do you want more containers?" I accidently heard, "do you want more potatoes." My South Central came out and a fervent, "HELL YEA." Came out. Everyone looked at me funny. Then when we cleared up what was actually said, the sweet darling brought me more containers AND potatoes. I LOVE HER!!!!! . . Ok, do I really have to keep selling this to you? Yeah, didn't think so. . . Next time (because please believe there will be a next time): . -I'll have a gyro . -I'll bring home a bottle of wine. -I'll spend some quality time in the bakery . . Tip:. -There is a parking lot (and complimentary valet) right behind the restaurant.
