ReviewID: cvgmRLH4RwF9H2xHStxEqw
ReviewerID: 9GecX7MrOMvxAo-DejDLTQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
So, my New Years resolution is to start actually leaving Yelp reviews instead of just using them.  Let's see how long this lasts, no?. . So, my husband and I decided to have a last hurrah dinner last night before the semester started and we stop seeing each other at all.  Again.  Not to mention we had a . http://restaurant.com.  certificate.. . The restaurant was pretty empty when we arrived, but it was a hella cold Monday and they had just opened (can we say 1000 point OpenTable reservation?).  We were immediately seated near the fireplace, which helped with that cold.  There is a great, laid back feeling to the place, and it looks like there is a good spot for private groups to the right of the door.. . Our server Marnie, was FANTASTIC.  She walked the line between attentive and hovering perfectly, always had a recommendation, didn't push, and offered samples of wine when I decided to get indecisive.  Everyone one of her recommendations was accurate and spot-on.. . As for the food.  My husband's lentil soup was solid.  Nothing fantastic, but it was good.  Could have used more seasoning perhaps?  Of course, it didn't use a chicken or beef base, so that may have been part of the issue.. . My king crab appetizer was pricey, but great!  Excellent mash of flavors, and really enjoyable.. . Nick's pork 3-way was awesome.  Really, really fantastic.  Great presentation, good mix of textures, and the flavors were out of this world.  They also offered the tenderloin to order, and I can't tell you how nice it is to not have pork overcooked because someone has a random trichinosis fear.  Unfortunately, it didn't get the attention it deserved because it was competing with.... . One of the best Wagyu steaks I've ever had.  Seriously.  The flavor and texture of my new york strip was out.of.this.world.  And the preperation was perfect.  There was one small issue that my mushrooms didn't initially come out.  The only reason I even realized it was because Marnie and I had discussed them - the dish didn't seem to be missing anything.  However, once they were quickly whisked to my table, I couldn't believe I had ever lived without them.  Seriously.. . Drinks were very good, but not inexpensive.  I really liked the pretty in pink  drink of the month, worth the $ (although I skipped a second because of the $.)  Great selection of wines by the glass, and knowledgeable staff.. . Overall, we really loved this place.  It could have been the particular staff or the slower time of the week, but the restaurant succeeds in making its guests feel like they are the ultimate focus of the night.  That, and fantastic food.
