ReviewID: CVrPZQ_9gRTf9g5qRQC9Rw
ReviewerID: tpXwIuoClyyAnA63giKT0A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
overhyped. long wait. quick service that almost borderlines on rude (even though i know that's not his intentions). . i've been here at least 3-4 times before today. and i felt that it was only fair that i go back so that i can evaluate this burger with a fresh taste.. . i got there around 2:05pm on a friday afternoon. waited about 4 minutes for a couple to finish and then i promptly sat down and ordered a steakburger with cheese. no fries. diet coke. got a little mad at myself for forgetting to say "no mayo" because this 2-week daily burger quest is starting to take effect on more than just my wallet.. . yada yada yada, my burger comes. he slams the burger onto the table (he slams everyone's burger onto the table, plates of pies too). i kinda wish they gave u some sort of paper plate or something. . . u really don't get much meat for a burger this price, with no plate, that gets slammed in front of u. . . there is too much lettuce, which is not flat lettuce, so it creates a huge lump in ur burger and eventually slips out. i really like ketchup/dill sauce they put on it, i found it scrumptious. but then i did the meat test i've been doing with every burger. i grab a little morsel of just the meat in the center of the burger pattie, and eat just that. there is very little flavor in this applepan meat. i think all the flavor comes from the sauce, which is great. the bread is normal toasted buns, can't go wrong with that. i wish there was a tomato or something. the burger is totally palatable, but wholly unimpressive.. . i've had their apple pie a la mode before. it's good. but it's vanilla ice cream on warm apple pie, can't go wrong with that.. . my total was like 9.25 or something. i gave him a 20 and he slammed my change in front of me. i still left 2 tip tho, cuz i'm not a jacka55 and i know he's not being mean, just busy.. . evidently they have truly awesome egg salad cuz i saw a lot of those sandwiches being ordered and made. and someone said it outloud to their friend too. but i doubt i'll ever go on a egg-salad quest.
