ReviewID: cWaOfDtPMsXMRlMUmRYjyQ
ReviewerID: UKUDY_H7JXBAogn4eEIK_A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
I've always wanted to go to Spago.  Even as a teenager up in Oregon, I had heard of this restaurant.  And now that I can finally afford to eat at there, I simply had to check it out.  My experience can be summed up in one word: disappointing.. . It's not that the food is bad, it's just way overpriced.  My girlfriend started off the night with a lobster and shrimp risotto ($26).  She thought it was good, but nowhere near the best she's ever had.  For her main course, she had the duck ($39).  I'm not joking when I say that you can get much better duck at Sam Woo out in the San Gabriel Valley.  Admittedly, you will not have the same ambience at Sam Woo (or even close to it), but speaking strictly from a food standpoint, the duck at Sam Woo blows Spago's away.  (For all those who don't know, Sam Woo is your average run of the mill Chinese restaurant in the SGV.)  . . I chose not to have an appetizer and went straight to the main course - American Kobe New York Steak ($90).  I was expecting a lot from this steak.  After all, I've had the American Kobe New York over at Cut, which is also a Wolfgang Puck restaurant, and thought that it was quite delicious.  I'm sorry to say that Spago's steak did not live up to my expectations.  Unlike Cut, the steak at Spago did not melt in my mouth and, surprisingly, was a bit tough.  I just kept thinking to myself, I'm so glad I didn't order the true Japanese Wagyu New York Steak ($150) (at Cut, I believe the Japanese Wagyu New York is $120 and, judging on my experience at Spago, is much better).  . . Spago is not all bad.  The service is pretty good and the ambience is top notch.  The outside patio reminded me a lot of Il Cielo, albeit not quite as romantic.  . . At the end of the day, I can't recommend Spago to anyone.  If you want to go to a Wolfgang Puck restaurant, go to Cut.  Now that is a restaurant you will not be disappointed with.
