ReviewID: CWBaECnPOrruVq5CoBYt5Q
ReviewerID: 40jyU6WuoTpYPkg8tPClXg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
This place was very good.  Definitely 4 or 4.5 stars.  There were a couple of negatives, mainly related to service.  I'll go through those first:. -Service.  We had 4-5 waiters assigned to our table, I think.  Yet the service was still really bad.  There is no info on the menu about what anything is prepared with.  We got the menu and looked at it for like 15-30 min  before someone came over to talk to us about it.  It was then that we learned more about the style of the food and how they recommend ordering (family style). Then they left us for 15 more min. We were surprised with what we got (I didn't expect capers on my scallops). Also, someone got potatoes that looked great, but i think it was just called "potatoes" on the menu. Anyway, I wish the info was on the menu or that the server would tell you more, earlier, about what everything includes.. -With that being said, the server had plenty of time to explain how we needed to order more than we had ordered or make us feel bad for not ordering 3 courses per person (before dessert).  We didn't, and we had leftovers.  But, seriously, back off.. -one food item wasn't that great--the redfish.  . . As for pluses -- most of the food was excellent.  . -we got an amuse that was fish (i forget what kind).  it was OK. mine was super salty but others at my table weren't.. -we started with lobster pasta and the crab risotto. both were outstanding.  i would have loved to have eaten just more for dinner.  really, really good.. -i had the scallops.  they came with toasted almonds and capers.  really very excellent. another person had the steak. also excellent.  it came on a bed of caramelized onions.  so good (again, why not let you know about the onions ahead of time?!). Person 3 got redfish.  it was terrible.  No one at my table liked it.  Person 4 got susuki.  it was good.   . -the dessert -- we had the peanut butter cup.  it was soooo good.  top 5 dessert ever. there was a peanut butter cup which was really a chocolate cookie-like shell on the bottom with creamy peanut butter and a gooey chocolate on top.  Seriously, so good. . -We also got a second amuse before dessert -- an orange soda with a bit of ice cream in it.  So, so good. . -And, last, they gave us hibiscus marshmallows and another treat.  Both, so good!  . -AND they still gave us little muffins to take home.  the muffins were only OK. . . So, overall, really good. But there were some bumps in the road.
