ReviewID: cwE4rIZ_izAubrbpVutR-A
ReviewerID: uGlv4vgvzkTzX-nask81mw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
As you walk in through the automatic sliding glass double doors, a smiling employee hands you a menu.  When you look up from the menu, a feast of color and flavor meet your eye.  This Cuban bakery has fans such as Andy Garcia who frequent its sugary halls.  And for good reason.  You can get anything from fried plantain chips to blueberry muffins to triple layer chocolate mousse for one, to a steak fajita sandwich full of yummy goodness.  Their meat pies are amazing, perfectly seasoned and have a light glaze of sweetness on top that complements all the flaky layers of flavor perfectly.  The potato balls may look a little odd, but after one bite, you will be an addict.. . They have two lines, and seriously, the only difference between the two is that you can only get the full sized cakes in the full bakery line.  That's it.  The 'express' line will still go over to the full bakery side to get you whatever you want if its not there, so if you don't see what you're looking for, then just ask!  Even if they don't have any out anywhere, chances are, they're making more in the back as you look.. . My personal favorites here are the Steak Fajita Sandwich, meat pies and potato balls for all you meat lovers out there.  And I can't resist the strawberry cheese croissant, or the apple empenadas.  Oh, and the blueberry muffins.  Those are a must.  Moist, sweet and bursting with blueberries every time.  Yum.  I also love that all the desserts come as individual portions, so you don't feel like you have to buy huge cakes or gigantic mousses.  You can buy a few things to share and sample.  Like Raspberry Mousse, Triple Layer Chocolate Mousse, Mango Mousse, Coconut with a fuchsia flower on top.... . ...yeah, I better stop before I start drooling.... . Anyway, no matter what time you get here, there will be a line, but never fear, the lines always move quickly.  Its amazing how many people they can move in and out in a short amount of time!  And don't forget the (non-alcoholic) Mojito!
