ReviewID: cWNJpo1Caf-wT7LYCSoOjA
ReviewerID: -2iqRtc6w1AXjVhT3CKuwg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
1 star = VERY helpful, friendly hostess. 1 star = VERY helpful waitress. 1 star = awesome pear prosciutto salad. 1 star = healthy bread with HUMMUS. 1 star = fashionable to-go boxes (yes, I'm superficial). 1 star = to die for desserts. . -1 star = street parking. -0.5 star = lukewarm food. -0.5 star = ambiance. . My friends and I came to this place for restaurant week. What appealed to us was the BRIOCHE BREAD PUDDING. I mean, bread pudding is already yummy enough, but to use arguably the FATTIEST bread (brioche), that is to DIE for. . . Most other places had really boring/bland sounding menu. Not Taste. Or maybe Taste just knows how to market their products well through Taste-y descriptions.. . I actually called TWICE to change my reservations and each time the hostess was plenty nice and friendly. Almost on the verge of overly chirpy.. . I then called TWICE again the day OF my reservations because we were running late. They said they hold the res up to 15 minutes. We barely ran through the door when it hit around the 15 minute mark. The hostess kind of laughed/chuckled and tried to reassure us that we were TOTALLY fine and escorted us to our seats the moment that burst of wind brought us through the door.. . We asked for bread and it came with healthy hummus instead of butter, which took us by surprise. And it was a good kind of surprise. More like, "Huh! Did not expect this!". . We also ordered a mango mojito. A bit weak for my taste again. And overly sweetened. . . The pear salad was AMAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAZING. My friend didn't like the fact that there was a bit too much goat cheese. I say, PILE IT ON!!!!! The prosciutto was DELICIOUS. I had some really nasty raw tasting prosciutto WHILE IN ROME. Was really surprised to taste such good prosciutto in L.A.. . Food was very promptly served. Which could be a plus. Unless you ordered risotto. While it was good, it was slightly lukewarm and under-seasoned.. . I ended up getting the Tres Leches Flan, because my friends got the fatty bread pudding that I could leech off of anyway. =). . Delicious. Thick. Creamy. Not what I expected a flan to taste like. Very good.. . Our leftovers were boxed up nicely and placed in a nice Taste brown bag, which we happily toted home only to have its contents be eaten several hours later.. . Great experience.. . My only gripes: PARKING. I hate street parking. Even though it was free metered parking. AMBIANCE. TOO DARK. Which made me feel really self-conscious also as I was snapping pictures away on my camera cell with flash. Couldn't see anything WITHOUT flash.. . So yes. 4 stars because Yay! I'm a fan.
