ReviewID: cy82vT-Fd9q5EcBBIBtPrw
ReviewerID: FH84gfnr39sraYrTCNbhIQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Cho Sun Ok Restaurant
Category: Korean
I would not brand myself as a Korean BBQ (KB) connoisseur, but when it comes to KB in Chicago, I would like to think I fit somewhere within the "experienced" category.. . I would first like to warn readers about the other good reviews posted about Cho Sun Ok (CSO).  There are not a lot of KB restaurants within the chicago metro area which I believe can be the cause for CSO getting such high reviews.  People who are posting good reviews do not have a valid point of comparison.  . . Prior to dining at CSO I have heard nothing but good reviews (not just from yelp) but also via word of mouth from friends who have dined there.  A friend and I arrived on a Saturday around 5, right before the peak of the dinner rush.  The place had about 75% of the dining area occupied with only 3 small tables open.  We immediately got seated and were served with water and menu. At this point I did not feel rushed or any sense of bad service. This quickly changed!. . During our ordering process, my friend (who had dined at CSO before) inquired about the Kim Chi Fried Rice cooked over the grill.  We were informed that we can only order that rice if we ordered one of the Grill items.  We turned to the grill items and asked which item we should order.  The waitress was extremely adamant that we order the "thin sliced" bugolgi vs. the thick sliced one.  As I turned to my friend telling him I preferred the thick sliced beef, she interrupted us and inssited that we get the thin sliced one.  Not trying to make her disappointed we went with her suggestion and went with the thin sliced beef (which we later would realize why she was so adamant about it).  . . Upon finishing our ordering, my friend and I were having a conversation until I was surprised from behind by our waitress who was holding the portable stove.  She placed this in front of me and nearly burned my eyebrows as she ignited the stove.  My friend and I decided to laugh it off as we are not fans of making a scene before our food arrives. . . The thin sliced meat arrives and she starts to cook the meat on the pan.  I make a comment to my friend about the amount of grease that the meat has produced while it was cooking.  The waitress had taken the stacks of beef and just threw it on the pan without separating each piece from each other.  We were then greeted with the waitress's solution to absorbing some of the oil. She reached in her apron for a napkin and threw the napkin over the beef and used it to absorb most of the grease accumulating in the pan.  The pan at this point looked like a saucepan of grease with the meat drowning in it's liquid fat.  This was when my friend and I realized why she was so adamant of us ordering the "thin" sliced beef.  It was easier to cook (about 10/90 meat to fat ratio) and I am guessing lower in quality.  Each bite we ate was a mouthful of grease.  . . I quickly gave up on the beef and saved my appetite for the kimchi fried rice which was the initial reason we decided on dining at CSO.  At the time the waitress started cooking our kimchi fried rice, I looked over to the door and realized there was a line that had formed out the door.  It was this moment when one of the other wait staff came by and threw our bill on our table.  Keep in mind, one of our entrees was clearly still in the cooking process which was visible on our table.  I jokingly asked my friend to ask for a menu to get a reaction from the wait staff.  He punked out. . . We ended our dining experience with our waitress prematurely turning off our stove that was cooking the kimchi fried rice.  My friend and I wanted to let the rice cook more until the bottom of the pan was burnt and crispy (which is our favorite part of the rice, similar to hot pot bibim bop).  At this point, we decided to wait as the rice cooked on the bottom, but during this process our waitress came by twice asking us to eat.  She came by our table to rush us to eat more than she attended to my empty glass of water.  I was anticipating her third trip around asking us to eat, would be followed by her force feeding us with a spoon.  . . Korean BBQ can be a truly unique dining experience.  It also comes with a lot of sacrifice, one being the stench it leaves on your clothes, the language barrier with most KB places, and the couple of hours you get to partake in gluttony.  With this being said, it can easily be a terrible dining experience if the service is below par along with the quality of the food.  . . Pass on CSO!  Spend the extra cash on gas and drive up to the northwest suburbs (i.e. Glenview, Niles) for a truly eye opening experience on Korean BBQ.
