ReviewID: cy_f9Wo4eFyl_Iua3S3WEw
ReviewerID: iyKeMjkuUyw7IrQgHG1Jhw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Paco&#39;s Tacos
Category: Mexican
Paco's Tacos is an institution. This small eatery has been serving up authentic Mexican food for years--I'm not sure exactly how many so I'm just going to leave it at that--and me for more than a decade. . . Unlike its newer sister restaurant, Paco's Cantina, in Westchester, with its towering ceilings and swinging paper mache parrots--which make it feel more like an El Torito chain than the authentic, family-owned business that it is--the original Paco's is a sight to behold. I remember coming here when I was a kid and barely touching my food, gossiping with the "tortilla ladies", as I called them--who would give my friend and I balls of raw dough on our way out which we would subsequently throw at cars and assorted passerby--and taking in the bizarre decor (full diving suit, stuffed boar's head, rifles, fish tank, and taxidermy of the weasel variety come to mind). . . As an adult I'm still mystified by the decor, but have a much greater appreciation for the food. One of my  favorites is the Supermex Burrito--rolled up in a warm, soft, freshly made tortilla, and filled with your choice of meat and sauce, then topped with slices of avocado. (Tip: If your date wants the same just ask them to split if for you, it's a couple bucks extra but you basically get two burittos for the price of one). Another staple is the Machaca dinner--which I usually order with chicken--a huge plate of rice, refried beans, and chicken with scrambled eggs and onions and a side of fresh tortillas. Their tostadas are also great--my only complaint is that they tend to skimp on the lettuce and over-deliver on the meat... not so bad considering they're always happy to bring you more.. . Their margaritas are good, but go for a shot of Grand Marnier with it if you want to feel a buzz.  . . Oh and their chips and salsa are wonderful. Just be sure to get here early on weekends or prepare for a bit of a wait. . . Say hi to Paco for me!
