ReviewID: CYhFZdEMYrn5Bt286MzN9A
ReviewerID: g-qZG1FmTdrkYHYwffrLmw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Terroni
Category: Italian
I've got mixed feelings about Terroni.  When you walk in, it's got an amazing vibe.  I love the way it's decorated, the open kitchen, the fantastic lighting fixtures and the layout.  The bartenders are awsome and the wines are great.  My only complaint while at the bar was that the wine menu is printed in type that is too small for any normal person to read - let alone someone who needs her reading glasses :). . Moving into the dining room, the service came to an absolute standstill.    After we were seated the server forgot about us.  We pondered the menu (which is AMAZING), debated over what to have, hoped for some bread in the meantime and caught up with each other hoping that the waiter would eventually come over.  We practically had to trip him going by to order our first course... the burrata, serano ham and grilled artichoke.  It came quickly, but server boy never came back to take our dinner order (in fact why didn't he take it with the antipasti order - he scurried away before we had the chance).  So we dive into our food (which was very good - except the cheese believe it or not, while melt in your mouth, was unseasoned and very bland), finish it up and  still.....no server!!!!  My BF is in the restaurant business, so extremely patient in situations like this, but we had a play to get to and I was getting antsy.  I guess another 10 minutes go by, I all but finish my wine and can't have another 'cause I'm driving and FINALLY our order is taken.  I go for the spaghetti Limone, Joe goes for the osso bucco and Dory has what I'm having.  It comes fast enough and it's good.  Not great.  Not to die for fabulouse, but good.  I make lemon pasta too and to be honest I like mine better (a Giada recipe).  Joe's ossobucco was good too.  Not great, not to die for melt in your mouth unbelievable. . . I really want too love this place because it FEELS so good when you walk in and the menu has what looks to be the most scrumptious food.   For that reason I'll give it another shot.  But really, this time around was just ok and the service was awful.
