ReviewID: cyxEw8bAn7PDi0ZeIW8PFw
ReviewerID: ptLIFLUPwg3MYt-J62s3iA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
"Hey dad, I have good news!" .... "I'm heading down and I will have some free time on Sunday, so I thought we could hang out, watch some March Madness, I'll grill some swordfish, we can drink beer and then go hang out at a dive beach bar later" . . "Sorry son, I am heading down to Tahiti on Saturday morning for a dive trip" . . Well I believe it's typhoon season in the South Pacific so I reaaaaaally hope a storm doesn't blow in and mess up my dad's diving trip" . . Thanks for inviting me pops! . . With a free Sunday, I now had the opportunity to move up a planned business dinner from Monday to Sunday. It was my choice on where to go and I needed a load of carbs so pasta and more pasta were in the cards. . . Osteria Mozza is one of my favorite Italian restaurants on the West Coast. Why? Because they serve carbs. And lots of them. And they serve some of the best ones you will find anywhere. . . What do they do different? For starters they do their best to collect the best black truffle and do not skimp when shaving it over your Tagliatelle noodles. The servers take their time explaining in great detail what you are about to eat. Which region in Italy the dish that is sitting from. How long the pork was cured and where the pork is from. My braised short rib special wasn't just "short ribs" it was a collection of ingredients that were masterfully put together that added up to one of the best tasting dishes that I have in months. . . The wine list is heavy Italian. Italian wines are my weak spot as I really don't know difference between a Nebbiolo or a Super Tuscan. We went with the wine tasting menu which again, for the most part I had no clue what I was drinking, but I can tell you that I loved each glass and the more than generous pours. And it appeared that each varietal was brought out in the proper Reidal. . . Nothing here is over-seasoned and the Chef uses simple, but fresh ingredients. This is exactly what you would expect when dining in Italy or even on Melrose.. . PS. They also have a dedicated pizzeria which on my next trip down will totally check out.
