ReviewID: D-BVrnSHsTG2pU_TPQumtg
ReviewerID: BmGKtjhYkFvMR13-RubrOQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
This review is a true rags to riches story. . . My history with this restaurant is intense and it is also home to my most embarrassing moment. I won an international songwriting competition when I was a teenager. I was trying to maintain an academic scholarship and supporting myself as a maid and nanny for a family with five children. I had a studio apartment and one dress to my name. . . With the big fat check from the contest, also came a dinner invitation from Tom Brokaw and his family to celebrate my birthday at Spago in the celebrity room. . . My birthday was a normal day in my life filled with sweat, study and the bus at 5 AM. to kick it off. I arrive at Spago in my friend's pick up truck and fall flat on my face in my one and only dress. I wasn't used to the valet opening doors for me at that time and I fell out! With me came all of the wrapping paper from my lap that housed my birthday gift from the family that employed me. An army of attendants scrambled to pick up every single shred of paper to present to me. Man was I awkward. But Tom wasn't, who shows up out of no where to hand every attendant in the lot a crisp ten dollar bill. What a cool dude. . . Someone took my coat: ten bucks. someone pulled out my chair: ten bucks. Like I said Tom is very cool. (I am so hungry). On our table is an extraordinary peacock made of a hundred different crackers and breads. Too pretty to eat? I stare at it for a long hungry while when Tom's mother finally cracks the head off of the bird and hands it to me. "Mary, you must try this Indian cracker bread, it is Divine." The coolness runs in the family. . . At this point I'm realizing how uncool I am while I devour the cracker bread because I'm so hungry. I have no idea what they are talking about while they converse about politics and new books. The worst part is that every time I take a bite of this dang cracker bread some poor dude has to run over to my table with a little gold broom and dust pan and sweep up the crumbs. Guys, I'm really trying not to make this guy run across the restaurant but the crackers are very flaky. Perhaps, divine as Mrs. Brokaw previously stated. . . Ever the classy guy, Tom orders my dinner. It was the first time that I've ever had Venison. When the food shows up the table conversation continues. Everyone is so intelligent. Why is no one else eating? They have a few bites and though I'm tempted to follow suit, I can not help myself and eat at least half of my food pronto like the rebel that I am. . . The next part really confused me at first. Wolfgang Puck himself comes out to chat with Tom and brings the largest platter of desserts I've ever seen. Each one looks too pretty to eat. I try to point to one. "No." Says Mr Puck. What have I done wrong? I try to point to another one. "No." again is the answer. I'm so confused, I don't fit in and I want to melt under the table and disappear. Then Mr Puck walks away and leaves about one hundred tiny bite sized desserts behind. . . No wonder they were saving room! One thing that Spago can do if you are lucky enough to have Wolfgang himself cook for you is pastry. We shared tiny desserts for an hour and I blew out a candle. I made the same wish I've always made and it always comes true. . . I've been back to Spago many times since. I love to sit in the garden on a weeknight in the summer. I've never spotted a celebrity but then again I'm not looking very hard. -I'm too busy eating. . . The only reason that the stars are four rather than five for me is that it is a little inconsistent. Sometimes it is the best meal of your life with a bottle of world class champagne and sometimes it is just very good. . . Here is how to guarantee that it will be great and get your five stars: Hand the credit card to the manager of the restaurant and tell them to surprise you. It works every time for me. Some of the unique off menu items still strike me as genius. Like the pairing of a sliver of fine salami and goose liver, Truffles and butternut squash and many other brilliant decisions made from the mastermind in the kitchen impromptu. . . The garden on a quiet night in summer would be a lovely place to pop the question, and as I said you can guarantee the meal will be one of the greatest in your life if you are willing to gamble on being surprised.
