ReviewID: d-zUx8ymN7GfW6kqKpD5IQ
ReviewerID: 1F0o_vgecqTcvT0yxzYJTA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
This place has hundreds of reviews and came highly recommended by my yelp ghetto ethnic cuisine advisor Andrew so we spent about half an hour reading reviews first before heading out on a sunday afternoon.  Between the Hollywood and the West L.A. location, we chose the W.L.A. location (there are 5 locations total) since it was on W. Pico near La Brea. When we got there, there were many many people outside the restaurant.  Somehow, all guys in white wife beaters.  My daughter said, uh, mom...I think we're overdressed.  Can we go to the Hollywood location instead?  I look at her and say, 'we're here for the fried chicken  and waffles.  So what if it's a little ghetto??  We can do Ghetto!'. The kids sigh at my stubbornness and I drive behind the restaurant where there is a small parking lot full of people and no parking space. I was determined to eat here so I parked next to the lot to wait for a space to open up.  MOM!!  Do you see what I see?!!  . I look over and there are guys in the parking lot  smoking something.  oh, they're smoking weed?. NO, that other group!. I look over and see another group smoking something in what  looked like a lightbulb.. God, mom, don't you know anything?? they're doing meth!!. Forget my "I'll do anything for good food" mentality !  I wasn't going to expose my kids to people doing drugs openly in broad daylight.....so we got outta there and on to the Hollywood location in silence.. The kids seemed relieved that we were seeing familiar places like pizzeria Mozza on the way there.  Fast forward to what we had.. The #13 which came recommended by most yelpers. 1 breast, 1 waffle: $8.40.. #9  the Country Boy for me because I'm a wing lover. 3 fried wings . with fries.. And a house combo #22 for my son: breast with mac&amp;cheese, collard greens, cornbread $13.40. We also got  biscuits .60 each , and grits $3.40.. As usual, I think I ordered a little too much food.  There were split opinions.  my daughter loved the waffle/ fried chicken combo.. I really didn't care too much for it.  The sides didn't blow me away....although the cornbread was impressive when it first arrived hot. mmmm    Fried wings and breasts were probably the highlights - crispy and tasty.  They put butter on everything with an icecream scooper....which we all desperately scraped off the waffles, cornbread and biscuits. Best thing along with the chicken were the specialty drinks, the Sunrise; OJ and lemonade $3.25.. Many yelpers echoed my sentiments. I did not grow up with this type of food so I did not find it extraordinary.  For many, it's pure comfort food.  My comfort food is more like Japanese chicken wings at Furaibo.  It was my first time I had tried grits and collard greens.  Just for the sheer caloric and fat contents of the food, this is not a place I can frequent.  Maybe once a year?  If I do come back, I'll order just the fried wings and a lemonade.....which I admit were perfection!. Lunch for 3 came out to $50....a little more than I expected at this type of place. (read uber casual, diner-ish) . Now when I got home, I read through reviews for the first location.  Nobody mentioned anything off about this place until I finally found ONE reviewer...who was scared to get out of the car so she forced her sister to get out and pick up ordered food.  Rest of the reviewers mostly wrote raving 5 star reviews.   I don't appreciate that type of open drug use in a restaurant parking lot.  Another complaint is that we all got extremely sleepy and lethargic after the meal....and we got absolutely nothing done.  Dinner was skipped and so was breakfast the morning after.
