ReviewID: d08SOugfl0IKwmVfokCcyg
ReviewerID: 0SvPdzpIEHQFJOvnPt9zxQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Abattoir
Category: American (New)
After seeing several 'blah' reviews about Abattoir -- I was a little hesitant heading over to the restaurant to check it out for myself.  Fortunately our friend Mike was celebrating his 27th birthday and he booked the reservation -- so, we didn't have much say.  . . First -- the decor in this place is awesome.  It's modern, industrial, and really warm inside (tone-wise).  So I would disagree with many of the comments of the space resembling anything close to a "cafeteria".  . . Sadly, we are still off the drinking train due to training for the ING Half Marathon, but one bonus is eating out has become SO much cheaper for us when alcohol isn't included on the tab.  Our friends did partake in the alcoholic goodness, and enjoyed the 'Moscow Mule', which according to our waiter is one of Abattoir's signature cocktails.  . . OK, so onto the food -- we ordered a bunch of appetizers and passed them around the table.  These included the pommes frites served with a house-made mayonnaise (HEAVEN), cumin ceci peas (very tasty), beef jerky (really good), chicharrones (could have done without), a couple of us had salads -- the beet salad (really, really beet heavy, so if that's your thing...dive in) and the butterhead salad (cue 'butterhead' joke).  Last but not least we had SWEETBREADS -- going into this experience I said I would not be trying the offal, BUT it was actually pretty amazing.  Not sure I'd ever order it as my main meal, but very good.  . . You'd think -- wow they must be REALLY full after all that food, but no my friend you would be wrong.  We all ordered entrees!  I had the burger which is made with beef and pork -- really big, but nice fresh taste.  Around the table -- there were a couple chicken schnitzle (I tasted this...definitely good), meatballs, and a pork tasting.  Everyone seemed to enjoy their entrees as there wasn't much left.  I could not finish the burger and it's obviously something you don't want to wrap up in a doggie bag.  I would order it again though!. . The dessert menu had been staring at me all night and I had the meyer lemon pudding cake with buttermilk sorbet.  Pretty tasty -- would have liked it if it had been warmed through.  I think the last point especially applies to the guys that got the sticky toffee pudding.  Warm that up!. . That's all my pros for the night -- I do have a few cons.  My biggest comment would be about the service -- it just seemed a little hurried, and a little too aloof for my liking.  I shouldn't have to ask for things twice in this calibre of restaurant.  Period.  Secondly, I read the menu and was prepared to make decisions, but the waiter insisted on describing pretty much EVERYTHING on the menu and saying it was all delicious.  You can't be THAT enthusiastic about everything -- a non-decisive person would really struggle if they had our waiter.  Yikes.  . . With all that -- I would go back to Abattoir, but I think there's equal restaurants at this particular price-point that I would return to much quicker.
