ReviewID: d3C78TXxxkrKQTPCAyVffQ
ReviewerID: WN3FQ5lNz5q8FFbeH42OxQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Went here for brunch yesterday with my favorite female dining partner in crime before we hit up some vintage clothing stores. We had originally planned on going to M Henry, but decided that with the Midsommar Fest it would be more of a zoo there than usual, and instead chose to go to Sola based on all the great reviews.. . I hadn't thought to make a reservation and it was hopping at 12:45, including two big parties, one replete with the dreaded diaper cake. The host managed to scare up a table, thankfully, far away from the ensuing ooohing and ahhhing of the baby shower.. . PIC arrived shortly thereafter and the waitress greeted us. She had a very sing-song -y Irish accent and she was more perky than anyone should be on a Sunday morning (okay, technically it was afternoon, but still). She gave us menus and asked if we wanted some donuts to start while we looked over the menu. In a flash, we both looked at each other and read each other's minds. You bet your ass we wanted those donuts. To that, we also ordered mimosas - a Red Dawn for me and a Palmango for Keri. . . I love blood orange juice and this was a delicious twist on a classic mimosa. The donuts, actually called "malasadas", were placed down in front of us. There were four of these little beauties and also small pitchers of raspberry coulis and chocolate sauces for dunkin'. I am always a fan of breakfast/brunch appetizers, especially sweet ones, (I'm specifically talking about the breakfast bread pudding at M Henry :::swoons:::) so these more than hit the spot and the sauces were spectacular.. . For our main courses, I ordered a wild mushroom, asparagus and goat cheese omelette and she ordered the huevos benedictos - a spin on classic eggs benedict.. . The food arrived and we dug in. On the side were hash browns which neither of us cared for. They were shredded but not at all crunchy.  They were just big chunks of steamed potatoes with no texture at all.. That is a big fail in my book.. . My omelette was good, but it was cooked a bit longer than I like and was more like a frittata than an omelette. Keri liked, but didn't love her dish, which admittedly had a lot going on. Sweet cornbread, a ton of crumbled chorizo and some heat from the salsa, which she thought didn't necessarily play well off of each other.. . The service was cheerful and friendly, almost too friendly, but she was knowledgeable and efficient, so I can't complain.. . I'd say Sola is a solid 3.5 stars for brunch, but I look forward to returning for dinner and updating my review.
