ReviewID: d5GodXvVLcmWYldHaymf1A
ReviewerID: KkbSCnuJAleTZ2JEhGhPkw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Medici On 57th
Category: Bakeries
The Med is one of those places where I end up eating when I'm out with a group of friends who are, for one reason or another, enamored with this place, but I don't usually go here if I have a choice. I've never really seen the magic. Sure, Obama eats here, but after five or six visits to this place and Dixie Kitchen (RIP) I've decided that Mr. President and I have different ideals in dining.. . Maybe Obama likes this place so much because he's tired of all the excessive public attention. I can imagine how, if you're constantly being hassled by the media, waiting for half hour to be seated when there are clearly open tables might be a refreshing change of pace. Maybe not having your glass refilled for 20 minutes can make you feel more in touch with the American populace. Maybe I'm just the Paris Hilton of casual dining, I don't know, but I always get this creepy chill down my spine when one of my friends asks the waiter for a "few more minutes" to decide on a meal, because God only knows if we'll ever see that nice, funny little waiter again. Sometimes they just... disappear.. . My last visit? Ordered a pasta dish. Twenty minutes later, the waiter comes back and tells me they're out of one of the ingredients needed to make this particular dish. They offer to make me something sort of similar from scratch for the same price, I say okay. It comes about ten minutes later. When I'm done, they ask me if I'd like a dessert. I ask if it would be possible to get one of the small tarts from the bakery (I'd seen one on display in the dessert thingy on the way in). This is kind of a weird request, but they say that it shouldn't be a problem. Twenty minutes later (I would have flagged someone for the bill and up and left if I weren't with a group!) they say that they don't have any tarts left. By then, I just wanted to go home. . . The only reason these guys get even three stars is because -- I'll admit it -- the food is pretty fantastic. Their Margherita and Spinach/Goat Cheese thin-crusts are great, crispy on the bottom and a little oily on the top. Their veggie burger is my favorite in Hyde Park (though I eat it open-faced, their buns are way too big). When my pasta does finally come, after that half hour of waiting, it's perfectly al-dente and delicious. . . But me? I'd rather go to Florian and have the staff fuss over me, even though the quality of the food is a touch less consistent. I guess I just like the star treatment.
