ReviewID: d5ubdv6Zbft-Cl9LnjQyTA
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
The one thing that you have to give Bottega Louie is that it is exactly what Downtown L.A. needs.  Downtown L.A. is focused on bringing people to Downtown for various reasons--working, living, eating out, clubbing, going to concerts, etc.  Bottega Louie fits right into that concept because it serves many purposes with people meeting up for drinks, picking up a few snacks at the high-end wine/cheese market, grabbing something to go from the deli counter or the bakery, or settling in for a long meal in the restaurant.  It is a place that is open early and closes late, and from the looks of it, Bottega Louie is always bustling with activity.. . That congested atmosphere did not impact the service on my first visit.  The service was very excellent on that occasion.  Over the weekend for brunch, the service was okay--not bad but not very attentive either.  I've never been Downtown in the afternoon when it was this busy.  Maybe it was the Red Bull event.  Regardless of the reason, the place was packed.. . In terms of the food, the brunch menu consisted of your standard breakfast and salad options.  I went with the eggs benedict.  Toasted muffins that were topped with thick slices of Canadian bacon, spinach, and nicely poached eggs.  The hollandaise sauce was served on the side in a huge gravy pitcher.. . In terms of the eggs benedict, it was okay but nothing memorable.  It was a little underseasoned.  My friend had to put salt and pepper on her eggs benedict.  They could have been a little more creative with the dish as well.  If you really want great eggs benedict, head out to Suzanne Goin's Tavern for brunch.  Prices here were about right.. . I tried a little bit of the ham and gruyere frittata.  It was huge and much tastier than my eggs benedict.. . I like what Bottega Louie has to offer and the atmosphere, but the food is a little average-to-good.  Their menu and the quality of food smacks of Cheesecake Factory.  Walking by the open kitchen, you don't really get a sense of creative people putting together great food but an assembly line churning out same plate after same plate.  In terms of the quality of the food, I think they would be well served to scale down on the menu and try to be less of "everything for everybody."  But, in terms of business, they seem to be doing just fine.  So if it isn't broken, why fix it?. . By the way, if you are by the oven where they make the pizzas, it gets a little warm.  Also, this is not the best place for a bigger group because it gets quite loud.. . Another note that you may find important--Bottega Louie was absolutely jam packed with good looking people.
