ReviewID: D6MUQ6IHsMn2JcP2y5hFYA
ReviewerID: hLZhIcq9qupYTeW5FHInEA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
The password to enjoy this place thoroughly is:. . Xiao Long Bao, . (sounds like a new weed bubbler, or another hidden character in the video game Mortal Kombat).. . Another spot, I sort of procrastinated on writing a review for therefore my feelings of this place, are a bit more indifferent than critical. I've heard so much hype over this place it is ridiculous. Imagine the 101 Taiwan fireworks (which I hear and see the fireworks show is of epic proportion and well worth the hype) every new year's...and then imagine another 101 tower on top blasting the same pyroclastic display, therefore I had such high hopes of this place.. . I was really hungry, and some of the Yelpers decided to stop by J.J. Bakery to grab some munchies to settle us down. Unfortunately the wrapped hot dog bread, did not fill me up to say the least and the bowels of my stomach were cursing me as though it was filled with demonic heathen. I sat down with the rest of the crew, and we got to ordering. Now I could have sworn, I asked Holly W. to take a picture of the receipt for personal reference but I'll go on total recall (no Arnold Schwartzenegger) to see what we ordered:. . -Xiao Long Bao regular dumplings. -Xiao Long Bao vegetarian dumplings. -Pork Shiumai. -Pork Shiumai with rice. -Shrimp Shiumai. . And many other things that my fluid intelligence, cannot retain at the moment. Let's start with the Shrimp Shiumai, again a really small bite but eat least 50 of these, and you got some what of a decent dinner platter coming along. Not my cup of tea, considering it was a bit too soft for texture, but I shouldn't complain too much I guess. While here comes the Pork Shiumai and Pork Shiumai with Rice (more like mediocre rice ball).. . The Pork Shiumai is again of the same quality as its cousin the Shrimp, the pork offerings were small and tender. I'm starting to see a trend here with the small portions and large orders (is this the conniving ways Asian people have to make you spend more money *gasp*, just kidding....maybe). Now comes the real reason why I drove almost two hours to Arcadia in rush hour traffic to eat here with some bomb Yelpers.. . Xiao Long Bao dumplings, like any other Asian delicacy will always have a vegetarian alternative. And, as a omnivore (swaying towards the Carnivore spectrum more). The meat version definitely enticed my palette greatly, in comparison to the vegetarian one. Maybe it's also the fact that I feel peas and dumplings don't mix well together (however peas are a filling vegetable I guess). A key element with all their offerings of this type of food is its smooth raindrop texture, especially if its just made piping hot. I feel its as though the Chinese perfected the M n M's recipe but for solid food (they are very smart in doing so).. . Overall, I believe we spent $20.00 bucks per person (so roughly $400.00 plus tax and tip in total). The service was excellent and they somehow managed to improve our seating, while being in the Sea of China for a good couple of hours. The host was flabbergasted to our epic appetite (something that he's noted from now on, in regards to a gang of Yelpers). Cool place, just too much hype, and cramped seating. A good experience nevertheless, but is it worth the visit? We'll see the next time, I'm in the area.
