ReviewID: D8pVqDTgSQq0OV7wrrnEPg
ReviewerID: n86B7IkbU20AkxlFX_5aew
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi Go 55
Category: Sushi Bars
When I first stumbled onto this I was going to the japanese market downstairs and looked up what my brother and I can eat there as we were hungry! I walked in and had reservations about the food already- all white people eating.Granted it was weekday lunch so it was all suits not suburban type families but still. Sorry to generalize but it's a sign of authentic food to see those of that culture partaking. I dont want "friendly" food with the palette tampered to be milder to suit a broad audience I want, no- I need the real deal. My brother and I looked at each other as we think alike on these terms...still we were hella hungry and it's reasonable prices so what's the worse that can happen if we stick to raw fish?. . I got chirashi bowl as it seemed like a big portion for the price- it was big and amazingly fresh too- very pleasing surprise. Also on that day they gave me gobo roots and a pickled plum for my chirashi! They put roe, sesame and shredded egg on the rice. They gave us little bites of sunomono, and 2 other little plates Eee! I love those accompaniments for chirashi and was the extra touches that made me happy with my choice of coming. It's still one of the best portioned chirashis I've had for the price and full from just that. My brother had a nigiri special and he enjoyed it. Later that week- I came back and grabbed some handrolls (toro green onion, lots of salmon skin hand rolls), ankimo, buri shisoyaki (yelllowtail) and it was also a yummy lunch. . This happened maybe 5 years ago (good memory, huh?!) and holds true today that I was mistaken and it is wonderfully authentic, unfussy place (it kinda smells like my japanese friends house!) with great prices and very nice and fast service. I've been a regular, making sure I am hungry whenever I come to Mitsuwa market.. . Chirashi is still a favorite, ankimo is great here, uyajyu/eel bowl is a comfort food, both toros- otoro and chutoro is yum (and finally a place that sells both!), kumamoto oysters (all flavors good but love chili and green onion), live hotate/scallop and the aoyaki/orange clams are delish and salmon skin and toro handroll is comfort. I love trying the specials on the board as its usually really good stuff! . . Yeah I really miss this place.I recently got charge $13 for a chirashi bowl in a Vegas place off the special board on the wall.....it came in a grapefruit that was hollowed out and cut in half and the other half the rind was cut and pushed up inside the bowl so it wasn't even halfway filled in my half grapefruit and no rice given- had to buy rice extra. It was just chopped up fish, poke/cubed style, not nicely cut sashimi- how can this be called a chirashi!? How dare they !!!. Such a travesty that makes me miss coming to Sushi Go 55. I will not dare to chirashi anywhere else.
