ReviewID: D8QMOMiYAV1SKK74D0z4mQ
ReviewerID: zTuosRsVJrxb5IYaFII2gg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Today I start Part 1 of  what I will call "The Soup-er" Files - dedicated to the seldom discussed and only for the TRUE foodies specialty sub category - soup;  . . Bottom Line: Who makes it and where to get it. . . Anyone who knows me, knows I am a Soup Junkie.  Soup for breakfast, soup for lunch, soup for dinner. I'll make a HUGE pot and eat it all day everyday for a week. . . There in lies the problem...homemade is the only REAL soup and GOOD soup takes forever to make. . . So, when you get the itch and you don't want to wait HOURS or all day (if you make soup like I do) and, like any good junkie, when you get that "I Gotta have it" itch you need to get your fix IMMEDIATELY...and bad soup is like a bad trip.  . . So were to go? . . What is commonly referred to, by those who know, as  "one of the best ramens ever"...and that's saying a LOT!...is in Little Tokyo, easily identified highlighted by a bright yellow awning on 1st street near MOCA (and the infamous Mr Ramen) is  one of my new found favorites -  "Daikokuya  - Original Noodle &amp; Rice."  . . . This is exactly what you want out of a Ramen shop.  A small, no nonsense Japanese noodle shop that, when you walk in, you automatically know the routine; you automatically see the sheet; you sign your name and sit and wat for a table or a seat at the counter.  . . CAVEAT: Do not be scared off by how busy it is.  This place is ALWAYS packed, but the wait is seldom any longer than 10-15 minutes (except maybe near noon - expect 30 minutes) Also, this joint ain't that big so more than 5 and you're all sitting at separate tables or you can all wait to sit at the counter together (which, once I imagined it in my head - sounds cool).  However, I have good Daikokuya Ramen karma and haven't waited more than 5 minutes. . . Another thing about Daikokuya is that the menu is the menu and its a simple menu.  There is what there is.  Luckily its all really good. . . Now, if you are a Ramen expert like me you know you can get an extra egg or onions, but don't ask for anything out of the ordinary (pastrami) or they will smile and move on until you have decided what from THEIR menu you want.  . . For me its easy: , Edamame, Deep Fried Spicy Tuna Roll and Gyoza + Daikokuya Ramen which is ALL made fresh in THAT store.. . The Fried Spicy Tuna Roll is ground spicy tuna, wrapped in a leaf (like cabbage) and deep fried in a tempura batter. The words OH MY GOD can not begin to describe the delicious evil that this Deep Fried Spicy Tuna.  Not too heavy, not un spicy, not un delicious.  I am always tempted to order two orders but the in store made, pan fried, pork and vegetable Gyoza reminds me that variety is better. I also recommend the Tonkatsu crunchy fried pork cutlets. No...not health food. . . I had a few bites of each of the appetizers and lo and behold I was delivered the Pièce de résistance, their amazing Daikokuya Ramen.  Why is it so amazing and/or famous? According to legend, Daikokuya begins making their process, with all the love and dedication you see in Ramen movie "Tanpopo" (yes, I know the SOUP movies). The night before, they pre-boil their pork in to a reduction entity (only word that fits).  From that point its ready and waiting for you to order it and for the geniuses behind the stove to add all the Daikokuya goodness and infused with their own 'secret blend' of miso soy sauce.  In to the completed broth goes boiled chijire style egg noodles (you can ask for soft or aldente...I never mess with their natural groove an eat what they give me), Kurobuta pork chashu (and if you have never had chashu at Daikokuya, you have never had it right), marinated hard boiled egg (wicked good), bamboo shoots, green onions and a sprinkle of sesame seeds.. . I think that Daikokuya may sub consciously NOT want to be Mr Ramen and lays back on the salt, which is fine by me, because I like to soy sauce salt to taste...and add chili powder for that WOW and "Lavanta Muerte" (Raise The Dead) hang over soup style. . . VEGGIE ALERT:  This is a great choice for vegetarians - but YOU HAVE TO MENTION you are a Veg and you'd like the cold noodles without meat (they come with pork and ham, as well as eggs.)...still REALLY good and this is also a good summer version if you want the taste but not the heat. . . There is an entire menu of Rice bowls and combos that I have never been able to get to and I will try eventually, but, again, when my RA (Ramen Anonymous) monkey starts beating me over the head with a japanese soup spoon, I make a bee line for Daikokuya. . . FINAL TIP:  While you;re waiting for your food, look around at people who are finishing their meal.  This is a REAL Japanese style joint where good ramen is NEVER to be wasted. You drink even the broth....SLUUURRRRRRRRRP!
