ReviewID: d965oazHNSoId9u6sJCgJw
ReviewerID: kRuMxqM-gSx_0FyJnwfY1g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fado Irish Pub
Category: Pubs
f*** it.. i don't care if fado has a preppy frattastic reputation.. i freakin LOVE it here.. 1 - so everyone and their mom has been out at fado and know that it's a pretty typical large bar scene, pretty crowded, people dancing everywhere, semi-hard to get to the bar - but i like it b/c it's huge and a  lot of floors to roam up and down on.. people are generally in a good mood and friendly and mingling.. and great outdoor patio area. overall if you just came here for the bar.. i would say 3.5 or 4 stars, typical regular bar with typical buckhead clientele . . 2 - FOOD - shepards pie is one of my favorite foods.. and i've tried it pretty much everywhere.. even in europe.. and surprisingly.. the shepards pie at fado is AS GOOD AS IT GETS!!! 5 stars for the shepards pie alone - the potato "pie" part is just the right amount of crunchy on the outside.. and soft on the inside.. and the stew is just the right amount of hearty-ness - it also comes with a mixed greens salad with balsamic vinagrette which is also pretty good and a nice break for your mouth from when you find that you can't breathe from shoving massive quantities of potato down your mouth. other notable menu item - chicken quesadilla boxty.. whoever came up with this was freakin genius.. b/c by putting it in a boxty (potato).. the average chicken quesadilla just got 1000 times better. . 3 - SOCCER slash world cup.. definitelyyyy come here for the world cup.. there are flat screens and screaming soccer fans in pretty much every direction you can look in.. this is the place to go for serious soccer-watching.. it's a super fun environment that is still focused on the game.. this is not the sports bar for "game playing in the background while ppl glance over at tv a few times while carrying on incessant conversation at their tables". . random comment.. they show hurling (irish sport) here when it's on too - one of the only places in atlanta that i know of that does... . another random comment - they used to have paulaner on draught here served in the original paulaner glass with a slice or orange inside that was freakin soooo good and amazingness. why did they take it away and say that hoegaarden is an acceptable alternative??? please bring the paulaner back!!!!
