ReviewID: D_RXzSV3YpapOOwhpf0_kQ
ReviewerID: 8xsDL0klDNt6t4mdi1n9lg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
I must review this dump once again... as I've said before. I've been coming to this place since I was a kid as many of you home grown east LA'ers have been proclaiming. So I gave it yet ANOTHER try last week just to please my bf (mind you, the last time we came he was dissapointed... I was so excited). He decided to give it another try to redeme itself. So we hit the spot on a Friday night, not as crowded as usual.. hmmm.. a sign that others have realized what I have?? So we have a seat and I decide to have the Kikos Special w/ enchilada sauce. The Kikos Special is 2 enchiladas w/ meat or cheese (I had cheese) rice and beans, what makes this special is they put a fried egg on top. Nothing new to me, we'd have enchilada left overs w/ eggs for breakfast as a kid. So I take a few bites of everything on my plate and am once again NOT IMPRESSED. NO FLAVOR, flavorLESS. The enchilada sauce was so bland, there was oil flowing all over my plate. Rice was dry as can be, beans tasted like mush. Do they need me to go back there and give them a hand??? Oh and to top it off, the complementary chip that came along standing in my beans tasted like it had been fried in dirty old oil. So I remained mum about how I felt about my meal in order to not spiol my guys small feast. He had a Hollenbeck of course. So when we got to the car I turn to him and said "so how was it?" he replies "I dont think I ever want to go back" oh lord jesus I screamed I was so happy!!! Over joyed and extatic that he had finally matured his taste buds to mine and realized that it has gone down the drain, all the way to the sewer. He was sad that something he had loved so very long (since childhood as well) was no longer on his top 3 resturant list anymore. What more can I say, I do not wish bad things on this establishment, I only wish good things for busniess' in East Los Angeles and for them thrive and become the best they can. Manuel's stoped striving to be the best years ago and is solely reliant on the hype and tourists word of mouth. Farewell Manuels...
