ReviewID: DAfoeUhHshSvZtYUO9wurA
ReviewerID: gfyW0vuJls8ARoHmogfcmw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
After all the raves about this place and the line going out the door on Sunday afternoon at 2:30pm, I expected a lot more.  Considering the prices, I was also expecting more.. . There's free parking available in the garage nearby.. . I got the special shrimp salad, which had 4 shrimp in it.  The shrimp were grilled well, but it was a bit lacking on the protein.  I'll admit, the salad selection was a nice variety of greens that were indeed very tender and clean tasting.  That was the highlight of the salad and is fitting for the name of the place.  The greens were tossed with ripe avacado, which was nice, since I asked for my dressing on the side.  Otherwise, there wasn't much to the salad.  I asked for no tortilla strips, but I got them in my salad anyway, and rather than waiting for another 20 minutes, I decided to deal with it and take them out.  They didn't contribute much to the salad flavorwise, but I guess it adds the crunch factor.. . The cajun BBQ chicken salad also had the non-contributory tortilla strips, and there wasn't much chicken in it.  The dressing lacked any flavor, and once again, the greens were coated in smooth ripe avacado.  . . The cauliflower and green garlic soup was like a cauliflower puree and wasn't too creamy, which I liked, but the garlic was a little too subtle, and I felt like I could make the same thing at home with some cauliflower, broth, and my immersion blender.. . The plates seem like a much better value, and there seems to be a more generous helping of the meats on there.  The tuna looked like it was seared well, and the steak was also medium rare, but I didn't get a chance to taste them.. . Like I said, the prices are high for what you get.  Had the salads been in the $5-6 range, I wouldn't be complaining, but it was way too hyped up for what it is.  I've had plenty of other innovative salads in LA and don't need to wait in line to pay for the ones at Tender Greens.
