ReviewID: dApdPHZvZz5r63KOJvd4EA
ReviewerID: -r200frAHPchv-VzkWKsJQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
maybe it was the fact that i walked in with a chip on my shoulder, but sushi-gen didn't exceed my expectations AT ALL.  yes, the fish was fresh, but it really doesn't offer anything beyond that.  . . first of all, the host is an ass.  he acts as though he holds the ticket to the hottest seat in town.  he refused to seat two of us, even after we told him that we'd be ordering drinks and appetizers before the other two people in our party got there.  he didn't tell us that's their policy, that he's sorry, etc... he just said, "nope." "no." "i can't seat you."  UGH. . . second, i don't usually do rolls at a sushi restaurant, but one of my friends got the spicy tuna roll.  i thought it was really not good.  i think that they use the worst/least fresh bits of tuna to make it, and just mask it with that awful spiciness.  maybe, though, i can't blame this on the restaurant.  i really never enjoyed spicy tuna rolls. . . and third, no green tea tempura ice cream!!! hahaha... i guess another thing that i can't hold against the restaurant, but i was craving it so badly, and thought that they would definitely have it.  . . since i go the criticism out of the way, onto the positives.  yes, the fish was fresh.  one of my friends ordered the sashimi platter, which is actually a REALLY good deal.  you get a plate full of decent sashimi pieces, and a side of mixed tempura all for $21.  my friend and i opted for the sushi a la carte.  we ordered the following: uni, spanish mackeral, yellowtail belly, yellowtail, spicy tuna roll.  . . the uni was really very, very good.  the flavors were all there, but i don't think that it was the BEST uni i had.  in fact, i've had better at Taiko.  my favorite was the yellowtail belly, which was melt-in-your-mouth delicious.  my friend told me that the spanish mackeral was to DIE FOR, but i thought it wasn't that good.  i guess she got my hopes up, and although it was pretty yummy, i thought that the yellowtail belly blew it out of the water.  . . all in all, i guess sushi-gen is pretty good.  i get why some people would rank it as one of their favorite sushi spots in town.  i personally don't think that i'd re-visit the place (unless i was near the area), but i would recommend to others. . . p.s. i'm not sure if the rainy weather contributed to this, but the place was not packed AT ALL on the thursday night that we went.  we got seated immediately WITHOUT reservations.
