ReviewID: Dc1v9i1oBBjUBDICUhWIgw
ReviewerID: w-l_Zco2Fa7Aid3uOwaWAg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Geisha House
Category: Sushi Bars
I will never ever set foot in this place again, much less spend any money there.  In fact, the one time I went, I didn't even get a drink.  This review is purely based on a horrible customer service experience that I believe was racially motivated.  My best friend came down from the Bay Area with her two other friends for her birthday, and her heart's desire was to have dinner at Geisha House.  We had reservations at 7, and arrived at the restaurant at roughly 6:30.  The girls arrived before I did, actually, and sat in the lobby talking for a good ten minutes before I walked in, and then as a group we sat in the lobby waiting to be seated for another 20 minutes.  Mind you, the restaurant was completely empty.  When we were seated, the hostess took us upstairs and to the back, in a completely empty section of the restaurant (the few other patrons that were in the restaurant were all seated downstairs in the central area).  When my friend asked if we could have a booth, instead, the hostess stalled for a second, then decided to sit us in a booth near the other patrons.  We had just been in the booth long enough to order drinks when the hostess returned and told us she would have to reseat us because the "owner's daughter" was going to be needing that particular booth.  At that point, my friend decided she no longer wanted to spend her birthday there, and the hostess actually had the nerve to tell us "there's no reason to get mad".  I felt like I'd walked into a restaurant in Alabama in 1965, not in 2009 Hollywood.  Oh, and I'm white and I can see the racism in the situation (my three friends are all Black).  And I don't really think we were the first to have this happen.  As for me and everybody I know, we are boycotting the Geisha House indefinitely.  They can keep their overpriced garbage, I know 100 great Sushi houses in LA that know how to treat ALL their paying customers.
