ReviewID: dDWUIs3FdGuoQdc-k_Vocg
ReviewerID: CfHwiGQQTn0RiWevX8yeIg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Moody&#39;s Pub
Category: Pubs
Alright alright, I'm sure a lot of people will take this the wrong way. . . But when I eat, I only have one speed: full tilt.. . You see, the food at Moody's, if eaten at full tilt, will leave you completely incapacitated.  Couple this gorging with a pitcher or two of the famous gut rot sangria, and you're in for a hurting.  . . It's one of those self-indulgent feelings that leaves you yearning for at least an hour on the treadmill.  The only problem here is that your brain knows better, that if you even attempted to work out right now, you would vomit all over the shirtless, hairless, frat boy running on the tread mill next to you. . . So maybe, just maybe I could hit up the gym and blast my guns for a short while to counteract the 2,000 calories I just ingested (damn you french fries).  But this wouldn't work, because my blood pressure is so high right now I would probably pass out and crack my fat head on the 45 pound dumb bell.  The assorted meat heads would gather around as my skull dripped blood into an expanding puddle on the floor.  They would stamp their hooves, sniff my ass and resume their respective workouts.   . . So if this sounds like the confessions of a guilty gorging fool, than that's probably what it is.  But I understand that these reviews should, in theory, deal in the concrete as opposed to the abstract.  So let's give this another try.. . I went to Moody's on a Wednesday with some coworkers for a staff meeting.  I instantly felt that this place was a little too dark.  There's a long wooden bar overlooking a large dining room.  The decor is all dark lacquered wood and stained-glass light fixtures.  There's a fire place in the corner, whoopee.. . One thing I will say, the sangria is really strong.  Be careful.  . . But let's move on to the star of this show, the blue cheese 1/2 pound burger.  The sweet, or not so sweet, thing about this is the sheer amount of blue cheese they put on the damn thing.  It was literally spilling out the sides of the burger onto my fries.  In a related story, blue cheese fries are really good.  Damn you fries.  . . The food was alright.  I suspect I would have had a better time if the weather had allowed us to sit outside, and mingle in the famed beer garden.  With this in mind, I will probably be back to moody's when the mercury rises.. . But not before I puke on a frat boy and have my ass sniffed by a meat head.  Dag.
