ReviewID: DDxCNR4AorrwckBJHFK4YQ
ReviewerID: T1ZJuJIzTEdIt8nPHiwAOg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
It started off so well...easy metered street parking. My worry that it would take forever to be seated at 11am-ish today (Saturday) was baseless: before long we were seated in a very nice spot on the patio. Quite lovely, especially considering that it was a beeeeauuuutiful day today. . . Sadly, I was totally underwhelmed by the food. Maybe my expectations were too high? From the other reviews, I guess I should have had the pancakes or some other cakey dish. The thing is that I don't like pancakey things. I love eggs, but I have a weird phobia about cooking them, so I only eat them at restaurants. . . So I got the 2 egg breakfast with grits. I love grits. But these grits were the blandest shit I ever had in my life. Maybe I had another restaurant's cheesy grits in mind when I ordered without asking any questions, but I didn't think I needed to ask for salt/butter/any kind of flavor in my grits. I don't care if they're stone ground by TomKat and the ghost of L. Ron Hubbard.  It is not hard to make grits taste good, okay?  . When I asked where the cheese was, the waitress said I had to ask for cheese. Ok...so to fix the problem, I asked for a side order of cheese grits. These came with white cheddar and were barely tastier than the regular ones, even after I added salt. Boo. I only ate a few bites, all the while wishing for my momma's Alber's grits made with milk (instead of water), butter, and cheddar....And then when the check came, they cost $5.75. I felt almost violated. Maybe I should have said something, but I didn't think they'd take it off my check just because I thought them bland.... . Dining partner reported egg white omlette with chicken sausage good. There appeared to be nothing in said omlette, however, except sausage. Booring.... I had a side of the same sausage, which was tasty, yet nothing to write home about.  . Toast in very small, yet nuttily tasty, portion.. Breakfast potatoes strangely devoid of seasoning. Boo.. Coffee was decent, but curdled when soy milk added. Boo. . Pricey, especially given the portions..... SKIP THE GRITS. I like to try new things, I'd been wanting to try this place, which was supposed to be soooo good, for a while, but I will stick with my old standby, Cafe Vienna, on Melrose, from now on.
