ReviewID: dfgPj43FVRnKIfxjLclqTQ
ReviewerID: qKVLocEUZUvceYXkiFX9BQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Rathbun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
Wow, disappointing much?  I was excited about trying Rathbun's and really wanted to like it.  Unfortunately, I did not enjoy it much at all.  . . First off, a positive - I like that they have the option of self-parking in addition to valet parking (pet peeve).  Valet parking is incredibly annoying to me in most cases as usually there is no need for it and it is often much more of an inconvenience than a convenience.  . . To keep the positives going - I do like the décor of the restaurant.  Slick, fancy, modern, but not too over the top.  The space was nice, but a bit cramped I think.  I had the back of my chair bumped numerous times as servers went by and it's because the proximity of the tables was too close.  This was due, in part, to the location of our table - right next to the open server area.  Not sure really why we were seated right there when there were plenty of other tables open nearby.  If it's busy, fine, bad luck - but when there are other tables open?  It's not very pleasant to listen to lots of servers chatting and bustling about right next to you for a whole meal.  It's not really the fault of the servers though - it's just the design and layout of the restaurant isn't great.  In fact, the service was generally decent.  Our server was fine.  Unfortunately, the bartender was very slow to take our order despite not being busy and was kind of standoffish when he did.    . . I did like the concept of the menu - lots of different selections and price points.  But I wonder if it's just too ambitious and if they are spread too thin.  I'm suggesting this because all of the food we ordered was just not that good!  Maybe we ordered the wrong things, but none of the 7 dishes I tried were excellent.  Nothing was bad and the two starters we got (squash tortellini and pork belly tacos) were both good, but the rest ranged from ok to not very good.  I tried the roasted chicken entrée and it was mediocre.  I had the rabbit with gnocchi and broccoli.  It was decent but the ratio of the 3 items was oddly balanced - a LOT of rabbit, one little bit of broccoli and 3 or 4 gnocchi.  There was also a lot of random stock/sauce in the bowl which seemed to be randomly added before serving - it made the dish very soupy.  We also got a side of the charred corn and gouda, which we anticipated to be great, but it was disappointing - it was almost a creamed corn soup that was just salty and bland.  The desserts (toffee cake and some (banana?) cake with ice cream) were just ok and identical; I had to ask the server to be sure they didn't bring us 2 of the same thing.  Our wines were both pretty good - definitely the best part of the meal along with the appetizers.  . . Overall, I think this placed is way over-hyped.  Like I said, I really did want to like this place, but it just did not deliver at all.  I may give it another shot but it will be a while before that happens.  I will probably try the KR Steak before going back here.  . . 2.5. . P.S. Kevin Rathbun parks his Range Rover in a handicap spot!
