ReviewID: DfuZDHeFsffJGIZW8uRR9g
ReviewerID: Xxvz5g67eaCr3emnkY5M6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: La Pasadita
Category: Mexican
HOORAY!  Great Mex in Chicago.  But make sure you go to the "correct" La Pasadita.  There are three of them on the same block.  Quite confusing.  This is definitely a hole-in-the-wall so if you are a decor snob, get takeout.  I have been searching for a downright authentic Mex place since I moved here from California.  I am shocked and sad at how many people in Chicago only go to Mexican places for late-night grub.  That's such a shame.  A good Mex place shouldn't just be a late-night joint! . . You will barely hear a word of English in this place.  The kitchen was blasting a Mexican radio station, and when a good song came on, they turned it up and everyone in the kitchen started singing along.  That made me smile :)  This is definitely a place where the locals go so I was encouraged by that.  Service is TERRIBLE.  Make sure when you walk in you make eye contact with a server so they know you want attention right away.  Otherwise, you will wait a very long time for someone to approach your table.  When I was there a table of young girls dined and dashed.  I actually saw them get up, and seriously, the server didn't notice for a good 5-7 minutes.  She grabbed the check and ran out the front door, looking for them and looking completely perplexed.  Um, well, if you actually gave attentive service that wouldn't happen... . . All I wanted was a simple bean burrito.  Yep, just beans, cheese, and salsa.  The server brought chips and a variety of salsas to the table--a salsa fresca of fresh tomatoes, onions, and cilantro, a medium-spicy green salsa, and a spicy dark green (almost black) salsa.  All of them were outstanding and so tasty.  So far so good.  Then I decided to be adventurous and order something I never order--a steak taco.  I don't know what came over me--it just sounded good at the time.  The taco consisted of two warm corn tortillas with perfectly seasoned steak and a little bit of cilantro and onion.  Wow, it tasted really good but the steak was rubbery.  I found myself chewing, and chewing, and chewing.  What do you expect for a $2 steak burrito?  Probably not the highest quality steak but downright tasty.  Then I ordered a bean burrito.  The server looked at me kinda of strange when I requested only beans, cheese, and salsa but hey, that's how I judge a burrito.  I couldn't wait to dig in...it was the moment of truth.  It was delicious!  The tortilla was soft and chewy (not like some other places that grill the tortilla..ick), the beans were perfectly seasoned, and I had more of that yummy medium green salsa in it.  BRAVO!  The bean burrito was only $6.50 and my Diet Coke was $1.00.  And yes they have real Coca-Cola products because they serve them in cans.  If you are wondering why I didn't give this rating a full 5 stars it's for two reasons:  1) I think the place is in need of a good cleaning, and 2) when you leave you will have BFS (bad food smell).  It's a small little restaurant with an open kitchen, and I could actually smell my lunch on me when I was in Best Buy an hour later.  eek.  I might have to invest in an, "eating jacket"  (equivalent to a smoking jacket) when I go back to eat there!
