ReviewID: dFv6Ah75z3n3DDR0wCapJw
ReviewerID: wjR3wbFfjz2thNlKKZc7aA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
I visited Oinkster's website today and saw they have Happy Hour from 3 to 6, Monday through Friday. Sweet! I decided to take my carpool partner there on the way home because he loves a good pastrami sandwich.. . They had some good deals on eats: Fries for a buck, chili fries for two bucks and a burger combo for $3.99. Brews were on sale, too. All seemed perfect until we entered the dining room.. . Have I mentioned how much I HATE douchie hipsters? Well, I do. They are generally rude, self-absorbed, materialistic a@@holes. Imagine my dismay when I saw a whole pack of hipster family-types having a party for a group of four year old ballerinas right there in the middle of Oinkster's Happy Hour.. . I guess they don't have a Chuck E Cheese's in Eagle Rock.. . Seriously, who has a little girl party at a Happy Hour? There's nothing appropriate for little kids to eat at this place. Pastrami and burgers for preschoolers? Really? I raised five-plus kids and I wouldn't  have ever dreamed of imposing my brood on folks trying to relax and have a beer.. . The kids were screaming at the top of their lungs and at one point were literally crawling all over me and my friend. A douchie hipster dad ineffectually whined at the little prima donnas to stop jumping around, but I had had enough.. . I have to say that the folks who work at Oinkster seem really nice. The food is alright and the beer is primo. It may seem unfair to judge a place by it's patrons, but the butts in the chairs do lend to the ambiance--good or bad. Therefore, I must regretfully lower Oinkster's score to three stars--3.5 actually.. . Seriously, we would have stuck around, watched the b-ball game and consumed a couple of pitchers. Instead, we had to flee with our fingers in our ears.. . It's kind of funny now, but I'm starting to get a bellyache from wolfing down my food. If I was a screenwriter--you know, like all of those douchie hipster dudes in Eagle Rock--I'd write this into a HILARIOUS sitcom script. Unfortunately, after this experience, I'll likely never return to Oinkster.
