ReviewID: dgPo6oOm_brB8yTz2QhNPg
ReviewerID: Q38vLH-PxvhX0cF6FqONcQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zed451
Category: Steakhouses
Uhhh...did you know you can get married at ZED?! YOU CAN! Two weeks ago I married my darling husband on the rooftop of Zed and then our guests and us newbies had dinner in the private dining room upstairs. The food was amazing the setting was amazing. Imagine huge beautiful windows with billowing sheers, candlelite everywhere and a fireplace in the background while your guests watch your first dance. Yeah. It was good. . . We worked with Gina mostly but we also worked with Sammy. Gina left for her own honeymoon :) and was unable to be with us on the day of. So Sammy was kind of our "Day-of Coordinator" Both ladies were phenomenal. So genuinely concerned about making our day perfect. I think Sammy was sick of hearing my "Thank Yous" by the end of the night! I consider myself a pretty detail oriented person being that I too am an event coordinator but Sammy and Gina kept thinking of things that I hadn't! I owe quite a bit to both of these woman. They really were outstanding. . . People went on and on about the food. My cousin pulled me aside just to tell me about everything he ate. I had to tell him I loved him but I really didn't have the time to hear about a play by play of him enjoying the truffle butter. The setting and flow of the event was wonderful. The servers were sweet and attentive. (I left them a huge chunk of cake to share as an extra thank you) . . My only thoughts on what could have been better were that the servers didn't make it clear that beverages besides wine were available to to our guests. The other thing was when we came the day before to do a quick run through for the rehearsal. We had a really bad experience with a server who thought it was okay to walk around and take drink orders with out asking if anyone wanted to start a tab or pay as they go. This is also after I specifically told her that we were just doing a quick rehearsal and that we were not staying there to eat or anything. 30 minutes later there is a substantial tab that that included orders from 20 different people! Some of which had left. She just came to my fiancee with this huge bill (with added gratuity!) and was like "Who's taking care of this?!" WHAT!? I was irate. Poor Sammy got an earful because she was unfortunately the first person I saw. She was so sorry and the manger also sent his apologies. But man-o-man was I ticked. I don't like being hustled. This server is bringing Zed down!
