ReviewID: dh9LB4j1nfqujs2B93_ZiQ
ReviewerID: ETpvceVRtVLjhDEgugFieg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Any place that serves an amuse-bouche and also has it taste like heaven is my kind of place... plus then I can say amuse-bouche over and over the rest of the night. . . Sola is now my perfect example of elegant dining. As soon as you walk in you are greeted warmly plus we were seated right away, so bonus. Though we did have reservations but regardless we didn't have to wait for a table which is very unusual (though they have a beautiful bar area so I wouldn't have minded). The decor and table settings are perfect, not to intrusive but very stylish. I don't know if anybody else has noticed but the flatware was from IKEA**, which is really funny to me (I was admiring how cool they were and then I flipped them over and went Nooooooooooooo). My only complaint is that the tables are a little too close to each other (the girl at the next table got up and we got full shot of her ass and it almost dragged on our table as she went by... she was very tall) and that it gets extremely loud. . . Sola seems to really wHip their servers into shape. Not only was it great service but I would give a star for actually remembering all the specials, which took almost 5 minutes to go over all of them. Very attentive without being overbearing. Just a note for the water-boys, let my glass go down at least halfway before refilling. I swear this dude just stood be hind me the entire night filling my glass after each sip. . . Again as I said elegant, their menu is creative and executed wonderfully. We started with the Calamari tempura with a saffron aioli sauce, it was a hard choice for the apps but we were more then satisfied with the pick. Actually the whole menu is really hard to pick from because you want it all. For our main course she had the Tuna hoisin-mustard-panko crusted, bamboo rice, avocado tempura, soy-wasabi buerre blanc and of course I HAD to have a bite or two or four. I went with the 1/2 chicken shallots, spinach, minted yogurt, Chinese black rice. The chicken was tender and gone in no time. And last the dessert ( I have to say that I'm a little pissed off at their dessert menu... there is WAY TOO MUCH AWESOME desserts to pick from), we finally after much debate chose the mai'a hot fudge sundae, banana ice cream, hot fudge, macadamia nuts, bruleed banana. It was the perfect ending. . . I'm going back to try their lunch and brunch menus as soon as I can!!. . **IKEA = HELL on Earth
