ReviewID: dhdLIaL__kTdgyxS0FPYhA
ReviewerID: K5gqa371yu-WCMbMN6AgVQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Wow!!!!  My burners are kicking and my effort to review is in play.  I really want to share this excitement because I finally got the chance to eat at a new favorite pick for 2008-2009, and that my friend is Osteria Mozza. . . It all started on a Saturday afternoon, when I visited my lawyers to finalize my situation over my financial legal debacle. The situation could not be resolve; however I was invited to dine with the legal boners as a treat because I was one of their non-significant, leeched out clients. I was thinking of some ultra chic restaurant where a plate of molecular gastronomy booger awaits for my disposal.. . That was not the case, after being informed that I will be dining at a Batali-Silverton- Bastianich joint for a bitter sweet meal. Anticipated upon arrival, my lawyer was flawless on the reservation by being seated with no waiting during prime evening hours.  The décor, ambiance, and the aroma of the restaurant all were inviting as well as aesthetically friendly for a first time guest like me. It is a mixed crowd of the "Casual West Hollywood hipsters, &amp;  the other half is the  dress-to- impress Beverly crowd," all sharing space, and fixated by the direct taste of a dream come to true. . . I heard about Osteria Mozza a few months back on Yelp, and I have always maintained a fan base for Mario Batali as well as an interest to Nancy Silverton's talent. The partnership with Joe Bastianich enhanced the West Coast scene to a whole new level for me. . . My trials consisted of an antipasti steamed pomodoro mussels, grilled octopus (texture and flavor equals "Sakura"). The primi consisted of linguine with clams, pancetta &amp; spicy Fresno chiles. The secondi was pan roasted pork loin all paired with a bottle of Pinot Grigio "Castle Ringberg," Elena Walch.  As I near the end of the course, I had to balance the meal with a dolci: melon sorbetto with a nice cup of coffee (another Sakura).  To simply sum up the course would be something new, fresh, and maintains integrity of the construction without any re-creations of old flavors.. . The flavors were well-balanced all through out the course and there was no disappointment with the construction of each dish. The antipasti consisted of an equal amount of herbs and a teaser of chilies to give the flavor a memorable taste, as well as an inspiration for me to replicate the dishes on my personal spare time. . . Since this was a maiden experience, Osteria Mozza has more surprises to be discovered. The menu and the wine lists were not fully utilize and a second trip is in the making, and hopefully my close friends will accompany me to experience the direction of Batali-Silverton-Bastianich.
