ReviewID: dHRRUN7bcMsHW-6_54nzNA
ReviewerID: Pnqwg10bpCo3ApShjkoa3Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
The way to one's heart is through the stomach.. . Sorry Umami Burger, but you didn't win my heart.  . . I really wanted to like Umami Burger, but I thought it was just overrated.  Yes, the burger is good... but it's definitely not the best burger I've ever had, especially if it's a $10+ burger.  And it's not something I'd feel like going out of my way of to eat at either. . . We were a group of 6 having lunch on a Thursday.  Street parking was easy to find on the adjacent 9th Street.  Otherwise, there's valet for $2.50.  The wait wasn't bad... the restaurant was busy, but it wasn't packed.  We just had to wait for a group to leave after having already paid for their bill... finally got seated within 15 minutes.. . Started out with side of their malt-liquored tempura onion rings, thin fries, and hand-cut fries.  Their onion rings were good, but extremely greasy.  My napkin was nearly see-through after I wiped my fingers clean from handling just ONE onion ring!  Their thin fries are more like regular sized fries and the hand-cut fries are more like really cubish looking steak fries.  They all come with umami ketchup, which I must say was not a favorite.  I can't say much about it... I am a ketchup fiend and I am very partial towards Heinz!. . We got condiments on the side: dijon mustard, house spread, and roasted garlic aioli.  Mustard had that wasabi spice to it, house spread was okay, and the garlic aioli was too much mayo, not enough garlic.. . Then came the burgers.  I got their new vegetarian Earth Burger, which comes with a mushroom-edamame patty with lettuce, tomato, and cheese.  It was good, but the patty was undercooked because I would've liked something crispier.  The mushy patty just fell apart as I was eating the burger and would keep squeezing out the sides and onto my plate.  The bun, however, was awesomely good.  It's perfectly toasted and keeps that nice crunch throughout eating.. . My friends got the Umami Burger, Hatch Burger, and SoCal Burger.  They all agreed that the meat patty was really juicy, but perhaps a bit too juicy because it just soaked up in the bun.  It seems like they might be undercooking their patties one notch below as requested... as all medium rare burgers were too rare, and the medium well was probably medium rare.  . . The burgers are deceivingly small looking, but my friends were pretty satisfied for their fill.  My New Mexican friend didn't like his Hatch Burger... didn't seem like he could taste the chiles at all.  . . Overall, I think Umami would've probably fared better with me if it weren't for the prices.  For that value, I would've expected more punch in taste and texture.  But alas, I still prefer The Counter for burgers in Southern California.
