ReviewID: digOWZm6-bvw2Gpp09wBEg
ReviewerID: 2E9njyTMI0qzQOKhe8mHDg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Part of me loves this place -- it's really beautiful, I can bring my dog on a weekday evening and usually fine a nice spot for her, the food is generally delicious.  . . But I'm mostly putting my two cents (and three stars) in because I think the way the place is set up is DUMB AS KNOBS.  Let me run the concept by you:. . We don't have servers, because servers are stupid!  Who wants to be waited on??. . Instead, we have a long line that concludes with some vaguely entitled/disrespectful counter staff.  We'd still like you to tip us, though!  See that jar?. . If you order drinks or a dessert, we'd like you to stand there next to the register for at least five minutes while we joke around with each other and eventually get you those items.  Don't worry that you're creating a traffic jam -- we like it that way.  And then you get to carry these items to your table (which you have to fight for, food/drinks in your hands, no tray) and then you get a number to put on your table.. . We might eventually bring your food if we notice your number there.  But if we don't, that's ok, because your food likes sitting around.  If it sits for long enough, we befriend it and play mad libs with it.  If you want it, you can come in and get it, no skin off our backs.  . . Oh, you want silverwear for your pie?  You're a pain in the ass.  You want napkins too?  What are you, French?. . Don't even think about going on a weekend for brunch.  Really, forget it.  Unless you like standing around like a jackass with coffees in your hands while the table with the screaming baby thinks about clearing out.. . Sorry if I sound like a grumpy old man.  Maybe I am.  Their desserts are AMAZING, get them to go.  Tom Trellis, there's a reason restaurants have wait staff.  And your restaurant is that reason.. . -----------. . [edit:]. . I feel obliged to mention that *some* of the counter staff actually are nice.  So it's not that hopeless.  But that still doesn't solve the fundemental problems with their setup.
