ReviewID: Divv-9987zcwqGiFmAGuUA
ReviewerID: B7ecAeAIrXg7sgmabS38pg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
The Fifth Taste.. . What I will give this place is marketing. They have it down. They've thought through all of the angles, they've executed it to a T and the food they are serving is tasty. All of these get high marks, but where Umami fails me is in two elements: Price and Speed.. . I have paid a pretty penny for a deelish burger in my day. Deep down, I know that it's just meat and a bun, but I am always thrilled to see what people do with this simple concept to make it shine. In Umami's case they took a burger, put a "Manly" spin on it and delivered a yummy, decent sized burger that included beer-cheddar cheese (yum, and good since they have no liquor here, gotta get your beer somewhere), smoked salt onion rings (um, yes!) and of course, my favorite, bacon lardons. I don't even know what the hell a lardon is besides putting more "lard on" my ass after eating, but hot damn, totally delicious. . . But here's where it gets sad. We sat down, ordered, waited, chomped on onion rings, finished our burgers, had a bill delivered and were standing back out at valet in 16.3 minutes. What the hell? This was date night with a guy I actually really like and want to be on a date with. How did that experience whooosh by so damn fast?! . . Our guess is that the place doesn't really set the tone for a leisurely dinner. The lighting is really bright, the music fast and loud, the service quick, but does it need to be that quick? The place is also really tiny so you are pretty much on top of the next table and can hear everything they are saying. So basically, if you want to drop a pretty penny and be out the door before you know what hit you, then have at it. We figured after leaving that for what we paid, we would have rather tacked on $20 more dollars and been given an extra hour of dinner time and atmosphere instead of the serve em and get rid of em approach.. . Again, this will either be a plus or a minus depending on what kind of experience you are looking for, but that's what I took away, so there ya have it.
