ReviewID: DiZfkF4RalNlrsI1YWYrkw
ReviewerID: 66P-qTygfcag2DUKKxJq9Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Brazzaz
Category: Steakhouses
Everything said below here in the reviews with 3 stars or less is absolutely true.  . . Fogo does everything better than this place.. . Salad Bar was nice.... The Charcuterie was my favorite paired with some nice cheese and wine.  It starts to snowball from there (not any of the numerous good types of snowball... If i've lost u go to check out some of the many definitions on urban dictionary). . The infrequency of the better cuts of meat is all about cost control, it detracts from the overall experience, so much so that the first table the fillet or rib eye gaucho stops at will be his last 50% of the time, seriously the guy comes out of the kitchen with 8 oz of the cut, versus the pineapple man who is always fully stocked.  . . Second point to places like this stop dumbing down food and preparing everything well done, the poor cow or lamb is already dead, there is no need to incinerate its remains to the point where I get a piece of carbon, if I wanted coal I'd just be naughtier.  You CANNOT UNCOOK meat, prepare the dish properly and if there is a misanthrope out there just char the rest of the life out of a cut for that poor soul who cant get over a small amount of red in their RED MEAT!!!!!!!  If you are dining with me and you order any red meat medium-well or above and I am paying you are not going to be asked to return. Which is a huge dilemma due to the fact that my mother-in-law to be did this at a higher end Chicago Steak Emporium, perhaps we haven't dined together recently for a multitude of reasons.  But i digress.. . Brazzaz needs to improve their attitude in all aspects of the game because Fogo wipes the floor with them, FOGO 9 Brazzaz 3 inning 8.  Gosh the boys of summer can't get from AZ to CHI soon enough.. . This place is dressed sloppily and trips over its own shoelace, as it slowly ambles towards the door to greet you. . . Normal review pending but the 2 Yelp Stars say it all, I've been to the mountain top and I'll refuse to dine at this base camp.
