ReviewID: dj0CtKRyfvQnLis7uiknGw
ReviewerID: 2TSZiOl5ofssL90hGbe-6Q
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Park Tavern
Category: Venues & Event Spaces
Okay a few days ago (June 17, 2009 to be exact), my husband and I partnered with the GA Breast Cancer Coalition Fund to hold a bachelor/bachelorette charity auction. Now, we chose this location just by chance. When we called them to see if they donated their space to charity events, they did, which was great to us, then. . . The events coordinator told us that they would donate the space and that's it and that we would have to pay $10 for every bar band that was given out. She told me that they'd INVOICE us after the event. . . So, June 15 comes and we stop by Park Tavern to make sure they put us on the signage so that people can find us. Keep in mind, we advertised extensively. We even hired a promotional company to help us out with advertising. I mean we had a lot of feedback from the advertising as well. . . So when June 17 comes(the day of the event), we finish setting up in the Piedmont Room and everyone starts showing up then towards the start time of the auction, people stop coming in. So, we're like okay, what's going on?? So, we look outside to see if they put a sign out for us. It's not there. We go around to the restaurant and there's no signs out there either. PLUS there's another semi-formal type of event going on downstairs that the crowd is gravitating to. Mind you, there's signage all over for that event but NONE for ours. We go down to the restaurant and ask them to put some up and they put one piece of computer paper up with the event name in small lettering. Disappointment, yes.. . While we are downstairs, we see some people who pre-registered for our event downstairs instead of in the Piedmont Room where our auction was. Luckily, we were able to lead them to our event but it still wasn;t enough. So, everyone is getting restless because no one is showing up. We had at least 20 people RSVP and pre-pay but only 7 showed up. So we're really pissed now. So about 30 minutes later we call the auction off and just let peopl get their money's worth from the food that was purchased and the light beer and wine bar. . . When we start packing up after everyone leaves, the bartender stays and sits there watching us. At first. I thought that he was waiting so that he could lock up but then he asks us for the $300 in CASH from the event to pay for the bar bands. Keep in mind, they said that they'd invoice us. I mean it's a charity event so we had alot of credit card transactions and little cash. That's what we explained to him but he kept saying that he wasn't going to let us leave without paying. I mean we weren't broke but it's the fact that we didnt have 300 in cash to just give to him and we didnt bring any credit cards with us. And I never communicated with him before so we felt uncomfortable just giving money to him. . . So, we continued to clean up and started moving our stuff outside just in case he got the idea to lock our stuff inside. I help carry things out and I leave my purse on the table. I come back in and don't notice it's missing because I figured that my hubby put it in the limo plus I'm so consumed with trying to get in touch with the special events coordinator to straighten out the situation. When I finally do get on the phone with her, she tells me that she never told me that they'd invoice us. She said that she told me all along that they'd collect the money right after the event. I told her that if that was the case, we would've found another place for the event.. . So, we came to the conclusion that we'd give them whatever cash we made that night and the rest later. The next morning I woke up and I couldn't find my purse. I called Park Tavern and told them that I couldnt find my purse and asked if she would look under the tables for me. She claimed that she looked under the tables that morning when she moved them back in place. I just asked if she did come across it to please call me ASAP. So after asking my mother in law, husband and my hubby's cousin, I finally got an answer. My hubby's cousin said when we were moving the stuff outside he remembered seeing my purse on the table and when we left he never saw it after that either. So I called Park Tavern back and I asked the special events coordinator did she ever come across my purse and she said "oh yeah I have it here with me. the maintenance man found it in the piedmont room and brought it to me about 30 minutes ago". I'm like okay why didn't she call???? So later that day, we sent my mom in law to pay the balance to the events coordinator(whom I talked to and arranged to bring the balance to). When my mom in law got there, the events coordinator was gone and the only person who was there was the bartender who now claimed to be the restaurant manager. He asked for the cash and my mom in law asked for a receipt or something written as proof for our business records. He said to give him the cash and he'd give her his business card as a receipt. Running out of room so, long story, short....pretty place, horrible experience.
