ReviewID: djkm7IvgkEakggJ0QbsECQ
ReviewerID: Ebych0F5_k600bj8vVZA2Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Real Food Daily
Category: Vegetarian
me giving a less than 3 star review to a vegan restaurant makes me feel like a bad person but it's my role here on yelp/earth to be honest with others about my feelings.. . RFD has taken a nosedive. it used to taste better and have better service 8 years ago. i have eaten here 3 times a year or so for those past 8 years and it just keeps getting more blah, in small increments. the redecorating is good; gone are the cheesy spacehogging spiral booths and hideous colors.. . the old awesome servers are gone now, or are not there on the random nights i've gone. they have been replaced by really nice people who i feel like i could be friends with in real life, but in the restaurant everything is slow and forgetful and disorganized. so like when i went with a group that i invited,  i feel like i had to cheerlead the table to cheer them up because everyone kept noticing things were wrong with the service (did i mention already that they are super nice, it's not an attitude problem, it's organization/timing).. . this is not the kind of restaurant to trick meat people into going to. in fact, the love of the taste of the food seemed directly proportional to how hardcore the people i brought were about vegetarian politics. so the most intense devout vegan i brought was like "oh my god i've died and gone to heaven" but my meat friend was not into it at all. since i'm in the middle (vegetarian food centrist?) i just think the food is so-so. i mean that about every single dish and i've tried maybe 20 things here.. . i still love the vegan pate but it's expensive. oh and i like the vegan syrah they have by the bottle (not made with fish scales? what the hell, wine industry? seriously?). . if you gotta get a sandwich, i like the reuben and the portabello.. . for desserts, the cookies and cake things are yucky, but the puddings and jellos are good. and i'm not even into pudding/jello things.. . so i have a clear conscious now. i don't feel "good" but i feel "real." this was a therapeutic yelp.
