ReviewID: DJKpu-R3zfkJqSmh5HLXUA
ReviewerID: kmuZJhe2UERaTtIm44Z9Ow
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Tom&#39;s
Category: Diners
In working in the decor industry for 8 years, I know a styled interior when I see one. And sometimes they blindside the average person, who mistakes them as the real thing. But this place has been styled by someone hired to make it look vintage-diner-chic. And people buy into the image - that's why droves of hipsters flock to the place, and keep going in my opinion...whatever they did seems to work. Cuz it wasn't always like that. . . Still, I've lived a far walk's distance from this place since 2003, and have always really really wanted to love it. It has all the qualities of a quaint little neighborhood place: it's quirky, has lots of character such as having a vintage-kitschy decor (inside and out), being open when it wants to be (that mom-and-pop essence), the staff has lots of personality (sometimes abbrasive), they treat you like you matter (the owner, mainly), there's an abundance of kitchy decor like plastic flowers and tacky framed pictures and stuff that looks like it's been there since forever, the photos of famous people (every classic place has to have that), the effort to offer old-tyme classic treats like egg creams, the cash-only policy, and the feeling of a timeless, old-skool, classic enviroment - the kind that can't fathom adjustments to the menu standard dishes. Yes it's a diner. . . But!....... . . I'd always hoped it would have a truly old-world grandma's cooking style that brings about that delicious flavor that's hard to find anymore. I have to say that it doesn't have anything close. You're way better off waiting in line at Mike's in Clinton Hill....the hipsters love it there too, but they have good reason to; Mike's simple menu and good food is dun-rite. I've tried a lot of things on the menu at Tom's in hopes of finding that one thing that was especially good. Nothing. Even the breakfast was below average to me - I've tried a few things from the pancakes to the eggs....simple enough....nothing is ever better than a typical greasy spoon, if that. . . I'm not a picky person, but I am a foodie -- I have my standards. I don't see what the hype is about. I could go to a million more neighborhood places and get something way better. I even had better food at Cafe Shane a few doors down once. (I can't believe I just admitted that, cuz usually their food is terrible, but their blueberry pancakes were good one time). Tom's crabcakes tasted like they were defrosted from a box, then microwaved. Their menu is missing a lot of typical diner fare on it, and they get funny if you ask for something that isn't specifically mentioned like the time they made a big deal and were rude when I asked them a fruit salad for me. Since it's not on the menu, it seemed to baffle them that I would request such a thing to be made even though it's typical....weird for a diner (to me). So are they a diner, or just a styled sham? They  even have sub-par salads and sandwiches! C'mon...I grew up in a diner city...I am officially qualified to judge diner food for what it is - I'm fully accepting of its limitations. So I am within my rights to say everything Tom's makes is either just "ok", or not so good. I ordered a roast beef dinner once when I was in a holiday-food mood and it was blah blah blah - even for a diner. And they act like they're so superior to other diners, closing at 4 or 5 or whatever everyday, and just because they have plastic pointsettias year-round, and a song in a frame that's supposed to be written about them hanging up.....  Well in my opinion, this place is a let down, and I'm not afraid to be the only hater on here, damnit!!
