ReviewID: DJQ0R2r4QbYf-Z0fayQNiA
ReviewerID: riZl2wkiHE1X0eonc41Xgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
NAME: Pink's Hot Dog Stand. . TYPE OF CUISINE: Hot dogs, hot dogs, hot dogs!. . ADDRESS:  709 N La Brea Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90038. . PHONE: 323-931-4223. . GENERAL LOCATION: On La Brea just north of Melrose on the west side of the street. . HOURS: Almost 24/7: They open at 9:30 am every day.  On Sunday through Thursday, they close at 2:00 am, but on Friday and Saturday they don't close until 3:00 am.. . DELIVERY SERVICE: . . WEBSITE: . http://www.pinkshollyw.... / (Make sure you explore this website! It'll make you want to hop in your car and git on out there!). . AMBIANCE: Pink's is the mecca for dogs, and Tommy's for burgers. Pink's has a much more colorful history (see website above, and take your time exploring every page!), and is in a MUCH less iffy neighborhood than the original Tommy's. You can come there at night, and boy do they ever! And there is only one Pink's, no branch outlets.This location is it, and it's been there at the same spot, starting out as just a hot dog New York style pushcart, and expanding until it's present-day glory.. . What explains the magic? Even Mr. Pink (in an L.A. Times interview) was at a loss to explain why everyone goes crazy over -- in his words -- "a lousy hot dog!" But they do. Pink's, like Hollywood itself, is a state of mind, a fantasy. But this fantasy has endured since 1939, and Pink's has given predictable dependable repeatable pleasure all those years to its myriad devotees, including this reviewer.. . Part of the fun is the names they give to the various incarnations of hot dogs (my current favorite is the Lord of the Rings hot dog, featuring -- what else -- onion rings). Again, I refer you to the website above, and the menu. That's where you'll have the fun of discovering all the crazy variations of hot dogs available.. . Part of the fun for many is standing in line on the sidewalk at all hours of the day and night hoping to see a celeb pulling up in a stretch limo for their hot dogs (and you can see some of that going on on the website). Part of the fun is sitting in the tiny little room with all the autographed pix on the wall, or sitting in the outside patio under an umbrella, having on your favorite dog and your Nehi Peach Soda (which is hard to find anywhere else).. . FOOD: It's dogs dogs dogs all the way, plus exotic sodas. And these dogs are good! They pop when you bite 'em! Pink's makes a big deal out of that pop, and their dogs have been specially made for them by the Hoffy company ever since they first opened back in '39.. . VEGGIE FACTOR:  No serious veg person in their right mind would go there. They might serve a veggie dog, but I'm not certain.. . PRESENTATION: It's strictly SLATHER 'N' SLOP all the way -- it's a stack of napkins to protect yourself!. . DRINKS: All kinds of things in bottles and cans, some of which are really rare.. . SERVICE: As efficient as it's possible to be when you have a long reflexed line, people shouting out their orders all at the same time, and people in the dog assembly line working their tushes off to turn out the product.. . PRICE RANGE: See the website!. . PAYMENT: Cash and CC. . PARKING SITUATION: They do have a parking lot which is in two sections just north of the little shack, and there's street parking.
