ReviewID: DJtoJ9PzSz3UgH2IzUslTQ
ReviewerID: 9ZoC0ctGe7UuF6DtPM7DBA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Not Bad.  Not Bad at all..... . Came here with some friends to check out what the hype is all about.  We sampled a variety of 7 different sausages and 4 different dipping sauces amongst 4 people.  Yes, we're little piggies, here's the ones I actually tasted.... . * Mango Jalapeno Chicken &amp; Turkey -- This was sweet and definitely had a mango taste.  Not bad if you like a little sweetness in your meats.  My only gripe is, why does this one shrink soOoo much more than the other ones??. . * Filipino Marharlica -- They told us this runs out every month and once it runs out, it takes two week for them to get more of it, because some guy in NY makes it for them and ships it over.  Not sure if it lives up to its hype, but it was tasty.  Had a slight asian BBQ flavor to it, otherwise taste like a normal kielbasa. Good, but forgetful.. . * Duck &amp; Bacon w/ Jalapeno Peppers -- The bf's favorite.  This one really packed the flavor.  You can taste the duck and subtle bacon &amp; jalapeno.  I am personally NOT a fan of bacon (yes yes, crazy), but I would say the pairing of flavors really worked well.  I would eat it again. . . * Rattlesnake &amp; Rabbit w/ Jalapenos -- Probably their most exotic sausage and I think one of the tastier ones.  If I had to describe what it taste like, it would be..  the sausage in a McD's sausage egg mcmuffin.  . . * Alligator &amp; hickory Smoked Pork Andouille -- Strangely dry and for some reason I felt like we were eating an enlarged slim jim.  Not something I would order again.. . We also got two large orders of their Belgian Fries w/ the following dipping sauce.. . Curry Ketchup -- good and my favorite dip. Buttermilk Ranch . Sundried Tomato Mayo -- surprisingly delicious!  of course, not if you're a mayo-hater. . Tzatziki (greek yogurt) -- tasted like a really light ranch. . Overall, definitely a place I would venture to again.  I gave it 4 solid stars partially because of their service.  Really nice folks! Helpful and friendly.  Just walking in the door, they immediately asked if you had question about the sausage, the beer or anything in particular.  They also gave great recommendations. The decor is cool and has a beer hall vibe.  Beer + Dogs + Friends = GOoOD!. . Food takes a little long to cook tho, about 10-15 minutes... so make sure you calculate that into your time, especially if you're starving!
