ReviewID: DjxbPpQBNlOcCNYRa3ns-g
ReviewerID: mKJxbV30ow8b9Jv0cS6Zpw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft Atlanta
Category: American (New)
3 words....Y...U...M!!!! Had a great and incredibly filling evening with friends at Craft and it did not disappoint. I was under the impression the it was "pseudo" family-style, but if you are friends with the people at your table and don't mind sharing it's family-style, but with loser to individual-sized portions. Everything was great and we tried a lot if it, I guess I could post the list and test myself, but suffice it to say I would find it hard to believe someone would have a bad meal here.. . The waitstaff was friendly and attentive, as was the hostess and valet and the multiple checks for valet, coat and even to-go food was a hoot. PS - the valet will have your car washed while you eat if you would like :).. . Back to the food :)...out of the 6 first course choices at the table the Sweetbreads were a true winner, assuming you like that sort of thing, which I do :). They were in an orange reduction and simply perfect. I could see going to CraftBAR and having those with a salad and a glass of wine and calling it a night. The entrees were probably a tie for the scallops or pork loin, both of which were delectable. The mushroom sauce paired with the perfect, crispy Hen of the Woods mushrooms was perfect and the pork loin offered various areas of pork, all of which were very tasty. The sides were a bit tricky, some were larger than others (like the fingerling potatoes and risotto, both of which were quite tasty), but all were very good and you could mix and match the flavors with the entrees very well. The desserts were very good, but nowhere near the calibre that the meal was. The pear crisp was very nice and the various, somewhat interesting ice cream flavors made for another great sharing experience.. . All in all it made for a great evening. Craft is a welcome addition to Atlanta and while it's obviously on the pricy side, it's manageable if you don't go crazy (which is likely to happen on the first visit), but it's at the base of The Mansion on Peachtree, I would expect no less.
