ReviewID: dk7awKsjjBpsqHVk9qWfdw
ReviewerID: 0SMBOsgncviE3AOqlr1sFw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
The first thing you'll notice when you walk in the door at lunchtime is that there are two lines. The one on your right will be for the bakery, the one on the left for sandwiches, salads, etc.. . Each section has it's own counter and wrap-around line, kind of like a parallel universe with the advantage that you can get coffee on both sides.. . Even though the lines looked ghastly long upon entry, they moved at lightning speed. This place knows how to move people and food quickly and efficiently.. . Once up to the front I picked my sandwich from the menu on the wall, took a number on a stand, went and filled my drink and was glad to find ample seating outside on the sidewalk.  Somehow Portos was able to line tables all along half a city block. . . It was great to sit in the shade by the trees with a breeze except for the occasional dry leaves that would dive bomb the table at surprising speeds. . . Within just a few minutes my sandwich arrived. "Papa Preparado" potato balls (basically seasoned mashed potatoes), sliced cheese, mustard, tomato, lettuce, on a crispy white baguette.. . After seeing how amazingly reasonable the sandwich was ($4.25), I ordered a fruit salad. The fruit salad comes in a tall plastic starbucks style container with a rounded lid and is quite large. ($2.85). It consisted of the same fruit that you'll find on Portos famous fruit tarts - Blueberries, pineapple, strawberry, kiwi, mango, and grapes.. . One interesting thing about sitting outside is that apparently people use the tables for clandestine meetings. There were two guys behind me discussing how to "blend in" and how to 'brown bag" it (his beer I assumed then, but it also could have been lunch) and so and so, so that it looks like you're a customer. . . So just a note. Good place to meet and bring a sack lunch.... . Oh, and they also have amazing cheese pastries.
