ReviewID: dkjaBeLP6Wl_3n2G-Skalg
ReviewerID: 5iXSFKD-iExQjFVjfEHQ1w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Moody&#39;s Pub
Category: Pubs
We rode our bikes here after a relaxing day at Foster beach. First, when walking in I thought we were going into a church or something. The entrance is strange. When we walked in I felt like I was entering into a cave, it was so dark inside. After my pupils shrank, I noticed the tables were scrunched tightly together. We walked straight through to the outdoor patio and seated ourselves at a table. The outdoor patio is huge. I mean, huge.  When I say it's huge, I'm not just trying to make you feel good. We sat there unnoticed for a good 15 minutes watching the squirrels run from tree to tree above our heads. Also, OMFG, you can smoke! I had that feeling again, like when I went to Wisconsin and sat at a diner, then noticed two old truckers smoking to my left. I didn't even want a cigarette but I felt I had to smoke just because I could. Finally, when the waitress came we ordered our Anchor Steam beer because they only have like 5 beers on tap and no bottles, and I wasn't about to drink Michelob or Becks. I ordered the grilled chicken sandwich and my bf ordered the burger. I probably should have gotten the burger since my chicken sandwich tasted like one of those oyster crackers you put into your soup. The fries were delicious and my bf seemed to enjoy his burger but he would have been content with a microwaveable burrito at that point, so you could contest to the validity of the sense of satisfaction I observed. All-in-all, I could definitely see myself and the goon squad getting completely annihilated staying here for the entire day poisoning our liver and blackening our lungs. I won't lie, I was a little concerned my bike would not be where I left it when we came out, but alas, it was, newly decorated with a stranger's sweat stained white T-shirt. After constructing a contraption to remove it, off we rode into the sunset with full belly's and fewer brain cells.
