ReviewID: dkT5ogX-AJwzRaAIUqpVvw
ReviewerID: _f4VFhCR746xhnsmxlcmLA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I've feasted on the much rated pizzas of Pizzeria Mozza at least twice in the past months, but could never find the opportune moment nor words to describe my experiences.  Until my foodie, dear friend Sophia, came down for a visit from S.D. this past weekend, has she befittingly recounted our dining adventure at the new bustling urban flavor.  . . *A quote from the fabulous co-foodie diva, Sophia M.*. . "OH HOW I enjoy my eccentric days in L.A. . . This weekend's trip to LA LA LAND was for another fabulous-haircut-by-Ed followed by a rendezvous with friend and fellow foodie, Noreena, at Pizzeria Mozza in Hollywood.. . Mozza is a current trip to Mecca for those followers of restaurateur Nancy Silverton (the dough), creative chef, Mario Batali (the toppings) executive chef, Matt Molina (who makes it real), sommelier, Joe Bastianich, and pastry chef, Dahlia Narvaez.. . The gods were with us.  We met at the valet umbrella at 12:15pm Sunday and found no line.  Inside there was a place for two at the wine bar and a few tables open in the dining room.  The forno-counter was full.  We had been prepared for a 15-20+ minute wait and typical line out the door.  It had been suggested that we arrive no later than 11:40am.. . We accepted a window table for two at the banquette end of the room, situated ourselves - a literal tucking in - before rolling up our sleeves to address the menu.. . We began with the fried squash blossoms stuffed with ricotta antipasti and bottle of bubbly mineral water.  Shortly thereafter arrived our glass of 2005 Falanghina, Villa Matilde (Campania) Falanghia  (the white) and then 2005 Barbera d'Asti "Frem," Scagliola (Piedmont) Barbera (the red.). . Both wines were wonderful by themselves and an excellent choice with our pizza selection.  We shared three types:. . Fennel sausage, panna, red onion &amp; scallions. White anchovy, tomato &amp; hot chiles. Bianco with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere  &amp; sage. . I could have reluctantly stopped there.  Noreena however, insisted we look at the dessert menu.  It was all over when she found that they served the 2003 Sagrantino Passito, Colpetrone (Umbria) Sagrantino.  The sagrantino wine is new to me.  Smooth, earthy, not too sweet -almost smoky w/ hints of fermented raisins.  Noreena had brought back a bottle of Sagrantino last year from Italy and had been longing for it since she enjoyed the last drop.  Our waitress checked with the bartender, and we could buy a bottle from them for $110.  I reminded her we had to pay for lunch first .... . Vino ordered, we returned to the dessert choices. . . There was no question after I read the description of the Butterscotch Budino accompanied by rosemary pine nut cookies.  The pudding was out of this world - the smooth, rich, creamy texture, the fresh dollop of panna sprinkled lightly with rock salt. . . Service was attentive and respectful.  There was no hurrying our afterglow, enjoyed over an espresso after which we reluctantly collected ourselves and headed back out into the anonymous buzz of vehicular traffic at the intersection of Highland and Melrose.    . . In summary, the pairing at Mozza is truly fantastic.  The choreography of timing, texture and taste elevates the experience far above 'just dining out.'  All meal stages and beverage selection complement one another to become a symphony of the senses. . . Definitely worth a scouting trip - you will return!. . Footnote about the dough: . There has been a lot of hype about the dough in the press. I feel that it is a wonderful and appropriate palate for the flavorful (and not too delicate) aromatic topping combinations.  In terms of comparison to "authentic" Italian pizza - the Mozza dough is not - it is something different and that is OK. . . In my opinion, if the dough were more 'authentic' the Mozza pizza would be less about innovative pizza experience and simply a comparison of toppings and accessories.". . After numerous trips to Italy, I must concede w/ Phia on Mozza's dough.  The authentic crusts are thinner, crusty at the edges, but pliable and soft in the middle...almost the same consistency as an Indian naan.  Nonetheless, Mozza's pizzas are superb!  Molto bene!
