ReviewID: dl3V_KnBO25y2u1WYlT7Yw
ReviewerID: 6NGuSnvFNKjwG3QeaaFRIw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Evening started out pretty good, got all decked out. Suit / tie / the whole nine yards. Drove all the way to Hollywood for this, valet service was great. Then there was the cover charge 25$ per person. ouch.. . Walked in after saying the magic word "open sesame". Walked to the left, and proceeded to wait in line for 30-40min. Then after that we went to the small theater. It was very cool the magician showed us some really nice card tricks. I was very entertained.. . Next we walked up stairs to the very back corner, to wait in what? Another line! w00t. This time I had the fortune to run into a magician Magic Mike Jacobson man he was showing us some card trick that he guessed and changed the color of the card. I had to say that was the highlight of the whole evening.. . As we were waiting for another 40-50min. The room started getting hotter. I had sweat pouring down my backside. My face was warm as all hell. Then as I was about to pass out, they opened the doors to a bigger theater. Which had to be 10* cooler. But not for long as it too began to warm up. As I was about to tear off my clothes and run around like a greased up deaf guy. Watched a very entertaining show of prestidigitation. . . Back in the main area, whoa man stepped back into a desert. Went to the dining hall to cancel my reservations, gave me a stink about how I would have to pay 20$ per person (80$ for 4) wow. And then laid into me how they could have had given the reservation to someone else. (I looked around and seen several tables open and tons of people to fill them in line) I explained to him that my party and I were very hot, and that it was very uncomfortable. Also I explained I was not the only party and there were 4 other parties that left. The dining room guy was very understanding and did not bill me the cancellation charge.. . Bailed and as soon as I got outside OMG 50x better weather. Took me a whole 20min to cool down from how hot that place was. If there are any fire marshals out there you need to go to this place on a Friday or Saturday night and make sure they are not in violation. All the doorways were very small and I don't think I felt very safe there. I didnt even see a maximum occupancy sign. They seemed more interested in cramming that place with bodies than safety. - Cheers
