ReviewID: dL5oE1jPYJjQ60DRLWelyQ
ReviewerID: VbVjkDYXMzRzRur8_q5GUA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
oh I'M IN LOVE!  how could anyone not be??!!  Louie, mi amor, where have you been all my life?. . danggity dang... but i must confess... i love just simply being in Louie's presence.  and there are so many possibilities... i could spend the whole day there!  like rise when the sun comes up to breakfast... croissant, cappuccino...  then a mid-day cappuccino... lunch with iced cappuccino... or e scusi - espresso (as the italians don't take their coffee with milk after mid-day).. and then onto dinner, drinks, more espresso...  and a night cap.  you can even purchase pantry items - some good EVOO, balsamic... ready-made salads... flowers too!  oh, and chocolates from MarieBelle (SoHo nyc) and Sea Salt Caramels from Little Flower Candy Co.  louie louie!  mon louie!. . so i got a little carried away...  the air at Louie is so contagious, but i must be honest about the food.  the food is decent, but it does not make me jump through loops.  sorry, i wish i could love it, but i don't.  we split the french toast and eggs benedict.  the portion on the FRENCH TOAST is very generous.  the toast must be about six inches wide??  yep, HUUUUGE.  the fruit (berries - strawberries, blueberries and blackberries) is fresh and delicious... but the toast itself was ordinary.  it could have been a bit more moist.  and the EGGS BENEDICT, i also found dry.  the english muffin bottoms were thin and crisp, so mid-way through eating, it gets hard.  not the way i want my benedict.  they serve the hollandaise on the side, but there is nothing special about it.  thick and guppy, not creamy.  the eggs were well poached, however.. . on the way out i picked up some pastries.... . MONKEY BREAD - very buttery, not very sweet, which is good... from its texture, it's actually like a croissant goes monkey.  you go figure.. . BRIOCHE - best eaten warm, or else it's dry.  good for breakfast, with coffee.  better yet, dip it in your cappuccino.. . PASSIONFRUIT MACARON - soft and chewy (therefore fresh!), very sweet and flavorful.  i just don't like how they overly color their macarons.. . SUGAR KNOT -  basically a mini croissant, topped with rock sugar.  i was not too crazy about this. found it dry.. . ***CHOCOLATE COOKIE - with chocolate chips, so yummy, moist and just the right amount of chocolate.. . OATMEAL COOKIE - chewy and not too sweet, the way an oatmeal cookie should be.  yum!. . ***WALNUT STREUSEL - this is their version of my favorite 'morning bun', almost like one of those chewey sticky buns.  this was my favorite item here.. . COFFEE - dark, strong, but not overly acidy.. . i think i love Louie solely for the feeling he brings me...  that european vibe.  it's eye candy and reminiscent.  thanks Louie, for finding yourself in L.A.. . 3.5 stars.
