ReviewID: DoWUFikXoV8COU0_z-1JWA
ReviewerID: q4i8IZ_achU-uExyevmhDA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Two Urban Licks
Category: Bars
I've never understood people who have had every item on a restaurant's menu.  I mean, there are so many places to eat and I get bored quickly, so I'd never have the time or desire to go back somewhere numerous times...until now.    . . I visited this past Saturday and it had rained allllll day.  I was in that "I just wanna lay in bed and watch TV mood" and just wanted to bail on dinner, but I'm so glad I didn't.  I've been wanting to try it literally for years now and actually suggested the place to my friend when she asked me for a good spot to have her birthday dinner.  I could kick myself for not making it here sooner.  From the valet, to the live band to the general ambiance  from the moment I walked in I forgot the weather and my mood were sucky.  I immediately had visions of myself and the girls all dolled up for the begining of a night out.  It's that kind of spot but not in the pretentious way.  I can't wait to go back and check out the deck.  From what I was able to see inside, it offers a nice view of the city.. . I've heard so much about the salmon chips but opted not to order them because I knew I will be back soon and frequently.  Instead I had the calamari and empanadas which were both fabulous.  I mean I'm seriously questioning every order of calamari I have ever consumed.  It's crisp and tasty on the outside but light and tender, not hard and spongy, rubbery or tough.  Who knew the true texture of calamari is supposed to melt in your mouth?  The empanadas were equally fabulous.  Other items ordered at my table and consumed quickly and wordlessly were:. . Big ass burger. Bistro steak. Salmon Chips. Salmon (meal). Chicken. Ravioli. . I have seriously never seen EVERYONE at a table clean their plate and when finished breathlessly state; that was sooooo good.  I've also never been to a place where I'm intrigued enough by so many menu items that I'm planning the order for my next visit  while I'm still lickin my chops at the first one.  I honestly hate to gush too much about this place because I don't want to set in motion that jinx that happens when you fall in love with a place then it changes.  I'm pretty sure I'm being paranoid, but just in case I'll just say this place rocks, and leave it at that.  If you've been meaning to try it, move it up to the top of your to do list.. . I can't remember our servers name but she was great.. . I must honestly say though that due to the noise level of the live band and patron chatter this does not make for a cozy date setting UNLESS you are comfortable enough with the person to sit right next to them instead of across the table.  Regardless, when asked to choose the restaurant I will be requesting dates bring me here because I'm in love with this place and will take advantage of any and every opportunity to eat here.  Later for cozy.. . I hear that if you sit at the 2nd bar the cooks will give you samples as they cook.  That's where you're likely to find me at any given time during the next several months, stop by and say hello.
