ReviewID: doYVwV6OeH_B0Tr-niagdg
ReviewerID: SI620L9GDuAxK81SEwj2uA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Veerasway
Category: Indian
First of all, I need to announce that I HAVE NEVER HAD INDIAN FOOD BEFORE. So is this my American palate writing this review? Not sure. I have lived in other countries and like to think that my palate is somewhat refined and open to all cuisines but who knows? It's all subjective, right? Let's begin.... . Ambiance. I loved it. The bench end of the table had couch cushions. It seemed very Indian-ish, I will say. I loved the wall of woven planks. I felt like I was eating inside a basket. In general, it was a very comfortable atmosphere in a warm environment with what I believed to be Indian music in the background. . . The food. They provide complementary lentil chips along with a cumin/coriander yogurt sauce, some red sauce and a green chili sauce. Tasty. Not to absolutely die for (though I will admit I continued to devour them) but tasty nonetheless. I think I was more enthused by the fact that I was eating something so unique. . . We went straight for the kill. No apps. Just the main course. Per the recommendation of our wonderful waiter, I got the Lamb Rogan Josh. It was flavorful but do I dare say something was missing. Certainly the lamb part of the dish, if anything. I think there were two small chunks of lamb in there, which I was disappointed by. The flavor of the soup-like mixture of spices was good but not heavenly. I did like the crispy onions they topped the dish with. It gave the dish a nice contrast in texture. And for the price--$17, it was pretty small. I'll have to assume every component of the dish was homegrown and the lamb was grain fed (or whatever) to justify the cost of such a small dish.  . . Oh, and we got the Naan brushed in olive oil (flat bread). Good, but not amazing. They also charged $2.50 for one piece, which I thought to be quite pricy considering the fact that essentially we were eating a dinner roll flattened out and brushed with olive oil. 50 cents, maybe, but $2.50??. . My date, hesitant to go wild with the menu, got the Tandoor Chicken. It kind of looks like Indian fried chicken on rice. It was good, though. I think for someone who has difficulty venturing outside of their comfortable food zone, this would be the dish to go for. . . And then there was the dessert. Spiced fudge brownie. Again, the waiters recommendation. Think moist cumin and coriander cubes, topped with mango (whose flavor gets drowned out) and vanilla bean ice cream. I don't think I would recommend this dessert. It was...meh. . . Summary. I loved our waiter. He was extremely knowledgeable and friendly. I loved the atmosphere. But the food wasn't enough to bring me back.
