ReviewID: DpO3gGKodyx0uNwvnl-kmg
ReviewerID: n2UsVjISE1nOow63cm3auQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
Even before starting this review, I'm thinking, "Damn. Two stars seems kind of harsh.". Especially considering I had two decent glasses of wine, wolfed down [every last bite of] my food and greatly enjoyed the company of my two dining companions.. But I can't...bring myself to give it any more than that either. Can I?. Hub 51 has a massive identity crisis. Part of it obviously wants to be a club, attract the attractive downtown demographic that isn't put off by loud music and bathroom attendants -- I am not of that demographic, by the way. Two stars. But another part wants to be a dining destination. Overall, it's a lovely space that carries off whatever it's trying to be with a touch of smooth, dark-wood-covered class. Three stars. Crap.. The menu is as schizophrenic as they come. Make up your mind, Hub. Do you want to be a sushi place or serve tacos? Throw in some burgers, too? Sure, why not. You CAN'T be all things to all people. Two stars. That said: One appetizer did the genre mixing very well, a trio of greens that included tempura green beans, steamed edamame and blistered peppers with a chipotle dipping sauce. Bah. Three stars. And my friends enjoyed their sushi. And my burger was passable, though the top slice of Jarlsberg hadn't even begun to melt by the time I finished it. Which was more than a little gross. One star. Hell!. The staff is as confused as the menu, especially where their attitudes are concerned: The bartender wanted to be brusque and pushy (totally zero stars if I could), but our server wanted to be sweet and attentive (four stars). Luckily, I spent much more time with our server; the bartender gave me my can of champagne (yes, really. Thanks, Sofia Coppola) and was done with me. Don't spend that $1 tip in one place, lady.. Oh, fine.. I guess it wasn't two stars bad. I'll give it three, but only because I couldn't really make up my mind.
