ReviewID: DQBtn0SUk1S7791A7gvUPA
ReviewerID: FPQ5s5lyZuKe_Uz4BifCjg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Rock Bottom Restaurant &amp; Brewery
Category: Restaurants
This restaurant is broken down into many sections.  The first one is the bar, which is loud and hectic (isn't every bar on a weekend?).  The other half of the first floor is quiet, and looks a little fancier, perfect for a date.  The 2nd floor section looks like it can be reserved for private parties, as it's sectioned off.  The 3rd floor is their rooftop, which is great on a summer evening.  . . On this day, we decided to try out the quiet restaurant section on the first floor.  This restaurant boasts delicious burgers on their website, and everyone wanted to try them.  Turns out, the waiter said the restaurant and bar had two different menus.  We could not order the burgers on this section.  Okaaaay, awesome.  After some back and forth, he ended up making an exception and said he'd bring back the menu from the bar.... . Alas, 15 minutes transpire before the waiter returns with menus from the bar and we even get a glass of water and we can place our order...the waiter service here definitely has me worried at this point.... . When we do place our oder, the waiter messes up mine.  He brings everyone's food, and mine is a steak, not the burger I ordered.  He stands there with an "I don't know what to do" look on his face when I tell him it's not what I ordered.  Finally, he says I'll be back in 10min with your burger.  Alas, he takes the steak...but leaves me just the fries.  Awesome, thanks. . . Alas, the Laredo Turkey Burger finally arrived.  It sounded delicious on paper.  Unfortunately, it also tasted like paper.  Flavorless and blah.  You'd think a burger with pico de gallo would have some "pow!" to it...but, no.  The Titan Toothpicks also look delicious on paper but taste blah.   The steak looked good, but alas, the waiter wouldn't even let me have it despite his mess up, so I can't help you out here.  The pretzels my friend had looked huge and are apparently awesome when you're having a brew at the bar.  This place has its own brewery, so you may want to check it out and enjoy a huge pretzel.  Be prepared to gain 3lbs as these pretzels pack a whopping 2,000+ calories each.. . So the bill arrives and I see the waiter has charged me for the steak.  Uhm...thanks.  Also, during our dinner, he came back to refill our drinks once...after we asked another waiter for drinks.  Also, he dropped the food on a lady's HEAD at an adjacent table.  . . The bottom line?  Rock Bottom is definitely an appropriate name for a place that seems to be hitting it.  A combination of crappy service and crappy over priced food will definitely not have me coming back to this place.  Unless it's to try a brew and scarf down one of those 2,000+ calorie pretzels at the bar so I don't have to deal with the crappy food and service again...
