ReviewID: DreFqCh79lc32ZMpOLnKtw
ReviewerID: 4XM4JGjl0zlu46-Zqclw5Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
This place kind of sucks. . . The first impression of this place was that it was pretty cute. We go up to look at the menu &amp; are stopped my this woman who looked like a less hot version of Chantal from last season of America's Next Top Model asking us very quietly if we wanted a table there. "Uh, I don't know, we're going to take a look at the menu." Menu looks fine, so we say what the hell.. . She escorts us into a rather small, but nicely decorated room filled with Hollywood dickbags. The skinny blonde girls who are pushing their food around the plate, the skinny blonde dudes wearing those terrorist scarfs, skinny jeans, huge shoes &amp; sunglasses even though they are inside. Yeah, whatever.  I guess that's who you cater to when you're located directly in the heart of Hollywood. . . Anyway, on to the food. I order the Salmon &amp; Greens salad which sounds pretty good &amp; reasonably priced. Man-friend orders the Muscle Beach which is an egg white omelette with spinach &amp; some other junk. It seems like its taking forever to get our food, which probably wasn't true, I was just starving, but in that time I realized that the servers don't actually do anything. Our waitress basically just took our order, she didn't bring us anything. Which I'm not complaining about at all, just a random observation.. . So, a food runner brings us our food. His looks good, mine... a tiny piece of salmon thats charred black on one side &amp; RAW in the middle. Damnit. I'm STARVING. I get our server's attention, I tell her my dilemma, &amp; she's really sweet about it. I hate HATE sending food back, but it wasn't a problem , thank god. I get my salad back in about 5 minutes. It's ok. It's swimming in salad dressing, &amp; my salmon, even though it doesn't look burnt, still tastes like it is. I still ate the whole thing. I was hungry! . . I probably wont be coming back, but it's far away &amp; these types of places are a dime a dozen.
