ReviewID: dRPTME1aR1zdMUhtcGct-g
ReviewerID: CuxmqNozpbZ6B3zuby4BMg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
i Must admit that I was pretty intrigued when I first heard about this place. I mean look!!! They have a good selection of different exotic sauages, and a pretty good wide selection of beers to go with it. My girlfriend and I decided to go and try it one evening.... (Ambiance) Wurstuche presents itself as a modern type of dining that you see with all of these newly refurbished business areas around L.A. I thought the decor was pretty nice but the setup and arrangement was kind of annoying. The entrance area where you walk into to place your order and what not was pretty small. It was well lit with a small kitchen and a counter to order your food. Alongside the counter where you take your order was a glass refirgerator that had all the different types of sausages that you can choose from. The dining area was a large dark area with cafteria style bench seats, a boomerang shaped bar and a DJ. Alongside of the walls were more tables with chairs, but on an elevated platform. (a recipie for disaster if you ask me) If someone was to slide their chair a little too far back, they are going down. Being a first timer, I was a little confused as to where to go after taking your order.  . (Service) There is not much to it. You stand in a long time in a crowded area, place your order, find a place to sit (if you are lucky) and they bring the food to you. . (Food) The food was ok... Maybe we chose the wrong sausages... or maybe it is just the way it is. Still 3 out of however many they have is still not a good ratio to me. We ordered the Rabbit Veal and Pork sausage, Duck and Bacon sausage, Rattlesnake and Rabbit, and an order of the double dipped fries. To be honest, the sausages were different in flavor but were all a little on the bland side. Out of those three sausages, i would say the duck and bacon was the best. The gaminess of the duck and the saltiness of the bacon worked well together, but for a combination like that I was expecting much more bold favor. The Rabbit Veal and Pork and the rattlesnake and Rabbit were ok. Nothing special. The double dipped fries were pretty good though. . Overall, this place was a place worth trying, and to say that I went there. Pretty pricey as expected. Would I go back? Maybe. But if I was not to go back, I am fine with it too. Maybe my expectations were high looking at all of the selections and ingredients, but I was sadly kind of dissapointed. I did not like the long waiting in line for mediocre pricy food, in a cramped place where it is as hard to find seats as it is to find parking. Wurstuche was not the WURST (haha) but it could have been much better.
