ReviewID: DSfiaYaats2aasNj1WWIZA
ReviewerID: Z46Th4ARj-KalgSsbMVHpg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Stella&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
I just moved to the neighborhood, and brought down my Evanston-based sister and visiting mom for a look at my new place. We needed dinner, and as we were trying to find parking (another conversation entirely), we noticed Stella's. How can you not, really, with a giant utensil-clutching hand extending from the building...When we sat down, my sister remarked that it had a really comfortable, friendly "feel" to it, which we think is important in a restaurant. . . I imagine the menu would be a tad overwhelming for someone who doesn't know what they're in the mood for, but it was a sandwich night for my mom and sister, and a gluttonous night for myself, so we ordered a BLT, grilled chicken sandwich (on a croissant with swiss and bacon), and chili cheese fries respectively. I didn't try either of their sandwiches, but the BLT looked pretty well stacked. My sister had to remove a sizable chunk of her sandwich because it was gristly, so I have to remove some points for that, but otherwise it was well seasoned and very yummy with the bacon and cheese. I've never had chili cheese fries before, so I have no idea how they compare, but I certainly finished them. The chili itself was delicious, but it slightly overwhelmed the cheese and the fries. . . What really impressed me was the service. Our waitress was an absolute doll, and the food came out promptly. Apparently the owner, Gus, could tell we were new, and came over to have a chat. He was delightfully friendly, and when I mentioned I was new to the area, he told me to stop by any time I needed anything from him or his family, who started the place and still hang around - recommendations for other restaurants, help with bus routes, a place to do homework. It could have been creepy, but it seemed to come from a genuine place, and I always appreciate such kindness. . . Is it the best diner food I've ever eaten? Nah, not yet anyway. But I'm certainly willing to give it a chance, if only to tackle more of the menu and enjoy the company.
