ReviewID: DSqPPlvbG6TQBAGnmBCbog
ReviewerID: zasaZf_10js4d96NXDC-RQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
Eat here on a pretty regular basis, typically for lunch, and have NOT had to wait much despite what others say.  Not sure if its timing or luck, or the fact that I usually sit at the sushi bar, but, it seems like the wait is usually for those who choose to sit at a table. . . My usual favorites include hamachi belly, uni, as well their monk fish liver appetizer which is fantastic when it is served slightly warm.  The amaebi (sweet shrimp) which you can request to have head used to make miso is also a consistent winner, although not coming close to the traditional japanese amaebi you find in Hokkaido which is much smaller in size, very seasonal, and usually not available.  They do also sometimes carry both chu-toro (medium fatty) as well as o-toro (extra fatty) depending on what you're looking for.  I generally don't bother with the white tunas or the albacores, so I can't speak to it.  But I love aji (spanish mackeral) except that like many sushi places, they tend to drown it with too much ponzu.  Fortunately, this is an easy fix simply by asking the chef to take it easy on the sauce.  I have yet to be disappointed by the seafood they serve here, with the exception of my last visit, where Kanpachi simply wasn't up to Gen's normal standards, but, at the same time, it the was the first time I'd been served by that particular chef (the one at the end) and maybe his knife had just been used to cut another more pungent fish.  Worth removing a star?  I think not (yet).  Bottom line, good reliable fish for those who like raw fish, with the occasional specials thrown into the mix, albeit overall not tons of variety per se.  And yes, they can be pricey depending on what you order, but, as others have said, there are other options as well.. . All in all, I think a few things need to be acknowledged, based on the reviews I've seen.  First of all, being busy is a good sign that inventory is being turned over, which is especially important when it comes to fish, so all of those complaining about the wait should either show up earlier or get over it.  Any busy good restaurant requires some sort of wait.  Second, the comment made about "anyone can do fresh fish" if you have the money is a little irresponsible.  Not everyone can do fresh fish, as demonstrated by the host of sushi restaurants out there, including many who can clearly afford it, who do not serve great fish.  Those of you who have been to a major fish market like the Tokyo Fish market and understand the lengths the Japanese go to in order to secure the best ingredients will attest to the fact that selecting, buying, and having access to great fish is a challenge in itself.  Great sushi preparers treat the process of selecting, handling, cleaning, preparing, triming, and serving their fish much like the way fine steakhouses and serious shabu shabu places do in how they prepare, trim, and age their own meats.  Its certainly not as simple as buy, slice and serve as some would have you believe.  So appreciate the unique attention on handling the fish for what its worth.
