ReviewID: DSrjb1Aq_nEwSm_F_ISyzg
ReviewerID: cXFy56DdT3-0ydQxulHu1A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: South City Kitchen Midtown
Category: Southern
Based on other Yelp reviews, I decided to take my Mom and the rest of the fam here for Mother's Day. Upon entering, my eyes were pleased by the intimate lighting and expectingly glanced into the glimpse of the kitchen peeking from behind the bar. The decor in SCK is warm and inviting yet crisp, with ambiance actually making me feel like I stepping into the kitchen of a familiar place, and not a new restaurant.. . We were seated outside on the patio, and the staff (including my waiter) were very attentive without being annoying. I'm the kind of diner that wants you to notice when my glass is empty or a plate needs to be cleared, but not to ask me how everything is going every 5 minutes. It seems like during my visit, SCK found the perfect balance of this, and it actually allowed me to enjoy my family and my dining experience. . . Before my meal, I ventured upstairs to the restroom, and was actually glad I hadn't had anything to drink. Although it was only two flights of stairs (I believe...), the steps felt a little steep to me. Maybe it was the heels I had on, but I couldn't help but feeling like there should be a spotlighted button for me to push and have Moira tell me I won some prize, Nickelodeon's GUTS style. Despite the absence of any dry ice looming around, the upstairs diners seemed to be enjoying themselves, and seemed to enjoy the view. . . Now, I am a southern girl, and there's two things that I'm finicky about. My cornbread and my biscuits. It takes a lot to make this biscuit connoisseur happy, and SCK tackled the task. I loved the corn kernels  in the muffins (just the way I like 'em!) and the biscuit (which had gotten cold by the time I convinced myself that I would hit the gym later in exchange for a taste) was still tasty and not crunchy. Thumbs up. . . To dine, I ordered the Boneless Chicken Thighs with the jalapeno corn pudding and SCK greens. The chicken was on point and I loved the greens (although a scrawny portion), but where was the jalapeno in my corn pudding? I'm the type of girl that loves a kick, but there was none to be had here. I sampled mom's trout which was delish, and my bro devoured the mac n' cheese, but left some meatloaf there. He said it was "alright...", but I never eat anybody's meatloaf but my mama's anyway. . . Desert: Black Currant Sorbet = hella too sweet. I know I've been laying off the sugar for a while, but isn't the culinary purpose of sorbet is to taste some fruit? I felt my blood sugar hit an immediate high and couldn't finish more than a few bites. I tasted my mom's bread pudding though, and it was yummy. I knew I should've ordered the banana pudding and just tacked another hour onto the gym.... . In conclusion, (9th grade paper style), SCK gives you a comfy meal in a comfy place with comfy service. Mom said she enjoyed her meal and it was quite tasty, so I'm happy. I'll be back for brunch.
