ReviewID: DSsDCzgIFNYYtpaE3Ik7xQ
ReviewerID: kyh1cYghJySvnsvXHkZ6cQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstk端che
Category: Hot Dogs
Wurstk端che is near/in the Los Angeles Arts District, next to an organic coffee and tea shop and a random ghetto market across the street. Driving there, we had no trouble finding parking, even during peak hours, but the streets around this restaurant tends to be rather confusing. Maybe it's my innate sense of terrible direction or L.A.'s crappy, windy streets or even weird directions from Google Maps from the 101.. Anyways, Wurstk端che's exterior is a brick warehouse that can be low-key, so be sure to keep an eye out. I imagine that this place might be really awkward to find at night. All seating is mostly inside, too; as there are no people or cars in front, you might miss it if you're not paying attention.. . Walking in the front, I was afraid that Wurstk端che would be pretty small, but there's a hallway leading to this huge place to eat in the back. Ordering with the chef is pretty easy: you look through the menu or the glass case of a large variety of sausages with their respective signs. You then pay upfront and they give you a number to deliver your food.. . The service here is alright. I feel like I can't be a firm judge, since I've only been once. There were no smiles or nice greetings as a friend and I walked through the door, even though there were only two other people ordering in line. When one of the guys who worked here delivered our food in the back, he simply just dropped it off without asking if we needed anything. He didn't even nod at me when I politely said "thank you". :( However, the bartender ended up saying goodbye to us, so that was cool.. . The ambiance is pretty hipster-esque/modern. Being that this place is in the Arts District and that it's also technically a posh, gigantic warehouse, I should have expected this. A lot of Los Angeles hipsters eating here, aged from 19 to older. SUPER hipster music, too. A lot of electronica / DJ sets, ranging from Justice remixes to Postal Service. I still dug that, though. Made me want to dance while eating my sausage.. . Now, the ultimate priority: the food. I'm a vegetarian, personally because of health concerns. I'm not too picky about what I eat at restaurants, so eff whoever will criticize me for eating at a sausage joint. The Vegetarian Smoked Apple Sausage was ballin'. Their bun and different kinds of self-serve mustard were pretty good, too. . . NOTE FOR VEGETARIAN/VEGANS: I wouldn't recommend this place solely because they cook all their sausages on the same grill, sometimes at the same time next to each other and/or touching. I definitely know that some people inquire about these kinds of things. I guess I shouldn't really have to elaborate on this, but I already did so.. oh well.. . Looking at the menu before coming to this place online, I was salivating at the Belgian Fries with the different choices of sauces they had. Choosing the Pesto Mayo and Thai Peanut, I nearly died from how awesome they were.. . The choices of beers and sodas were pretty solid, too. Lots of beers for you alcohol connoisseurs that they serve on tap. Anyways, if you didn't read anything I said for the last couple of sentences, read this: FOOD IS SOLID / BEER AND SODA CHOICES ARE AWESOME. . . The prices for this place seem decent for the quality and specialties that they are known for. However, if you're on a tight budget, I would choose a different place, as our bill was 30+ bucks for two people. But then again, we ordered specialty beers, large Belgian Fries, and two sausages.. . Overall, I definitely enjoyed this place. Really unique with food content, but service could maybe be better? Thumbs up for their overall appearance, ranging from their menu to actual restaurant. Definitely am coming back.
