ReviewID: duajVfH5ZtJkJX3FJ6fnCA
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Las Palmeras
Category: Cuban
Through a brutal game of attrition, Las Palmeras has turned into intown's go-to place for Cuban food. Now, it's not like this place is HORRIBLE per se, but it ain't Havana Sandwich Shop and it DEFINITELY ain't Kool Korners (oh how their Cuban sandwiches haunt my dreams.) But through a combination of neighborhood loyalty and, uh, not burning to the ground, Las Palmeras has bubbled up to the top of the intown Cuban heap.. . I often forget about this place. It's easy to, tucked as it is in the middle of Midtown. It's easy to drive down 5th street and even pass right by it. As it is, parking can be challenging, particularly if your parallel parking skills aren't up to snuff. But should you find street parking, you'll enter a cozy, almost quaint little space.. . Now it used to be that Las Palmeras had no liquor license. That was okay because conveniently you could also buy wine or beer at the store next door (also owned by the same family) and slake your thirst.  In the intervening years, Las Palmeras got their liquor license and you can now order beer and wine at your table. I don't know why this should take away from any charm of the restaurant when, really, it's six of one, half dozen of another. But it does. There seemed to be something somewhat illicit about going next door to buy your bottle of wine to take to your table. Now, though slightly more convenient, the experience is now like any other place.  Sigh.. . The food is fine. As I said earlier, it's not the best Cuban I've had, but it's not terrible. Serviceable is probably the best word I can find to use.  The last time I was here, plating was a bit odd, as every single component of our meals was served on a separate dish.  However, I can't complain about the service as it was fine too.. . Sigh. "Fine." At my age, I should be fine with "fine."  However, as someone who's newly married, I've also learned that depending on how it's said, "Fine" can mean so many other things, especially when mouthed by a dissatisfied wife after you've said something that you probably shouldn't have said, but you're not quite sure why.. . So, fine. Las Palmeras gets a "fine" 3.5 stars rounded down to 3.
