ReviewID: DwsDd1EeqTbpWGHnulqgAA
ReviewerID: BSYFalCZU07EYeJ8f00zfg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
So, one place you do not want to go on Valentine's Day is The Stinking Rose.  I thought we had it made when we made reservations.  When we arrived, the place was jam-PACKED.  I felt like I was in line for Pirates of the Carribbean at Disneyland in the middle of the summer.  When I finally worked my way to the host, they had two lists: reservations and walk-ins.  Now, this place was fully booked.  Why are they taking walk-ins?  We arrived at 9:15 for a 9:30 reservation.  We didn't sit down until close to 10.  Minus a star for that fiasco.  (Surprisingly, everyone was civil about the mess.). . This was our second time here and we liked it quite a bit the first time.  We loved the old-school kitsch decor and enjoyed our meal well enough.  I was looking forward to ordering the same thing I had last time which was a 3-ounce steak.  I love red meat but usually don't order it at restaurants because the portions are so goddamn outlandish.  I don't need a pound of meat.  I just want a few bites.  We walked through the bar area and they sat us in a weird corner that looked like an outtake from Beverly Hills Cop.  It looked like an 80s add on.  But it was quiet and away from the madness of the front of the house.. . We looked the menu over.  My wife ordered what she had last time, cappellini cooked simply with tomatoes, olive oil, and garlic.  (They serve this at just about any Italian place and it's almost always good.)  I searched in vain for my little steak but it's gone.  GONE from the menu.  I was kinda pissed about it.  Minus another star.  Instead, I ordered the giant prawns with some kind of pasta.  We started with some of that garlic spread (which IS on the menu, contrary to another reviewer) and some garlic fries. . . The starters were gone before we could even think about it and we were already oozing garlic out of our pours.  Our dishes arrived.  Suddenly, Linds remembered that she didn't really care for her pasta the last time.  She pushed it around before deciding not to eat any more.  Which was fine since the bread and fries were filling enough.  The prawns weren't bad, like low-rent lobster.  I asked for light butter-garlic sauce and I kind of blew it there because usually places drown their food in sauce but if you ask for light sauce, they hardly give you any.  That's what I got.  Still, I cleaned my plate.  And I wasn't gonna do anything less for 23 bucks.  . . Half a star off for the pricey food/wife not liking her dish/horrible parking situation combo. (Took us 10 minutes to even get out of the car and another 15-20 to get out of the lot after.)  We probably won't be coming here again for quite awhile.  We get enough garlic when I cook at home.. . 2.5 stars
