ReviewID: DXCuDQJei3koE-LjvuhKSg
ReviewerID: PZJAyC00hTZ5zUgIqUEDmg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
Spacca Napoli was a huge disappointment, which is partially my fault because I'd really built it up in my head.  I live a few blocks from Spacca Napoli and I've been meaning to go there for at least a year.  Since it's nowhere near anything else, I tend to forget about it when choosing a restaurant in the neighborhood.  When we were rejected from  Mixteco on Saturday night for lack of reservations, I finally remembered SN and demanded we go there despite the fact that my date had his heart set on Mexican.  After a year of anticipation, I was primed to like this place, I wanted to LOVE this place, I wanted to erase the bitter Mixteco disappointment.  None of these things happened.. . We were seated almost immediately.  For a Saturday night, that's impressive, though I seem to recall it used to be difficult to get a table here.  It makes me wonder if word has started to get around that SN isn't really all that special.  Our order was taken promptly and our food arrived literally within 5 minutes of ordering.  I realize it doesn't take that long to cook a Neopolitan pizza, but I am not a fan of food coming that quickly.  It really doesn't make for a relaxing dining experience.  If I wanted food lightening fast, I'd go to a drive through.  If I'm paying a premium for sit down service, I want to linger over my dinner.  This may be the first time I ever wished a restaurant had NOT started  my order as soon as the waitress put it in.  It could not have been more than 25 minutes from the time we sat down to the time we were finished eating (and we hemmed and hawed over the menu for a few minutes before ordering).. . The pizza itself was fine, but unexceptional.  The more interesting options were all offered in white pizza form.  For some reason I was really craving tomatoes, and for red pizzas our options were pretty much limited to cheese, mushroom, or sausage.  I do feel the pizzas are overpriced at anywhere from $12 to $16.  I far prefer the personal sized pizzas at Apart, which are about half the price.  . . The dining room is very noisy and kid-friendly, but I knew that going in so it didn't bother me.  All of the staff were pleasant enough. Overall, SN isn't bad, it's just a very average restaurant at a higher than average price point.  One bright spot is that we were offered a free taste of what seemed to be a test appetizer by the very personable chef.  Even free food couldn't redeem Spacca Napoli for me, though.  After my year of waiting, I have no plans to return.
