ReviewID: DXgeiSLmyrq2GBxVa2tt0A
ReviewerID: Xn_Ebo3N1FctPmI0lrJw_Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
I remember being a very small child and hearing my father say to someone, in reference to a friend, that they had known each other twenty years.  That sounded impossible to me at the time, to actually have stayed in contact with someone for longer than I had even been alive so far.. . Well, whaddaya know, all these years down the road and I too have had friends for twenty years.  It was for one such friends birthday that I found myself at The Stinking Rose.. . I was meeting my friend Katie and her family.  I valet parked (grr... but good luck finding street parking in L.A. at dinner time) and headed in.  Photos of old Hollywood stars cover the walls of the foyer.  There's a little souvenier counter by the host desk, which is where I was directed to the bar to find Katie and her mom. . . They were already enjoying a Rosebuds Shot; pickled cloves of garlic which you would skewer with handily provided toothpicks.  Really flavorful and yummy, and great for cocktail time, when savories like cocktail onions and spanish olives are tasty, but let's face it, a little tired.  Being the boozehound that I am, my gaze slowly drifted to their frosty martini glasses.  Katie's mom encouraged me to order one of my own, what I assumed was a dirty martini.  Oho!  The gimmick of The Stinking Rose was now beginning to rear its head.  No dirty martini was this -- this was a *garlic* martini!  Well, I'm pretty brave gastronomically speaking, so I dove on in.  If you like dirty martinis, give it a shot.  It's much the same, just where the olive brine flavor would be, the garlic is.  Which leads me to mention the consensus of our dinner party -- not a good date joint.  Our communal breath was already foul after a nibble and a cocktail -- what in the holy hell were the appetizers and dinner (and much to our later surprise, dessert) going to do to us?!. . After the rest of our party arrived, we were shown to a little back room.  There are two little rooms separated from the restaurant-at-large, each with a round table surrounded by very comfy plush armchairs and tastefully lit from above.  Unfortunately the lovely atmosphere did nothing to curb the dinner conversation, which was bordering on the obscene.  But hey, that's my friends. And me.. . After a lengthy conversation with the waiter about the various appetizers, we quite stupidly decided to order a whole pile of carbs to start.  We ordered the barbecue garlic chicken pizzette, the garlic fries, and the garlic, swiss chard, and fontina fondue.  Nothing makes me feel so classy as telling a cute man in a shirt and tie that we'd like to begin with the fondue.. . The pizzette was okay, but I'm not much for chicken pizza.  I'll eat it, but it's never my first choice.  This was as good as any that I've had, and the birthday girl, who very much likes chicken pizza, thought it was delicious.  So did everyone else at the table.  Just not me.  I'm a freak.  I was pretty much obsessed with the garlic fries though, which were so garlicky I tasted them the next day.  Which I am ashamed to admit I did not find altogether unpleasant.  The fondue was really tasty and if only it had been a little more melted it would have been just sublime.  As it was it was still pretty good, but definitely some room for improvement there.  It was served with a kind of Italian crostini that was very tasty as well.. . The entrees we chose were the garlic roasted crab, the prime rib with mashed potatoes and creamed swiss chard, the garlic encrusted spare ribs, and I had the seabass in sott'olio with asparagus, olives, rosemary, and acini de pene pasta in a roasted tomato snap pea lemon butter sauce.  Say that five times fast!  Everyone loved everything.  The seabass was perfect, the cloves of garlic on it were expertly roasted, and the pasta was just delicious.  I tasted the crab Katie had, and it was really great, too.  I didn't try the ribs or the prime rib, but those that did said they were delicious as well, but we all lamented having eaten so much of the appetizers (and the yummy garlic rolls) before the meal and not being able to eat all this.  Well, I made out OK, because I had fish, and so did Katie, with her crab, because these are both light.  Everyone else was pretty gobsmacked, though.  Because we ate so much, I took half the fish and the pasta home for lunch the next day.. . Dessert was a surprise to me -- garlic ice cream with chocolate sauce.  That's right folks.  It was interesting... worth ordering to try it once but I dunno if I'll be barking up that particular tree again.. . The overall experience was great, and the folks in the room next to us were gracious enough not to complain about our scandalous dinner conversation, even when we had the audacity to insist they join us in singing "Happy Birthday.". . I don't think anyone who enjoys garlic will be disappointed here, but I don't think it's the sort of thing I could handle doing very often.    Unless the cute waiter stops seeing that girl.
