ReviewID: dY6t3lD03B9v1EniM_DWfw
ReviewerID: _DItbvuROo_QsZvlkotTZw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Wakamono
Category: Sushi Bars
Ready for this one? It will be a long one.. . A couple months back, two friends, my husband and I enjoyed a dinner at Wakamono. Food was great, service was great, from what I can remember.. . A couple of us (6 total) wanted to get together for dinner, so I recommended Wakamono again. One of the girls had mentioned that she had a terrible experience the last time she went, where she waited over an hour when clearly they were one of the first to arrive. A couple parties who came in after her group clearly knew the hostess, as each separate group came in giving her a kiss on the cheek. . . Despite this, I loved there food and wanted her to give them another chance. I called around 6:45p Saturday to ask for an idea of what the wait would be as they don't take reservations. They said they easily could sit a table of 6 right away. I asked if I was to come in at 7:30 what they thought it might be - 15 to 20 minutes tops they said.. . My husband and I went in a little after 7:30, thinking we could at least put our name in and hopefully be seated by 8:00p. I went to put in my name and whoa and behold...the wait was now 45 min. to an hour. Not bad, fine, we'd at least be at our table by 8:30p. We went to the bar and ordered a couple drinks until our friends arrived. Come 8p, all 6 of us were in the bar. My husband went to check on our wait at about 8:10, and they said they had seated 2 groups of 6 ahead of us, and we were next. Another 15-20 min. . . Now it's 8:45p and we are still waiting. I decide that I will go check. I got to the front, and there is another host. I tell him my name, explain we've been there since 7:30p and ask what the deal is. Apparently there is going to be another 30-45 min wait. Yes, 30-45 minutes. I am really confused, and ask how that's possible, and his response was "it's a saturday night, we get really busy". There isn't even a 2-hour wait at CHARLIE TROTTER's, PLEASE. I get a little pissy, obviously, and as he's fumbling through the wait list, I see my name crossed out. I ask why my name is crossed out and he cannot answer. Obviously someone made a mistake, and they continued to seat others before us. The original host comes back in, asks whats wrong, and looks completely confused. He then goes, "Hmm OK, give me 5 minutes". . . I go BACK to the bar. 9pm, he comes by and let's us know "even though our name was crossed out, it doesn't matter because there is still a group ahead of us" ok, bs, fine, we dont' even care anymore. They sit us at 9:15p, almost 2 hours later, and probably about a $75.00 bar tab just for waiting on them, even though we have 7 bottles of wine. Nice free money for these guys.. . We're seated, service was pretty shitty, food took a long time, but as expected, food was great. . . But I'm not done - when were were first seated, they took our bottles of wine - all 7. One of which, let me explain, was one of the couple's bottles of wine that was given to them as a recent wedding gift only 3 weeks ago. . . We drank and drank, and suddenly toward the end of the nite, our hostess let us know that somehow one of our bottles 'went missing' but we could pick one out of their crappy wine list. We did - however, realizing that the 'missing bottle' was the wedding gift. Really crappy.. . Now, I understand that mistakes happen, but here's the even crappier part. When the husband of my friend who had just gotten married was coming back from the bathroom, he took a peak in the kitchen and saw their wedding bottle of wine, sitting on the counter IN THE KITCHEN, with a couple sips left, cork on top. . . When he confronted the wait staff about it (by this time it was midnight and we were pretty much the only ones left), they all look confused and immediately came up with 100 excuses.. . So - all in all - we will never go back there EVER again. Can I please have 5 hours of my life back?
