ReviewID: DY8JHBlwp5oCzHCk7rYEBg
ReviewerID: RjBDWtqhgK6ux-8OWHgJKA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Furaibo Restaurant
Category: Japanese
I came here last night with my friend.  I've been wanted to try this place for a while as there was always a line outside their door, waiting to get in.  Must be everybody's favorite place right?  Well, it didn't turn out to be mine.. . The biggest objection that I had about this place was the portion of each dish.  It was too big considering that it was an Izakaya style restaurant.  We ordered 4 dishes, thinking that we'll order the second round of something else once we get through the first 4.  Well that didn't happen.  I was surprised how big of a portion each dish was, and by the time we finished 4th dish, we were too full to order the second round.. . One of the reasons why I like Izakaya is because I get to taste variety of food.  So to me, if I can only try 4 dishes, it's a huge disappointment.  I know I'm greedy, but hey,  I was so looking forward to eat like 10 different dishes!!!  Bummer!. . That being said, let's move onto the actual food part of review.  They were... hit and miss, I should say.  Wait... more miss than hit for sure.. . - Chicken Wings (Tebasaki), medium spice. It was indeed yummy.  It reminded me of the place that I used to go to in Japan.  Pretty good.. . -  Pork Miso Soup (Tonjiru). Hmmm, ok, nothing special.  The flavor was a little too weak as I think Tonjiru should have stronger flavor than a normal miso soup.. . -  Beef Tataki . Well, the menu called it something like Beef Steak Tataki.  I should have read it more carefully.  I was expecting the normal Beef Tataki, you know, thinly sliced seared lean beef.  But it really was a steak.  A thickly sliced steak.  And it wasn't a lean meat.  It was quite fatty and chewy.  Sure you can do it steak style, I'm sure it can work out.  But fatty and chewy Tataki?  That's just a cheep steak meat served cold with citrus sauce, which is so wrong in so many ways.... . - Marinated Wakasagi Fish (Wakasagi Nanban-zuke). I was so excited to get this dish as not too many restaurants offer this yummy dish.  Nanban-zuke is a deep fried something (chicken or fish, normally) marinated in the sauce made out of soy sauce, sugar, and vinegar and it's served cold.  There are normally raw sliced onions and green peppers accompanying the meat.  The whole point of this dish is to enjoy the deep fried fish/chicken and veggies soaked up in the sauce, therefore they should be marinated for at least few hours in the fridge before being served (it tastes even better if it's eaten the next day!).  What this restaurant did was to put the hot deep fried Wakasagi fish and sliced onions in the small bowl, and they just poured the sauce on top.  So the fish on the bottom was somewhat soaked, but the fish on top was totally dry and crispy, just a simple deep fried fish.  I was so sad.  Nothing should be dry and crispy, or even hot,  when it comes to Nanban-zuke dish.  Were they too lazy to let it sit for few hours?  Or do they not know what Nanban-zuke really is?  What a tease it was....  I was sad.... . Wow, it really was more of a sad meal than anything.  Chicken Wings were the only yummy food of the night.  Greedy me isn't happy with a single plate being good out of 4...  I'm not coming back here.
