ReviewID: dyIv1YqlGY3jZI_Qmkhnmw
ReviewerID: SpM-RGzQe5pRNyChsxqmTw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
I want to give this place a 2.5-3 star. I was REALLY excited about trying this place out (and I probably had really ridiculous expectations) but I was really hoping that Umami Burger would surpass my expectations far and away. . . Umami Burger offers about 6 burgers, a few sides, and no alcoholic drinks. . . I ordered the Truffle Burger and the Umami Burger. While the meat was cooked perfectly on both burgers, the person who prepared the dish seemed to have a heavy hand with the salt. At first I thought it was just my truffle burger- but then I tried my friend's burger and it was also really salty. . . The truffle burger had a really great flavor to it, but the flavor was really inconsistent because of the salt. Also, I think I'm more a veggie type of person. the truffle burger came only with meat, truffle glaze, and truffle cheese. I wished there was something more for a textural difference or more complexity. The burger itself was a bit greasy and the bread got very soggy after a few bites. . . The Umami burger was VERY salty. the whole burger was just so overpowered by salt, the only saving grace was the shitake mushroom. I swear- I have no idea what Giada was talking about.....she lost a lot of cred from me.... . We also had a side of their home made fries. These were TERRIBLE. No salt- (surprisingly, right???) and they tasted stale- but I think that just how its supposed to be. Also the ketchup was just ok, so we asked for a side of their garlic aioli (which our server said was "hands down the best side ever") omg. how can one screw up garlic aioli?? It had no garlic flavor AT ALL, and seriously just tasted like mayo (which REALLY pissed me off). . . Here's my thought about places like Umami Burger. If you're going to offer 10 items ONLY on your menu- you better make damn sure that all those items are impeccable and executed perfectly.  Not only executed perfectly, but the items themselves have to be deliciously sinful. I'm really not quite sure why this place is so popular....I don't think I'll be coming back.. . And I've decided to give it 2 stars...
