ReviewID: dyLCQ5dxGAEaF8e8LFf8JA
ReviewerID: 0Dq3T5EId_WRUtic7wZzBg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
When my boyfriend was younger, he wanted to be a traveling magician. This was a dream that would never become reality for him (at least not yet) but his love for magic never faded. So, with our 6 month anniversary approaching, I wanted to take him somewhere special where he would get to experience a night of top notch magic. Through some work connections, I scored a pass to the castle and made a reservation for dinner on Friday April 2nd. When I called the staff was nice enough and they quickly locked us in for 8pm. . . So I told my boyfriend the good news, and he was thrilled. I warned him about the dress code as a full suit is not what he normally packs for one of our weekends together. So the evening arrived and we got all decked out in our finest evening wear and headed over to The Magic Castle. We arrived around 7pm so that we could check out a show and some drinks prior to dinner. The valet took our car, we paid the cover and shouted the words "Open Sesame" at the bookcase, opening the doors to the famed Hollywood club. . . Wow, is the building spectacular. Hidden rooms all over, clever vintage decor though out the building, there is nothing like it. As soon as we walked in, we were greeted by a woman who suggested we get in line for the next close-up show as the room fills up fast. It was 45 minutes before, but the room only fits 20 people or so, so getting in line early was key. We took our seats and she sent the cocktail waitress over to us to get our drink orders. The cocktail waitress was back in a flash with our drinks and before we knew it, we were seated in the tiny Close Up Gallery watching some awesome close up card tricks. . . After we finished the show, it was time for our dinner, so we walked right up to the host's stand and were seated immediately. The restaurant is pretty large and there were huge tables celebrating birthdays and special occasions everywhere. The service was consistently good throughout the night and though I see the mixed reviews on the food, our food was pretty fantastic. First up we had the portobello mushroom fries. Strips of mushroom fried in tempura batter and served with a spicy ponzu sauce. They are a great way to start a meal! Next up I had the fish special which was yellowtail served seared with a sesame crust, wasabi mashed potatoes and shitake mushrooms. The fish was great, and really high quality, which is necessary if you are serving it rare like that. However, my fish was a tad bit cold, so I think they should try storing it at slightly lower temperatures. I loved the mashed potatoes too. . . I had to try the lobster mac and cheese and though I did see some reviews noting the lack of cheese in this dish, I have to say I preferred it that way, it let you really taste the lobster chunks. Too much cheese would have eliminated the flavors completely. Since I am a dessert-aholic, there was no way I was leaving without dessert. I was tempted to go with my standard... creme brulee, but I decided to try something different and went with the banana cream pie. Oh my! The crust was made with crushed nutter butter cookies, and the filling was creamy. They finished off the plate with a banana that had a hard crunchy sugar crust on them... sooooooooo good. . . The dinner was surprisingly better than I had hoped for, and the price was not nearly as terrible as I thought it would be. The service was helpful and relatively quick considering the number of tables that they were serving at the time. At the end of our meal, we were given tickets for the big show and were sent on our way. We managed to squeeze in 3 shows total after dinner, including one where I got picked to go on stage!!! Somehow the magician got my $5 bill into a lemon, and when he cut it, it was all citrusy smelling!!! That was one of the coolest tricks I have ever seen! For the people who said that the magic is not as impressive as Chris Angel, and other Vegas acts, well NO SHIT, this is a small venue with magic, not huge illusions. Were you really expecting to see a multi-million dollar Vegas production at a small magic club in Hollywood. I mean really?!?. . As we left our final show around 12:45am, we walked into the main bar to find the place packed with guests and magicians everywhere!!! Thank you Magic Castle for making it such a wonderful anniversary for me and my boyfriend, it was a great time for both of us, and as long as I still know someone that can get me in, I will be coming back again and again.
