ReviewID: DZaXQArHVHZUg8e9zFZRpQ
ReviewerID: NYbK7RHJBF33UDwFz5xuQA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
It took me two months to finally get a table at this place and I must say after dining here that I was not impressed at all.  This place is definitely overhyped and I've had much better pizza elsewhere for a fraction of the price.. . Food: Mediocre at best.. Price: Overpriced.  $12 for 3 squash blossoms and $8.50 for valet service is way too much.  . Service: Excellent, the food comes out very quickly and the staff is very friendly.  . . Appetizer #1: Fried Squash Blossoms stuffed with Ricotta Cheese. I've had this appetizer at several other restaurants before and I must admit that Mozza's version is very tasty.  The ricotta cheese is flavorful and the battered blossoms are crisp with just the right amount of crunch.  BUT, at $12 for 3 blossoms this appetizer is a huge ripoff.  The presentation is lacking as well, as they serve it to you on a tiny plate with a napkin to soak up the oil.   . . Appetizer #2: Bone Marrow on Toasted Bread. The first few bites of the bone marrow was good, but the dish became progressively less palatable after that.  You have to fish out the bone marrow with a tiny fork and after a while the plate becomes covered in yellow oil.  This dish would have been better if the bread wasn't also soaked in olive oil.. . Entree #1: Egg, Guanciale, Escarole, Radicchio &amp; Bagna Cuada Pizza    . After the so-so appetizers we were hoping that a few bites of the much ballyhooed pizza would salvage our opinion of Mozza.  The pizza certainly looked good as it was topped with pork cheek, vegetables and a still runny egg.  Unfortunately, the escarole and radicchio were very bitter and overpowered the flavor of everything else.  The Bagna Cuada oil drizzled over the pizza was overkill and by the time we were finished, the pizza was a soggy mess from the egg yolk and oil.  On a positive note, the crust was excellent, very light and crisp but still soft in the middle.  By far my biggest gripe with the pizza was that I couldn't taste the cheese at all.  . . Dessert: Butterscotch Budino, Maldon sea salt &amp; Rosemary Pine Nut Cookies. Pretty decent, but nothing special.  Basically a butterscotch pudding with cookies and that's it.. . This was the first time in my life I paid 30 dollars for pizza and it will probably be the last.  I've had way better pizza at 3 dollars a slice with the same types of ingredients that Pizzeria Mozza uses (Cheeseboard and Gioia's Pizzeria in Berkeley come to mind).  The subpar flavors and high prices really make me wonder why this place is so popular.
