ReviewID: DzmFYHhQPxGjNVVvJNVFLg
ReviewerID: BX632PBkCNWJfAWQgWMvbQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
So, I decided to use my Groupon the other day to purchase both lunch and dinner all in one go.  Ordering over the phone was an EXCELLENT experience.  The Manager, Mark was great.  He let me use the Groupon...even though it says that it was for DINE-IN only.  Cool points to you, Mark!!!  I got to the restaurant (on my lunch break) and paid the balance to Mark and handed him a tip.  He proceeded to give the tip to the guy behind the bar.  I assume he was the one responsible for seeing that I get my order.  Well, I proceeded to wait for 25 minutes for my order.  One of the servers, Delfina, was as sweet as she could be.  She kept asking me if I was alright...and did I want some water.  Well after the long wait, I finally said "No, I don't want water...I want my food."  She was so sympathetic.  She decided to check on my order.  Lo and behold...my dammed order had been sitting on the bar the WHOLE time!!!!  The guy behind the bar never said ONE DARNED WORD to me about it.  He just let me sit there for half of my dang lunch hour!!!  I actually SAW my food sitting in a bag on the bar counter WHEN I GOT THERE.  I had NO IDEA it was MY food!!!!!  Again, it was Delfina who was the gracious one.  She apologized and quickly went behind the counter and presented me with TWO $20-off gift cards and TWO free dessert cards.  Ten Super-duper COOL POINTS to Delfina and a whole lot of big fart points to the guy behind the bar who got the tip that Delfina should have received.. . With that said, the food was EXCELLENT.  I got black beans, quinoa, cumin fries, Argentine empanadas and a Cuban fried chicken salad.  You have GOT to go there for the food...and ask for Delfina as a server.  You can't go wrong.. . I only give 3 stars because of the long-ass wait (thank you, bar guy).  However, overall...Manager Mark and gracious server Delfina made the experience (along with the food) above average.. . I have one more Groupon.  I will come back and update (and possibly re-rate) this post after I use my final Groupon.
