ReviewID: DzmPJX3kVSGm8giWViEkdw
ReviewerID: YWWDhFvemd93HKof8D-QoA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
My wife took me here as a surprise for my birthday, and I have to say I very much enjoyed the food and experience at Mastro's. My wife had heard about the restaurant from Yelp and from a friend. She knew that I loved steak, and this turned out to be a great choice. . When we arrived we left the car with the valet.  As we entered I instantly realized that my kids and I were inappropriately dressed as we were all wearing hoodies and jeans. I think that the appropriate attire would have been some type of blazer or sport jacket with slacks. For a woman, it seemed like everyone was wearing little black dresses so I guess that would be appropriate attire. . The first thing that was served was an assortment of bread. All of the bread was very tasty. After that it was on to the main course for us. I ordered the bone in fillet, my wife had the petite fillet, and my oldest son had the chicken. There was no kids menu, so the baby shared our food. Everything was ala cart, and the sides where family style with very big portions. For sides, we ordered the potatoes au gratin, macaroni &amp; cheese, and broccoli. The food was very hot when it arrived and had my mouth watering. Everything was to hot to eat at that point, so we had to wait a few minutes for it to cool down. After the food cooled I tried the mac &amp; cheese and the potatoes which were both excellent and very cheesy. After that, I tried the steak, which was one of the best I have ever had. It was all incredibly good. . Besides the food being excellent, I would say that the most impressive thing about Mastro's was the service. It was unbelievable how attentive and courteous the staff was. They even called the next day to thank us for eating there, which I thought was a very classy touch. . I would highly recommend that every steak lover try Mastro's. It was a great experience for me, and I would love to go back. . . Pros: Excellent selection of steaks, the best service I have ever experienced at a restaurant, friendly staff, and a pleasant atmosphere. . . Cons: Not for kids and very pricey.
