ReviewID: DZWsWASIs6d_HShFeMeTQA
ReviewerID: sDjLntGYVuhp4FlKz33P_w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
After eating $600 of lobster, dungeness crab, king crab legs, shrimp, clams, oysters, catfish, Cajun fries, sweet potato fries, and corn, (whew!) we were STUFFED, REEKING OF GARLIC, AND HAD RED STAINED HANDS. . . But it was all worth it. I came here for my birthday dinner with 9 good friends and we ate a massive F-E-A-S-T. . . It being my first time here, I was amazed by the restaurant's popularity. There was a two-page long waiting list, an overcrowded patio/waiting area, a small dining area, and scarce parking, both in the restaurant lot and along the residential streets. . . Parking doesn't stop us. The long wait doesn't stop us. No, only after we ate two rounds of seafood (indeed, we ordered seconds!) do we call it quits. . . I loved their garlic butter sauce on the dungeness crab. The perfectly cooked, succulent crab meat brought back memories of childhood; growing up in the Bay Area and eating fresh dungeness crab.. . Besides the dungeness crab, everything else we ordered was covered in the whole sha-bang sauce at medium spiciness. Medium spicy had a good kick, but next time I'll have to try the xxx spicy! That will be the next challenge!. . Their lobster was HUGE! HUGE! That sucker was ready to be eaten, but not without a fight. Thank goodness our waiter brought hammers and crackers to help break the armor open. . . Their shrimp was amazing, too. It was my second favorite seafood order after the dungeness crab. Though the shrimps were not "easy peel" shrimp, they were cooked well and very juicy. I sucked every last drop of juice and meat from the heads! . . The raw oysters and cooked clams were the easiest to eat, while the craw fish were the hardest. I couldn't get the hang of pulling the tail off the craw fish and picking out the meat from the head. I need more practice. . . Waiter service was alright, but the kitchen was on top of it! Our orders came in good time and there were no mistakes. First came the raw oysters, followed by the shrimps and small shellfish, and lastly, the crabs and lobsters. . . The restaurant had great beer prices, $2 domestics and $3 for imported bottles, similar to a happy hour, so hanging out at the bar while waiting for tables wasn't too bad. They didn't carry any wine or other liquors, so we brought our own white wines to share. Corkage was $10 per bottle. They even set up the wines in ice buckets. Though they only provided plastic cups for drinks, whether it was wine, water, or sodas. Ghetto!. . I must warn you: be prepared to get red sauce all over your clothes, hands, and even your hair. It's a messy eating frenzy, but a fun experience at the same time. To lessen the damage, they did give us plastic bibs, but I still saw flying seafood and sauce at my table. Then, the garlic smell follows you for at least 24 hours. It's like going to a badly ventilated Korean BBQ restaurant, but not to say this place is not ventilated, it's just that the food odors stick to you. . . I highly recommend this restaurant to seafood lovers! 5 stars for great seafood, moderate prices, and a fun dining experience.
