ReviewID: DzxmFVBYOe4Xmz5dEvoaHw
ReviewerID: yIj3DxyTtNr9gV-g--9oqw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
Once upon a time Sun Wah Bar-B-Que was located on Argyle. I remember telling my friends when I was younger that this was a place with some plexiglass up because they would chop roasted duck or pig with such force that hunks of meat would go flying in every direction. That Sun Wah while dingy served up some of Uptown's best eats. We have always gotten roasted pig and duck from Sun Wah.. . As the years passed friends kept ranting and raving about Sun Wah and how awesome it was. Yes, I knew where Sun Wah was but the truth was I never remembered what it was called! Fast forward to the present day where I heard of the NEW Sun-Wah. I recall walking past while on my way to Viet Hoa to pick up rice hats for kickball and seeing it in construction and reading review after review pop in.. . Time passes and opportunity finally landed in my hands and a friend was hungry, hungry enough to go to Uptown and rock some Sun Wah! Wahhhhooooo!!! We came in and were stunned with the visuals, bright lights up above, brick wall, huge, huge clean locale with the traditional plexiglass still up to protect passerbys from flying projectiles of meat!. . We sat down my buddy ordered some Goose Island while I had some pop. I got some garlic chicken while my friend battened down on some shrimp tofu. While he did not know what he was ordering and confused it with some other dish, there was no confusion about mine: delicious, delicious, and YUM! While dining I became quite jealous of the other tables with duck being carved out in front of them. Resolved to go again, I did!. . On the next trip to Sun Wah me and two friends rocked half a duck, various noodles and appetizers and were delighted when the duck arrived! Hot, juicy and leaving your lips with the richness only duck, lamb, and chicken wings can provide, I was having a great time.. . For the detractors who are offended for Sun Wah's service, yep I concur - it is slow as molasses. Sun Wah is understaffed and gets mad busy, but do I give a care? NO! The food is worth the wait, a wait far shorter than KUMA's or HOT DOUG's!
