ReviewID: e-9ZbUnwza-MJuPgGj0p8g
ReviewerID: QXAkmRjGJvLg3fX65A9oNQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Straits
Category: Asian Fusion
Straits is one of my favorite restaurants in SF. that's right, I said SF. The restaurant recently moved to the newish West-field Mall. A lot of people in SF were not too happy about it, but it was great for me, as I could go for lunch. When I found out we were moving to Atlanta, I think I went to Straits 4 times in 3 weeks. On one of my last trips, I saw the newspaper clipping, saying that Straits would be opening in Atlanta, with the help of Ludacris. Boy, was that a good day.  :o). So, we took some friends on Friday night. I knew it was going to be different than the SF location and that they would probably be playing loud music, but the food is soo good here, nothing else mattered. The interior was pretty cool and I was so happy to see that they had a nice wine selection. We were seated upstairs and I had raved the whole way there about the food and now I was starving.. I was put in charge of ordering the food and the husband ordered the wine. Well, first he tried to order some Sake, but the waiter had no idea what he was asking for, so he went with wine. I ordered all my faves and a few new items. The place was full, but not packed. We put in our order and our first few dishes arrived, without the Jasmin rice. No big deal, as I really wanted it to go with the basil chicken. Everyone was enjoying the food and then it pretty much stopped coming out. The plates were cleared and we sat and sat. Oh yeah, I forgot about the wine, as did the waiter! When he did bring it out, he poured my husbands glass to the rim. By the time he got to the fourth glass, there was barely a taste left for our guest. Not good.. In the mean time, I noticed that Ludacris was walking around the room and he did stop by to say a quick hello. Kinda cool,but I was here for the food and now I was wondering where the rest of it was??. Finally the basil chicken came, but without the rice. We waited, then we asked 3 different people. Nothing. We decided to eat it without the rice and when the waiter did bring it out, the Chicken was gone. By then we finally got the attention of the women working the floor. She said no problem and she would get us another basil chicken. She did, but they charged us for it! We still had the garlic noodles coming, the item that I  had gone on and on about. They were as good as I had said, but would have been better with the rest of the food!. I have to say this was some of the worst service I have received in a long time. I was so embarrassed that I had recommended the place, I kept apologizing to our guest. Thank god the food was good, but I won't be coming back anytime soon. My advice to Ludacris, fly your employees to SF, so they can learn how to serve food and wine!. BTW, my best to the chef, as the food is incredible!!
