ReviewID: e0ER74hogRe6sI5iCsg-AQ
ReviewerID: lSe1FpSPHKPpS6Hcdm_XFg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Majestic Diner
Category: Diners
I've made my last trip to The Majestic.  It's been my drunkneedbreakfastat3am spot since the early 90s.  Back then the cooks were scary and the wait staff was surly, but the food was good.  A few years back they cleaned it up and got different staff.  Gone were the truck stop servers with the back combed hair and in came a cleaner diner and nicer bathrooms.  The food was still good and the menus were less greasy.  Then something happened.  Our favorite waitress left (she's now over at Savage Pizza) and things just ran off the rails.  I don't think it was her leaving that made things screwy, I take it as THE SIGN.  We went in a couple of times on a Sunday, early afternoon (re: not busy)  and got slow service and food that wasn't the same.  It was alright, but missing something.  Then we went in last night.... . We got there about 2am.  The place was wall-to-wall people.  Nothing unusual there and since it was full we expected a wait for food.  We got our drinks and placed our orders:  2 eggs over medium with hashbrowns and bacon x 2 and a cheeseburger and fries.  We wait.  We wait some more.  Our server came over and apologized for the screwy food timing stating that things in the kitchen were out of whack.  Okay, cool.  That explains why tables that came in after us have gotten food and could I have some more coffee?  She refills the coffee and we wait some more.  The people that came in after us are finishing up, but wait!  Our food!  The server arrives with our plates but then looks down and says "Wait, this isn't right" and goes back to the kitchen.  We wait.  Our food comes back out.  Okay, we're good to go...or maybe not.  Everything is cold and everything is undercooked.  Part of the hamburger is medium, the other part is way way way too red.  The fries are gummy.  The eggs are cold and on one plate the yolk has been broken.  The hashbrowns aren't done and the bacon is limp.  Limp to the point that when I lifted it up with the stand-in Managers pen, it drooped.  I asked for the check and explained that the food was cold and gross and we needed to go.  Our server said there was no check since it was bad but I wanted to pay for our drinks and tip her.  The drinks were okay and she had done her job, so lets settle it that way.  We got apologies and reasons as to why things were so off that night and we left.  At 3am, still hungry, an hour after this whole trip in started.. . I understand off nights.  I've done my time working in restaurants and bars and understand that things get backed up.  It happens.  I can deal with slow but I can't deal with inedible.  There seems to have been a slow decline happening at The Majestic culminating in our experience in the wee hours of this morning.  Too bad, really.  I hope they can turn it around.
