ReviewID: e1cYSs0l4aLp2cvUBEYHUg
ReviewerID: ylZTPTWTJo6ngjHtZAxbkw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
This past Friday was National Hamburger Day. Check out my Top 10 if you have not already. To keep the movement going I had a burger for dinner. I heard from a handful of people that the best burger in LA was at a place on melrose. I went to check it out. I was excited, hoping that I overlooked this amazing burger that I could add to my all time list. To my disappointment, that was not the case.. . The Foundry on Melrose is a nice establishment. The decor is classy and it gives a nice relaxing ora. But my experience did not go as planned. In addition to the burger I had mac n cheese and the foundry tatar tots. . . Note: Mac N Cheese will be the next Top 10 list I publish. The Foundry Mac N Cheese was good. I will admit my focus was on the burger being that it was national Burger day.. . On to the burger. First the presentation was top notch. I will hand it to them on that. . . I ordered my burger medium rare. It came out medium well. Now that does not effect the final verdict on the burger once prepared correctly but it does knock the experience. . . They were cool and took the over cooked burger back no questions asked. Fifteen minutes into my meal another group of people took the table next to me. They were very nice but they had a large dog with them. I like dogs but not for dinner. On top of the massive dog eye balling me while I ate he also got a burger. Almost instantly the waiter brought the dog out a burger. He was some sort of Foundry celebrity dog. I don't know about you, but when an animal is eating the same meal I am it takes away from the meal. I enjoy fine dining. If I want to eat next to a dog I will go to a BBQ or a cookout at a park. . . Now let's talk about the burger. The Foundry burger is more of a novelty burger with the hawaiian sweet bread bun. It was a nice touch and added an interesting flavor. On the side three onion rings, a tamarind, onion tapenade, homemade mayonnaise, and pineapple and bacon relish. I best bites of the burger had the pineapple and bacon relish.. . Cooked correctly at medium rare the meat was very flavorful. All things considered the burger was good. By no means the best burger in Los Angeles. I don't know where that came from but that is just not true. I probably won't make it back to The Foundry any time soon.
