ReviewID: E1uHFnJaB4PgzZLmyjB22w
ReviewerID: Wu6fI6ij1nvy79gFKKDGzg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: May Street Market
Category: American (New)
amazing.  came here for a friend's bday on a wed night and will definitely be coming back again.. . i love truffles, so bread with truffle red wine cream cheese definitely piqued my interest.  i've only had truffles in croatia, so i was a little wary that i wouldn't really be able to taste the truffle.  i was wrong.  it was delicious.. . the busboys were great and inconspicuously refilled our waters twice before the food was even there.  started with the steamed mussels and frites.  again.  delicious.  the mussels were fresh with a touch of garlic and a slightly spicy broth.  the fries were perfect.  not too oily.  crispy and the truffle aioli was a nice touch.  had a taste of the pumpkin and apple soup which was good.. . the special was the duck burger with foie gras.  sold.  didn't even look at the rest of the menu.  it was so so good i can't even explain it.  the duck was moist, tender, slightly sweet with i believe carmelized onions.  it all just melted in my mouth.  tried my friend's glazed stuffed pork loin and was not blown away like with my duck burger but it was good.  on first bite it seemed like it was going to be dry, but it actually wasn't.  weird initial impression but it was quite tender.  by this point, the gm had come to check on us twice.  very nice.  i was thinkin 5 stars.  but there's more.. . for dessert, two of my friends had the smores with the prix fixe menu.  most places don't let you share a prix fixe dessert but our waitress sarah brought us extra plates so that we could.  the chocolate mousse was smooth and chocolatey and mixed well with the flamed marshmallow.  the graham cracker crust was a little dry, but the mousse was so good i let it slide.  the graham cracker cookie was a tasty added touch.. . then the gm brought out the cake we brought, candles blazing.  =)  he had it cut it up for us in back and picked one raspberry and one blackberry off the cake to put on the birthday girl's piece.  when the busboy placed a piece in front of my friend facing the side, the gm quietly turned the cake to face him and checked to make sure all our pieces were facing us too.  amazing attention to detail.. . AND THEN, the chef himself, Alexander Cheswick, came out to say happy birthday and compliment the bakery we bought our cake from.  okay, now if i could give 5.5 stars, i would do it at this point.  i am definitely going back soon.
