ReviewID: E2OC1ZMXuTtBjeEs4sqvtw
ReviewerID: Gqxkzd9QDsoNZAgiApX2nQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
By far the best dining experience I've had in L.A.  The food was great.  The best things we had were the sweetbreads and braised morels.  The sweetbreads were fried to a perfect crisp with a red currant sauce.  The morel were braised in cream, garlic and lots of butter.  You bite into the mushrooms and the rich braising liquid oozes out into your mouth.  We also has the braised Wagyu beef cheeks, roast duck, lemon blue prawns and gnocchi.   The shrimp was as good as shrimp can be.  The beef cheek was tender and flavorful.  The duck was served with roasted peach and cherries, it was very tender but the skin was not really crisped enough for my taste.  The gnocchi was very big and a bit doughy for me.. Beyond the food, the service was far and away the best I've had at any place in L.A.   And I don't just mean restaurants , I mean best service anywhere be it a restaurant, store, movie theater, whatever.  Regardless of what kind of absurd prices someplace charges in L.A. I usually feel like the people that work there think you should feel privileged to even be there.  At Craft I did feel privileged to be there because the service was so good.  We had a drink at the bar while waiting for our table.  The bartender asked if we had  a reservation and got our last name to put the drinks on our dinner tab so we only had to deal with one bill.  I've never had a bartender do that anywhere.  They gave us a huge bowl of olives and candied pecans while we waited.  They got the name of the olives for my father who was asking about them.  During dinner the waiters were there when you wanted them and gone when you didn't.  They swooped in like ninjas to grab plates and silverware off the table without you even noticing them.  Then my father had a question about the wine he was drinking and the sommelier came and sat down at our table and gave him his card and the name of the distributor in New York where he gets the wine and told him if he had trouble finding it to just email him directly and he'd help him out.  Above and beyond service , great decor and great food.
