ReviewID: E5F0rgoMzXFkw1CfPpgW2g
ReviewerID: 1F0o_vgecqTcvT0yxzYJTA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
3 day holiday weekend, but with only one day off...I'm looking at a yelper gf's photos with amazing crawfish (which I've never had)  and crabs.  I must have those, now....I thought.. .  I google map a crawfish place and it esimates a 45 minute drive time to Westminster, probably more with the holiday traffic....not reasonable just to fulfill a craving.  I yelp more places and find a place...40 plus reviews, mostly 5 stars.  A 30 mile drive....but WTH, I have to labor tomorrow on labor day so I gathered my clan (mom and kids).. . Ahh, so this is ghetto vietnamese. And this is what they eat?  Good stuff.  I was impressed ....the patrons were all vietnamese. (coming from a Japanese girl who grew up in then non-ethnic Santa Monica thinking she's white/Jewish). .   I skimmed the reviews before leaving home and they all seemed to mention lobster....so I made sure I ordered that first. .  Plus crabs. Salt and pepper fried shrimps with lime  . Steamed mussels.  Steamed fish. Deep fried fish. all of the above (except shrimp) were without prices..labeled 'seasonal'. and shrimp chow mein. white steamed rice. . Uh, frog legs?   They had half a page of them on the menu cooked in different sauces.  Pass. . .  I like tongue, brain, most organs, tripe - Trippa alla Romana - YUM!, escargots, cat's eyes , veal intestine with half digested milk in Italy ... most stuff that gross other people out but....I just can't do frog legs. . . Let me take one thing back, I DO NOT like any eyes.  I was tricked into the cat's eyes when I was a child and visiting Hong Kong....and I will also never eat dog, monkey 's brain etc......  Ooops, sorry...now I can go on and on with a list of stuff I cannot eat besides frog's legs.  We"ll save that for another time..... . The brain I mentioned I liked above was sheep.. And the Tongue I enjoy is..... cow's.  . . I realize now that I overdid it with the seafood.  But the waiter suggested all of the above and I listened.. Now I've read the reviews again and regret not ordering the beef, soup, and chicken that everybody mentioned.....just for variety's sake. . .  I also missed the cash only warnings. The total was $170.  The lobster alone was $70. Luckily I had exactly $200 cash in my wallet.  Whew, I didn't have to wash the dishes.. . Well, I seem to be the only person in yelpland who has never had pho (no, i don't count Pho 99 in West L.A. ) so it was interesting to be in a chinese/vietnamese neighborhood, with pho places everywhere.  It was exactly 40 degrees hotter than in Santa Monica.  115?!  It felt  like the surface of the sun!. 5pm on a Saturday, I found parking easily and there was no wait.. By the time we were leaving though, there was a huge crowd waiting outside.. Lack of one star for noisy, no ambience/decor, AND, they actually forgot to bring the mussels, and brought my Tsing tao beer at the end of the meal.... A place to come with family or friends.....no,  not a first date place.. . Lastly,  I only have myself to blame for lack of research on what to order....but seafood overkill!  (and I ordered too much, thank god they forgot the mussels....I'll be eating leftovers tomorrow...). Yes I should have ordered the bo luc lac (beef)  that all reviewers raved about. .  The crab and lobster house special came with identical sauces so it was hard to tell which was which after a while.  . . I love lobster, but I could've done without it and the crab was much better.  Will post pics later.
