ReviewID: e5jldQOZ6LciUhuYfYb8Lw
ReviewerID: -HudJfGj2P2y9SkuNxv-RQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Where do I begin? Well, it's an exclusive club, so in order to get in, you need to know a magician or be a member. So if you get the chance to go, take it! It cost us $25 just to get in. The parking is valet. Which is pretty intimidating because most people who drive up own Mercedes and Audis and high roller cars. While I would roll up with my 1997 Honda Accord. Haha. You also have to dress up pretty nice. No sneakers and jeans here. . . On to the food. The food was less than magical. For what you pay to get in, and what you HAVE to pay per person, you'd think the food would be at least decent. You HAVE to spend at least $15 per person in order to get tickets to get into the main show. But at least it guarantees you tickets into the main show. But the food was horrible! We ordered mainly appetizers and sides because we didn't feel like spending over 25 bucks for a meal since we already spent $25 to get in. Let me start with the chili. Apparently the LA Times made this the number 1 chili in all of LA. Really now? My mom makes better chili than this! The sweet potato fries weren't too bad but they were definitely lacking in additional flavor. The ones from Trader Joes taste better than those. The onion rings were pretty good. They're HUGE! So that's a plus. The sirloin tips weren't bad. A little on the salty side, but at least it had some flavor. The mac n cheese was the only thing worth eating from all the sides we ordered. So if you're gonna opt for sides, try the mac n cheese. It was the somewhat redeeming factor to the food.. . I could have gotten better food at Sizzler's and saved about 15 dollars. But since this place isn't about the food, I'll talk about the show itself.. . The main show was actually pretty cool. I guess from what I hear from my friend that goes pretty often, it's sometimes a hit or miss with the magician. The magicians we saw in the main show were definitely entertaining. But I wasn't blown away. I wasn't amazed at how they could pull off such great tricks! But their jokes were pretty hilarious. So I give them that.. . The second show we saw was amazing. Not only was the magician entertaining, his tricks were awesome! He is Sweden's champion in magic or something like. And he was really, really good. He was charming and funny and his presentation of the tricks was done very well! I also love how he involved the whole audience as part of his comedic act!. . The other magicians that were sitting around the castle were really cool too. They had their share of jokes and definitely made me laugh. Their card tricks were definitely entertaining!. . Overall, it was definitely a fun experience. The magic made up for their less than decent food. And I'd definitely want to go back and give the main show another chance. Even if I have to eat their food.
