ReviewID: E6jfrJwwHYXPiq1gsBfEbA
ReviewerID: ovvwENQTAvQeHGfBF2GR1w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bacchanalia
Category: American (New)
Bacchanalia is simply as good as it gets in Atlanta.  When I first came down to this city when I was a freshman at Emory in 2005, I was very unimpressed with the food offering here.  I was stuck convincing myself that Bluepointe and the like were good restaurants, although the foodie and Chicagoan in me knew that they did not even compare.. . When I finally made it out to Bacchanalia for the first time I was absolutely blown away.  This is a foodie paradise and a tremendous departure from the ostentatious trendy dining scene of Buckhead.  The staff is unassuming, the decor is lowkey, and the atmosphere is quiet.  The guests here are not present to show how much money they have or how loud their clothing can be.  The experience is 100% about the food.. . I'll reveal my bias in saying that I go here 1-2 times a month.  A pris fixe of $75 for this place is an absolute steal.  If Bacchanalia took up shop in San Francisco, Chicago, LA, or New York they could easily charge 2-3X as much.. . So the most important part.  The food.  Bacchanalia uses extremely fresh seasonal ingredients in all their dishes, and for those not in tune with what foods are vegtables are in season, you can learn quickly here.  At any point you could see a menu which features asparagus in every dish or perhaps fresh Georgia Peacehs.  The chef/owners use local organic ingredients from their farm and other neighboring ones.  That dosen't turn me on, for all I cares my beef could be pumped full of steroids and hormones as long as it tastes good.  The ordering process involves picking one item per course from a small 4 page menu.. . For appetizers, its been said a million times, but I cannot drive it home any further.  The crab fritter is not to miss.  They clearly are aware as it is the only item on the entire menu that I have seen every single time I am there.  Honestly, I've never ordered something else, I've tasted others, and I must say if you are a sweetbreads fan that it is imperative that you order them if available.  Hands down some of the best sweetbreads out there.. . For entrees, the pork trio, lamb tasting, or rotating beef dish are all outstanding.  The pork is memorable in that their pork belly is the absolutely leanest I've ever seen.  The norm for that dish is a large portion of fat and a tiny bit of flavorful meat.  At Bacchanalia, there is minimal fat and a proportionally tremendous piece of pork that is absolutely out of this world.  Their steaks are incredible as well.  Before you cry Peter Lueger, you must approach this with an open mind.  Their steaks truly are something to marvel at, and they blow away that of my favorite supplier Allen Brothers.  The only steak I've ever enjoyed more than one at Bacchanalia is from Cache Cache in Aspen.. . The cheese course is quite impressive.  I suggest picking what calls to you most, since cheese selections are quite personal.  My favorite is the Parmigiano-Reggiano with medjool dates and aged balsamic.  The dates have such a powerful yet not overwhelming sweetness which compliments the acidity of the cheese.  If you truly are a dairy connoseur there is a cheese sampling for a supplemental $10.  Star Provisions extremely knowledgeable cheese expert will give you a run down of their cheeses and allow you to pick the most appealing.  The process can be intimidating but is definitely worth it.. . Deserts are just as exceptional as the other courses.  The only course I've ever had and not enjoyed was a desert, but I in no way blame the pastry chef.  Souffle's are incredible there, and one night it was not on the menu.  My dad who was in town requested souflee very politely.  The chef accommodated, but was in such a rush and panic that the gran marnier souffle tasted like doing shots of the powerful drink.. . All in all.  This is the best place in Atlanta as far as I'm concerned.  I always try new places, but frankly its closest competition, Eugene, is not in the same league.
