ReviewID: e6qG4MvKDVDCSUII8g6RIA
ReviewerID: bqjAhIGARynspNvUp2dQ3A
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Joy Yee&#39;s Noodle Shop
Category: Vietnamese
OK, I saw this on Check Please and decided to go. Wow!, Wait a minute, (Not a good wow.) I would never go back to this place. I'll keep it short and sweet. Nice inside, I mean decent looking. My duck egg rolls had no sign of duck meat. The Vietnamese spring rolls had no flavor, like from basil or mint leaves, but doused in the peanut sauce passed. The eggrolls passed also but only because they were fried, and you know that anything fried is, well, ok.. Entre was Chop Chae with beef which can be an extremely flavorful and delicious, but was greasy and had no flavor at all. The quality of the beef was bad and since it was, I guess it shouldn't matter that there hardly was any in the dish. But it was unbalanced. Mostly noodles and onions. This is a Korean dish though and most certainly better ordered at a Korean restaurant. (I am up writing you at 3.29am thanks to this dish.) . The other dish was a scallops, calamari &amp; chicken in a Bamboo pot, cool concept. "Blah," no flavor at all. Again a bad balance of the 3 ingredients and no flavor. . . Then the waiter and busbuy came right up took the cash from the table and proceeded to count it right there. I loved that!, And then didn't even say 'thank you' or 'good night'. At that point I felt like I shouldn't have given what I did. This is what happens when you have 500 menu items and foods from too many other cuisines, like Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese etc. . . I would say if you want good Chinese better to head to Lao Se Szuan in same strip of China town. Or, if on the Northside, Silver Seafood on Broadway near Lawrence(kind of divy) but great flavors of garlic, ginger and more, depending on what you order. Skip the eggrolls here though.  Also, had delicious food at Tank Noodle Vietnamese restaurant a couple of nights prior(at Broadway and Argyle). The best fruit shakes.  Food blew me away. But I'll do separate reviews for these.
