ReviewID: E7HROirqgEgfNI8OlW1SSg
ReviewerID: FOS8F_U1DLMvdszGim2cTA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I caught the Miracle Mile truck last night. The line was not long at all. . . Mufaleta Special - $5 - Spicy pork &amp; short rib with cheese &amp; jalapenos encased with 2 corn tortillas on the top and 2 on the bottom. Jalapenos give it a kick. You get 2 of these in 1 order. Deceivingly filling. It was also topped with creme on one of the two.. . Short Rib Taco - $2 - A nice small bite of food to try their meat which has a sweet essence but not too sweet, contrasted with the kimchi topping. Delicious. If you are only ordering tacos, you might want to pick up 3 of these.. . Spicy Pork Burrito - $5 - This is my favorite. It's not really that spicy at all but it had a nice flavor to it. Next time I'm ordering this one all for myself!. . Short Rib Burrito - $5 - This pretty much tasted like a large scale taco with a little extra fillings. If you don't have a large appetite, stick with a couple of tacos instead. But I'd order the Spicy Pork over the Short Rib any day. I picked this up as an extra for lunch today. Tastes great the next day. . . Tres Leches Cake - $4 - This was a disappointment. It's terribly tiny. It didn't have that same day baked freshness, more like it was sitting around for a day or two. Plus, the chocolate cake had a boxed flavor to it. For those of you who can distinguish between a chocolate cake from scratch and the box, it has that box taste. Disappointing.  It was topped with toffee crunches adding a nice texture. The center was filled with a sweet rice pudding and the bottom had the condensed milk goodness. I think it if were fresher, it would taste as good as it looked on . http://kogibbq.com. 's photos. They loose a star for this poor excuse of a desert.  Also, the fact they were out of Kogi dogs was another disappointment.  Will have to update my review once I get my hands on a Kogi dog!. . My suggestion, if you're in the Miracle Mile stop, get your meat on and then head north towards MILK to get splurge a little and get your dessert on (if you have room).
