ReviewID: e8cZ56xVmKQgcpIqSzPaOg
ReviewerID: 30AFnZZEEYSLMO2TNKgabA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wishbone
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Oh wishbone. How I love you. You make me oh so happy.... . So let me just say that I am originally from New Orleans, born and raised. Let me also say that I hate these places that advertise their "southern style" cuisine. Yuck. Yes I'm a snob because I know what this stuff is SUPPOSED to taste like. Most times it does not. However, Wishbone you have made me a believer! . . Usually I go for dinner. I love the blackened salmon with macaroni and cheese. Delicious. Today I tried them for brunch. I had friends in from out of town (New Orleans to be exact  so yes they are food snobs too!). There was a bit of a wait but not as bad as I thought. We were quoted 30 mins but we were sat in about 15 minutes. Brunch was great! I had the crawfish cakes with cheese grits and my friends had the croissants with spinach, egg and cheese and the salmon cakes. Needless to say my friends were impressed and I was a hero for picking an excellent brunch place! Cheers to me.. . So why only 4 stars? Well that can be attributed to the waitress this morning. One of my friends is a bit of a germaphobe and asked the waitress to please put her water in a to-go cup and not a glass. The waitress looked at her like she had just pulled out her left tit! Then she asked why? BECAUSE SHE F-ING ASKED YOU TO. Of course I did not say this but I sure as hell was thinking it! then after she gave her the water she came back and asked very snootily "how's your water?" There were two other people at the table drinking water. She didn't ask us. So we felt offended by her. It is not her job to judge or make fun of her customers and their little idiosyncrasies. Also I ordered a watermelon lemonade. When she brought it to the table it was frozen. I was unaware of this because it was not stated on the menu. It said fresh squeezed. I explained this to her and she just gave me a blank look. Then she finally asked me if I still wanted it. I told her no. She took the drink and NEVER asked me what I wanted to drink instead. So I just drank water. . . So boo for her and her nasty attitude. I'm sure she won't be there for long. Other than that we still had an excellent brunch and yes I was still the hero. :-)
