ReviewID: ea2h_b8qHZIdxuBzoo5vWA
ReviewerID: MnfeBPepD2WwhYZ8L7e0Kw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: HB Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Wow HB does not dissappoint!  I had been looking forward to this experience for two weeks, ever since my friend confirmed that he made reservations for us for 8pm!  HB is a great place for a date or a small group of friends, it does get loud in there but if you are with great company, you barely notice it.  Each table is lite with a little candle so it creates a cozy dinner atmosphere, plus its BYOB and the great Kafta wine store is across the street, so right away you know you have it made, BYOB and a great dinner!  Now for the food!. . For appetizers we ordered a side of truffle fries and the bacon wrapped dates.  With the side of fries, we were expecting a little plate....the waiter walks out with this huge bowl over flowing with hot thin crispy fries with a side of mayo.  Truffle oil heaven!  It was very dangerous to have the bowl right in front of me and I basically went to town on the fries!  Next were the bacon wrapped dates..ok I know I am weird but I don't like bacon so these were just eh for me.  I feel like the Baba Reeba ones are better, but then again I really can't critic them since I don't like bacon.  . . Onto the entrees!  I ordered the trout.  Now fish I feel, is pretty hard to make right in restaurants.  But this trout...was tender and moist, and it came with this buttery broth that was delicious, and I loved the thinly sliced potatoes and braised greens that came on top of the trout.  I finished everything on my plate!  My friends ordered the lamb pie - which was minced lamb with yummy cheese and peas wrapped up in pyhllo.  I highly recommend this entree, it was surprisingly light for a lamb pie dish.  My other friends ordered the quail and the whole striped bass.  HB definitely knows how to make their fish!. . Now onto my favorite part....dessert!  Ok so...when the waiter was listing off the desserts, I already knew I wanted to try the famous bread pudding..so we ordered that, and then the waiter said salted caramel brownie and then I was like ok sold!  So then the brownie comes out, it looks like a very thin brownie with whipped cream on top, I take a forkful with whipped cream and caramel sauce on top and at first I am like this is great, its chocolately and warm and gooey with a little hint of salt but as you keep chewing you notice that ew the saltness is not going away and you feel like you are chewing salt!  Ok so HB I love you but can you put a little less salt and a LOT more chocolate into your brownies.  I know you said salty caramel brownie but if I knew I was going to be chewing salt gum, I would have ordered two bread puddings instead!  So now for the bread pudding, it was made just the way I like it, warm bread budding that is warm, intense yet light, drizziled with caramel sauce and whipped cream.  My friend and I were scrapping the caramel off the plates when all of the bread pudding was gone and my friend jokingly asked if I was going to lick the plate..and I actually stopped to think about it.  . . HB I will definitely be back here!  And I am excited to try all of the other entrees and desserts here!
