ReviewID: eaju8tdw_7yFb1LLiIvqMw
ReviewerID: 4SJS_m-JXc0oASx6x5Mjkw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Hm, I spent over $100 and somehow I felt vaguely unsatisfied. Maybe because I've been eating a lot of fancy dinners lately but the service was just NOT there last night.. . We walked in for the $35 Amaro Bar special. Now, I told this to the host and they sat us at the "other" bar. Eventually, our server told us we had to be at the real cocktail (aka the Amaro) bar for that special. It was of course, packed and people were swarming all over the place for a handy seat or two. My friend and I just decided to stay parked where we were and make the best of it.. . I ordered the Goldrush cocktail ($12) and it was damn good. Better than the version at Copa d'Oro and better than other honeyed whiskey drinks I've had at other beloved whiskey bars. I don't even like licorice tasting things but the fennel pollen added a nice flavor to the drink. I savored this drink.. . My friend ordered the burrata with bacon to start and I was in love with the idea of the pancetta wrapped figs. Both were $15. I loved the figs the best. They however, were tiny and at $15, I expected at least another two figs. My friend's burrata was okay. I thought the firm cheese wasn't very "burrata-y," actually. It was good but I think I rather have had more of the amuse bouches they served us.. . She then ordered the Bavette pasta ($17) which was just a simple spaghetti with fresh cracked pepper. Hm, I had a bite and thought, "woah, too much pepper." And I LIKE pepper. . . I ordered the pork loin, the thing I LOVED when I first came to Mozza. It was definitely a smaller portion but at the inflated price of $29. I liked it but it didn't wow me like it did in the past. The beans underneath the pork loin were great though. . . I also ordered a side of cipolline (cipollini onions) for $8 because I thought the onions would go well with the pork. Well, they were good but the balsamic dressing actually competed with the sauce of the pork loin. I probably should have ordered the polenta. Ah well.. . My friend ordered the cheese plate ($12) for dessert and I had the ciccolato (chocolate) cake ($12). That was amazing. I loved everything about it and wish my friend enjoyed sweet desserts as much as me to share it. I wanted to tell everyone in the restaurant how great this cake was. I loved the chocolate covered nuts and honeycomb. The cake itself was so dense yet light at the same time on your tongue. It took a long time and a lot of water to get all of it down. And believe me, I didn't mind finishing it by myself. . . So, next time- I only want the figs and the chocolate cake. That is, if I go back anytime soon. There are so many other places in LA that serves up a gourmet meal without the huge price tag and has much better service. We had to ask repeatedly for cold water (they gave us water without ice). Food runners were doing their job though. And it was nice a passing server helped me with arranging my handbag under the bar. I still think it's hilarious to pick up your leftovers from the front host. . . C'est la vie. At least I can coast on the memory of that cake for a while.
