ReviewID: ean9K5J5dVOTKjkzJJVRDw
ReviewerID: oAf9OkoaeE252ijLydHUqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chef Liu
Category: Chinese
I'd been to the "shack" version many yrs ago - didn't like the food and never went back. But since they became a "restaurant", I'd been twice in the last month and I'm eager to go back and try their other dishes. I also decided I might like their food better than Northern China Eatery (NCE). BUT NCE does beat them on price and friendly service (they smile - Chef Liu's servers don't). . . SHANGHAI JUICY STEAMED PORK BUNS (8) - $6.95. Maybe they read Yelp reviews b/c now they use a paper liner - only 1 dumpling broke during our 1st visit, and none during our 2nd. I'm not a soup dumpling expert but I liked theirs more than NCE. . . LEEK PIE - $2.50. Best leek pie I'd ever eaten - tasted fresh. Pies were packed w/ leeks, tofu, &amp; vermicelli. Yum. . . MIXED VEGETABLE DUMPLINGS (12) - $5.95. We lucked out and got 13 dumplings :) Contents tasted similar to what's included in leek pie. Very good.. . EGGPLANT W/ GARLIC SAUCE - $7.95. Group favorite and very very delicious. . . DA LU MEIN W/ SEAFOOD - $5.75. This dish wins for best value. You get a bowl full of noodles plus shrimp, mushrooms, pork, tofu skin, &amp; cucumbers. Very tasty - although it does start tasting saltier as the dish gets cold. FYI, this dish is the same as NCE's "Combo Noodle". . . TWISTED CRULLER - $1.50. SWEET SOY MILK - $1. My friend said he used to eat this everyday for breakfast when he was in China. I didn't particularly care for it - the crullers tasted like funnel cake but w/o the sugar, and the soy milk tasted like cardboard. But I still ate a few bites of the cruller dipped in soy milk. At least I can say "been there, done that" now :). . When we came for lunch on a weekday, crowd was a mix of non-Asians &amp; Chinese. When we came for lunch on Sunday, crowd was all Chinese - a good sign for authenticity :) Almost all the tables had dumplings and/or crullers w/ soy milk - so I guess that means they do those dishes well here :). . Great place to be a little adventurous for less than $10. Definitely go family-style. For both visits, it was just $7/person incl. tax &amp; tip. . . I love Buford Hwy :)
