ReviewID: eAOtmYaxk6-ycGTCkdf26g
ReviewerID: g6uykYTmuND_5DLoYmh8_w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alfredo&#39;s Italian Restaurant
Category: Italian
I kind of loved Alfredo's and will go back, even though it wasn't as great as I'd hoped.  The atmosphere is intimate, classy but accessible, family-friendly, and a bit romantic all at once.  I personally wouldn't come here with a big group.  Alfredo's is a dark, cozy little room with a small bar, oldie decor (70's wood paneling), and burgundy-vested self-important waiters bustling around.  On a Friday night around 6:30pm, my friend and I got seated immediately without reservations.  It got a lot busier later on.  . . You get a free basket of deliciously fragrant garlic bread with plenty of minced garlic and butter.  It's a little distracting when you're trying to focus on the menu... not that I complained.  I ordered Penne al Salmone, alla Rita (a vodka sauce dish) after reading another review about how great it was.  Meh, it was good, but not even CLOSE to the amazing vodka sauce dish from home that I fantasize about regularly.  I finished dinner with a Cafe d'Amore, which was amaretto (plenty of it), coffee, and tremendously thick whipped cream.  It came with a hazelnut pirouette, and it was lovely.. . Some iffy notes:. - The portions here are SMALL, compared to what I'm used to for Italian-American food.  Not that I think America needs to gain more weight, but I'm used to, and I like, having to take home leftovers when I eat at an Italian restaurant.  Besides, pasta is relatively cheap, and I didn't think it was worth my money to get so little.. - My friend and I split the check, and we each tipped over 20% separately... someone came to collect the check and said "What, no more for the waiter?" because he only saw one of the checks.  Granted, he then realized we'd split it, but still -- it's the customer's call.. . I'm pretty discriminating about Italian-American food, having grown up with the best of it in the Jersey/Philly/NY area.  Judging Alfredo's purely by food, it was good but not quite up to the level I was hoping to find.  However, the ambience, garlic bread, and relative authenticity of the menu offerings will definitely bring me back.
