ReviewID: eC4ZrqiydzBkcLcshYv34Q
ReviewerID: 8wcm1X-xOAxdWsBe3GbA_Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Hatfield&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
I did the tasting menu to get acquainted with what the chef can do as well as just to take a break for the evening. The evening started with an amuse, two of them, in fact; quail eggs with smoked trout and a shot glass of apple fennel soup. Both were delicious but the shot of soup was much more memorable, a perfect blend of sweetness with the nutty fennel. What follows is a long list of all the foods that arrived at our table and some impressions where appropriate. I can't quite put everything into a narrative since I want to actually tell you what I ate instead of just give you an impression of the restaurant. I think the food will speak for itself (either that or I'm lazy).. . We started the actual dishes with local raw yellowtail with celeric puree and avocado curls, a mini croque monseiur with a similarly mini quail egg poached on top but the monseiur was filled with raw yellowtail to complement the other dish. The addition of the yellowtails is unexpected and surprisingly rich in effect with the dish. Then we had charred Japanese octopus salad with artichokes, bean puree ,followed by ricotta ravioli with browned butter and peas. Roasted squab breast came next, then on to duck breasts with foie gras with butternut squash and whiskey sauce and then to my favorite, lamb with date and mint crust! YUM! Perfect. Grilled hangar steak and braised short ribs with shaved horseradish ended our salty portion of the meal. . . For our sweet endings, we had perfect buttermilk pannacotta with passionfruit and elderberry sorbet and macerated strawberries, lemon tart with meringue and ginger sorbet over blood oranges, chocolate souffle with peanut butter center and caramel ice cream and finally walnut torte with espresso ice cream. And if that wasn't enough, they sent out rich hazelnut pralines to cap off whatever stomach space I had left and satiate whatever sweet, rich, creamy desires I might've had! . . can't wait to go back!
