ReviewID: eCdJH2zA1lN2lCk4ARcW5A
ReviewerID: A2Pd9fr0sZpZT2cdqlo5WA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Andie&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Caterers
I have been to Andy's 3 different times now and each experience was very differening, but overall I would say I like it a lot.. . The first time I went was with my friend Liz.  The only thing that I really remember from that particular time was that when they brought me the bill, rather than charging my debit card $32, they charged it $3200.  It all got sorted out, and despite that I still very much like the place.. . The second time was for my birthday after a Cubs game; I was pretty enebreated (sp?) so I don't really remember much about what I hate, but I was there with family and friends so I had a good time.. . Andy's is right next door to Reza's which is another VERY good mediterranean restaurant, however, I feel that Andy's menu is much more expansive.  They also have a healthy and vegan/veg portion of the menu (albeit I didn't order from that last night) which I think is very helpful.  They honestly have everything.  My cousins, aunt and I all had a hard time landing on exactly it was that we wanted to eat because there was so much to choose from and everything sounded so delicious. My one cousin who was not exactly ecstatic to eat there because she has very particular tastes and doesn't like anything non-American, actually found something and she seemed to like it.. . What I love is that they put warm pita on the table and I don't know what it is about their pita, but it's very fresh and delicious.  Honest to God, I think I had like 5.  For appetizers we got calamari (which was fabulous, however, I thought the sauce that it came with was a bit too spicy), and hummos.  Honestly, their hummos was not the best that I have ever tried.  As my cousin and I acknowledged it needed something more. I honestly hought a bit of salt would have done the trick, but she mentioned that some garlic would have been fabulous; it was quite a bit bland.  . . One of my cousins, my aunt and I got a bottle of sauvignon blanc, which was good, but coulda been a bit colder.  My other cousin got a pomegrante martini which she appeared to like, as she got another and remarked how strong the second one was.. . For dinner, we all got something different. I had wanted to get the grilled salmon, but they accidentally brought me the wrong dish, but it was still good.  It had salmon, shrimp, mashed potatoes, and a dill sauce on top.  A little heavier than I would like to eat, but nonetheless it was still good.  Two of my cousin got their combination vegetarian plates with which they got to choose what they wanted. They got some classic favorites like:  spinich pie, dolmas, falafel, coucous, potato pie, dill rice, etc.  My one cousin let me try all of hers and they were all delicious, but not the best I've ever had.  My aunt got lamb kabobs, which she said were perfect:  very tender and delicious.  Then my cousin who is not that into international cuisine got a stuffed chicken breast and from everything I could tell appeared to like it.. . For me the best part, despite my aunts remark that my stomach had expanded, was dessert.  Between the 5 of us we got 3 different desserts.  We had the classic baklava, which was very good.  This was the first time I had had it where I could tasted cinnamon and it was quite tasty.  We got a chocolate mousse which was really good even though I don't normally like my chocolate like that.  The best though had to be my choice, the chocolate peanut butter pie a la mode (that part we requested).  It honestly tasted like a gigantic Reese's Peanut Butter cup -- absolutely fabulous and I would have liked to have had that one all to myself.. . We sat out side despite there being five of us, on a very nice night.  Andersonville, in that area, can get very hectic, especially on a Saturday night.  The one thing that my aunt remarked on as to why she liked this place so much is that they always check up on you to make sure you're enjoying everything!  It was a great time, however, I think I liked it more because I was there with my cousins and aunt.
