ReviewID: eD5IqgabtUHaz2tW66Qt8A
ReviewerID: PkWAYvkhhn03NBB_6i2TkQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Sugar rush!  Came here with a friend to try the world famous griddle cafe and both of us left feeling sick and a bit disappointed.  After waiting about 45 min for a table (we were told about 20-25), we finally walked in and were seated at the counter.  The counter has way too many seats and removing a few would probably reduce the amount of times I bumped into the guy next to me.. . Anyway, on to the good stuff, the FOOD:. Eggs Benedict - This was one of the better things we ordered.  Nice, large portion, hollandaise sauce was good, and as their twist, was served over some deep fried potato skins.  Very tasty and a good deal on their menu.. . Nutella French Toast - this item is meant to be shared by 2-3 people, just like most of their carb heavy dishes (aka pancakes)...the 2 of us managed to eat most of this, but not without feeling sick from the intense sweetness of this dish.  Nutella + whip cream + whatever other sugar concoction they threw on top was a little overboard for anyone that doesnt have the sweet tooth of someone in grade school. . Oatmeal/Cinnamon/Honey Pancakes and Chocolate Espresso Pancakes - I combined these 2 because their pancakes there generally use the same batter and the flavors are made by throwing the "flavors" into the batter as it is cooking.  Their buttermilk pancake batter is not that good in my opinion.  It is very dense, and just not that good.  The 2 varieties we ordered were pretty tasty, but after eating a few bites of each order, you just get "tired" of the food and there is not much desire to continue.. . While we over ordered by a lot, and only finished about 2/3s of all of that, we did not leave fully satisfied.  We simply just got tired of the food.  Nothing too amazing.. . 1 star for nutella french toast. 1 star for eggs benedict. 2 stars for excellent service (waiter was quick and extremely friendly). -1 star for bland pancake batter at a place that suppsedly specializes in pancakes. . I'm not sure I'd ever go back based on the waiting time alone, but if there was no line, I would go and try a few of their other items, since their menu is about 5-6 pages long.
