ReviewID: EdWQq899RceWwhYpO_qoYg
ReviewerID: DgQQh4VqBG-9zQhc776a2g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Desta Ethiopian Kitchen
Category: Ethiopian
Had Desta in my sights since all these 4-5 star ratings have been filling the review panel....finally got to go tonight.  Plenty glad that I did. . . Here's what we ordered:. 1)Fish tibs with shiro- !!!!  This dish was borderline PHENOMENAL.  It was NOT a soupy watery tomato soup- it actually had just the right texture- not so thick as to be a paste, but enough to be able to scoop with the spongy bread.  The garlic flavor was strong- just how I like it.  The tilapia had a thin fried breading that encrusted it- and it was thick enough to keep the fish slightly crispy despite being soaked in the thick sauce.  All kinds of awesome! (4.5)  . . 2)Kitfo Dulet- This dish was a bit different, but nevertheless tasty.  (description from the restaurant: Tender lean freshly minced extra lean beef, sauted in a special blend of house spices, onion, pepper, and Ethiopian butter)  I had them cook it medium...but it looked pretty red to me when it came out.  Not everyday that I get a good sized bowl of lean minced beef to eat (not that I don't love my wife's predominantly veggie cooking.....heh...heh)  (4). . 3)Lamb Tibs- (again, restaurant's description: Tender cubed fine lamb leg sauteed in a special blend of house spices, onion, tomato, pepper, and Ethiopian spiced butter)  This dish was served with some sauteed cabbage, which was surprisingly good as a side- I'm used to stewed cabbage from southern cafeterias.....so this was pleasant surprise.  The lamb was not too gamey, and lived up to the restaurants description.  Good good stuff.  (4). . Almost forgot, we ordered vegetarian Sambusas, which are basically like mini fried Samosas stuffed with Lentil, onion and diced jalapeno peppers. This was definitely had a nuttier taste than Samosas (which are typically stuffed with potatoes)- not bad at all.  (3.5). . We also had a glass of the honey wine...which is like a white-wine looking, port tasting wine.  Okay, nothing special.  (3). . I haven't read all the reviews, but apparently the word "Desta" means "Happy" in Ethiopian, as per our waitress.  I anticipate that this will be a frequent "Desta"nation for my wife and I in the months to come.  Cheers! . . btw. these guys open late!
