ReviewID: EfOE5GMLJF959UkuPmd7pQ
ReviewerID: EpAkqFJLjztmlAscrTfh_Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Unfortunately, 2nd time at Osteria Mozza wasn't as good as the first time.  I felt that their presentation was pretty sloppy and the dishes weren't as good as they used to be.. . Grilled Octopus with potatoes, celery &amp; lemon was my favorite dish the first time I tried it about a year ago.  This time around, it was over cooked and too salty... Definitely not what I remembered this dish to be.. . They had this new prosciutto and melon antipasti dish. They were pretty generous with the portion, but it looked like they just slapped on some prosciutto on a plate, cut some cantaloupes and threw them onto the bed of prosciutto.  It wasn't too bad, but the presentation killed the dish.. . Other dishes that we ordered were:. Burrata with asparagus, guanciale, brown butter &amp; almonds,. Agnolotti, burro e salvia. &amp; Pan Roasted Pork Loin with fennel &amp; onion with olives. . When we first got the Pork, the pork looked a little raw inside. I understand that Pan Roasted Pork Tenderloin is supposed to have the pinkness, but I KNOW when a pork is raw when I bite into it because there is a difference in the texture... but since it was only a couple of pieces that were actually a little raw, I didn't say anything.  Even if it WAS borderline cooked... something about raw pork, just isn't appetizing.. . The one dish that sparked my interest a little was the Squid Ink Chitarra Freddi  with Dungeness crab, sea urchin &amp; jalapeno.  It was something I have never tasted before.  It was a chilled pasta, with fresh tangy flavored sauce which really brought out the flavor of the dungeness crab.  What topped it off was the sea urchin. I LOVE sea urchin, and It went very well with the smokey flavor of the squid ink pasta.. . I was pretty disappointed that they didn't have Gnocchi with duck ragu' anymore.  It wasn't anything extraordinary, but it was a great Intermission/comfort dish.. . Will I come back? hmmmm probably not.  I would rather try other places.  I am pretty over this place.
