ReviewID: efStor76SA0o9Vy9gY524A
ReviewerID: yST12Bf0obaS4gakA3fiKg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Agave Restaurant
Category: Tex-Mex
this is a PSA on the ceviche and guacamole up in this joint.. . first of all, let me just say that I drank the shit out of some diet cokes with lime last night.  everyone else is all like "oh yummy margaritas!"  me? NAH.  it's motherfucking diet coke time.  at least two limes and a small labs worth of artificial sweetener were sacrificed.  AT LEAST.. . confused yet?  well... let me tell you about a little place called Sol y Luna.  I wasn't drinking diet coke at the time (my tastes have changed, as I mused to my lady friend last night), but what I can tell you is that this was probably the worst fucking food I have ever experienced in the Great State of Atlanta.  THE ONLY place I have ever strongly felt deserved the coveted 1 star for its food alone.  . . well imagine me tucking in to my ceviche last night and having a tasteback a la Sol y Luna.  I thought Sol y Luna was long fucking dead, but NO. it comes back and haunts me from the restaurant grave.. . the long and short of it: I took a bite of the ceviche last night at Agave and actually started to sweat a little from the tasteback.  I think my hands were shaking too, but that was probably the diet cokes.  anyway, my point is I had some really fucked up ceviche.  actually if you put it in front of someone they would probably say thank you for the gazpacho.  did you even just see what I wrote? jesus fuck.. . HOW TO MAKE A SHITTY CEVICHE ROLL CALL:. . -tons of shittily marinated tomatoes. -random bits of rock hard shrimp. -fish that decided fuck it; didn't even show up. -weak ass lime support. . there are probably other nuances that were lost on me in the ceviche, but that's the gist of it.. . christ, I haven't even gotten the guacamole yet I realize.  but I'm thinking the salty green paste was squeezed into my bowl. it actually made me want to go to Rosa Mexicano.  yeah, that bad.. . ok, so in all fairness, the two stars is directed strictly at the ceviche and guacamole, which most people probably don't give a shit about.  I have eaten here on a previous occasion, and from what I can remember the food was a very strong whatevs.  given the prices, and food quality, this place just don't cut it.  I am noticing, however, that a lot of people do give this place high marks, but I'm guessing they all southerners.  for this reason, I forgive them.  sort of.
