ReviewID: eGQzEAUgERCLRALsrlc1eQ
ReviewerID: lWlNo9NYI5fTUbQ6i8tIRg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
my first ramen experience! . . walking in at 1230pm on a saturday night is bound to get you stares. the rude kind. the ones that make you cry in a corner. so i'll remember to never to that again... but how amazed was i when i didnt have to wait for a table? ha ha, says i. . . lets just talk about the decor for a second... old school japanese advertisements? freakin sweet. i wish i had some at my pad. and lets mention the uniforms... it just screams non-american, also freakin sweet. . . ok so... menu is basic. i dont remember anything but the ramen portion of the menu because, spluh, thats what you come here to eat. after downing packets of easy-make ramen for the latter portion of my life, i had high expectations for the real home made stuff. . . jesuschrist. . . talk about huge. the bowl was bigger than my face! fat long squiggly noodles, bamboo shoots, slabs of pork, bean sprouts(?), a marinated egg, and green onions swimming in the creamiest broth ive ever tasted. but that was just it, it was creamy. it wasnt the complex flavor i was looking for, so maybe next time i'll ask for the saltier version, something about back-fat or whatever. the ONLY reason i knocked a star off was because i really didnt like the noodle so... chewy. thats probably the way its suppose to be, but, i would have rather had it a little more well done. . . my bf ordered a ramen combination, and my eyes popped out of my head when i saw that it was oyakadon... ugghghhhladthwelihf. that has to be favorite meat and rice bowl (actually, its tonkatsudon... but close enough) and it was so damn good, especially for a noodle house. of course i ate half when i had absolutely no room in my body for it. . . tips? go late a night or for an early lunch. if you try to get there around "dinner" time youre going to be waiting with everyone else. plus, i literally just pulled into a parking spot on the street, how convenient is that? if youve got a small stomach for noodles like i do, split a combo with a friend. i'm definitely doing that next time. and dont arrive dressed like a stripper, youll get worse stares than i did simply because you look like a ho.
