ReviewID: eHActuWzgXMLs0Y4YQJmdw
ReviewerID: uhfny-iNpIQKXl8PMQrppg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
This is the second incarnation of Father's Office, and... dare I say... it's better than the Santa Monica location.. . As you walk up to the bar, someone will be checking IDs at the door.  They ask you if you've ever been before.  We have, so we say so.  (If you haven't, the door person explains that you order at the bar, get a number, and sit anywhere.). . My friend and I sat at the bar, as there were no open indoor tables, and ordered food and drinks.  I got a Manhattan.  It was, possibly, the best Manhattan I've ever tasted.  The secret to a good one, my actual father tells me, is the bitters.  Father's Office makes their own bitters.  My friend ordered a particular white beer.  The bartender told her they were out, and recommended another beer.  She enjoyed the selection.. . *Note- they are known for their impressive beer on tap collection, however, they do have wine and spirits.  This is not the place to order a vodka tonic, though.  Their old fashioned cocktails are made simply, with excellent ingredients.  Try one!. . Our food arrives just as a table opens up.  We swooped in, and took the table.  While I could easily have ordered another Manhattan, for the sake of my liver, I switched to beer.  I asked the bartender what he thought the best pairing would be for my burger, and he recommended the Racer 5 IPA.  I don't know if another beer would have been better, but this was a delicious combination.. . My friend, who also ordered the burger, had initially asked for the caramelized onions to be left off.  The bartender explained they have a 'no substitutions' policy.  She loved it, and was glad she left the onions on.  The caramelized onions, she told me, gave it another dimension.  The fries were great.  The aioli we dipped it in was delicious, and obviously very fresh.. . I have half of my burger in the fridge right now, and I can't wait until lunch, so I can enjoy it again.
