ReviewID: eIex0hF-kkL1aWvQUNmX1g
ReviewerID: xmNxfsWLBZlUw2tyoiaN-g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
Great late night dining option.  There are not that many Thai Town options when you are out of cash, so off to Palms Thai we went.  We used their valet service around the corner (a reasonable $2.50).  You can't park out in front at night, at least not on a Friday (and you may not want to, anyway).. . We ordered two of Jet Tila's recommendations: the Wild Boar with Curry Sauce and the Spicy Pad Thai.  The waitress asked if we had tried the wild boar before.  She warned us that it was very chewy and came with the skin on.  They did not have a spicy Pad Thai dish!  We still ordered a combination Pad Thai.  So that should have been enough food for two, but we ended up ordering a bowl of the Spicy Chicken Soup as well.  Loved the wild boar dish (though not necessarily its chewiness).  I was expecting a gamey meat.  It was not.  Actually, I don't think there was a particularly characteristic taste to the wild boar.  Or I may have been focusing on the curry, which was delicious, its spiciness probably accentuated by bunches of green peppercorns.  We had to have rice with it.  The soup was better after the wild boar.  When they first served it, I thought it too lemony.  The Pad Thai was a tad too sweet, but still perfect considering that both soup and curry were quite spicy (we ordered our food "medium spicy").  . . Palms Thai's portions are very generous, especially when it comes to the meat.  No wonder they are a bit more expensive than other Thai Town places ($32.50 before tip).    . . I like it's spacious interior.  We sat on a corner by the window this time.  I had never noticed the cat ornaments above.  You can't really see the street because of plants and blinds on the windows.  I liked that too.  . . Service was incredibly efficient.  All waiters wore headsets to relay orders to the kitchen.  Water was regularly refilled.  And the food came out fast.  Our waitress even packed all of our leftovers to go, right in front of us.  . . I won't say that it compares with our favorites - Spicy BBQ, Jitlada, and Sapp Coffee Shop.  But, again, it's a great late night dining option.
