ReviewID: EIw7k2mLM01yokVAd-nWjA
ReviewerID: EEESiKQoL9jwHj10wU2Ynw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Bluebird
Category: Wine Bars
My mom and I can really put down a cheese plate and a bottle of wine - it is one of our favorite hobbies when we are together. We were looking for a lighter dinner (more like some snacks, really), and ended up at Bluebird. Just a few blocks from my apartment, I had always wanted to pop in but, like Erin P. had mentioned, the mixed reviews really kept me away. . . I was pleasantly surprised! The atmosphere is just lovely...long bar (with hooks underneath for your purse), open windows, and exposed brick. We arrived early to avoid the late night crowd and shared the place with only a handful of other couples. However, the late night music was bumpin'. Ugh, one of my pet peeves. The bartender wasn't phased when I asked if he could turn it down. Another pet peeve - clunky wine glasses. I expect wine bars to have really nice, thin glasses. It's just more fun that way. These were not. But, I can overlook that...especially when the bartender helped us pick a great glass (or three or four) of wine. Now we are cookin'.... . For snacks, which eventually became more of a meal, we ordered the mixed olives, two selections of cheese, a cup of pea soup, and the grilled shrimp. There were some hiccups in the timing of the food, but it was so damned good it really wasn't a problem. . . Of everything, the mixed olives were the least exciting. The cheese was an amazing deal - it comes with all the fixins, and the portions were hefty. We only chose two selections, and that was plenty. Our favorite was the cana de cabra goat cheese from Spain - not your standard goat cheese by any means. . . The shrimp was insanely fresh, and insanely delicious. Oh my. Yum. I can't recall eating better shrimp. Shrimp shrimp shrimp. . . I will definitely be back to Bluebird, but will avoid visiting late night lest I feel the need to downgrade a star. I just like it too much to risk it.
