ReviewID: EjetZzxLGX5ToLYApgZ7jQ
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Radial
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I went into the entire rehearsal dinner thing with trepidation. In fact, I wasn't sure I saw the entire purpose of it all because, hey, I'm just going to be seeing these people the next day at my wedding.  On the contrary, dear groom, you won't. In fact, you'll deal with so many people that next day, you'll paradoxically barely see anyone. So I'm actually glad I did the rehearsal dinner. As crazy as they make me, these people are all still family and, what the hell, let's get an early start on letting them make my bride crazy too. Welcome to the family, Honey!. . What didn't make me crazy was the folks at The Radial. Now when you think of something like a rehearsal dinner, you usually don't think of the Radial. I sure didn't. In fact, I only knew they did this from a friend who planned the same thing about a year previous.  He raved. No, not in the ecstasy-taking, lightstick-waving sort of way. He raved about the dinner. Now it's my turn.. . First, because it's a breakfast/lunch place, they don't have to charge an arm and a leg to make up for lost dinner service. Second, because they don't serve booze, we were able to bring in our own. For 40 people, (stupid huge Catholic families and their prohibition against birth control), dinner was relatively inexpensive. Granted, we only served them shallot roasted chicken, garlic mashed potatoes and roasted veggies, but they were pretty damn good. The humus starter was good as was the Mexican chocolate brownies for dessert.  In fact, many guests were impressed by the shallot chicken.  I know, I know. You may think that I'm the groom and you doubt my guests would tell me what they really think. You obviously don't know my family. For example, they never met a fat joke they didn't like, even on a certain groom's wedding day. ESPECIALLY on a certain groom's wedding day. . . Back to The Radial, the service was good, yet unobtrusive. The space is cute, minimal yet warm. And again, the dinner was excellent even at the lowest cost post.  I'll review The Radial for brunch some other time, but for a rehearsal dinner space, it was excellent. Five stars.
