ReviewID: EJj79Nm1HnEzar0q2PD5Jw
ReviewerID: MwgBBqNF91a32fcBzlCKlA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
Restaurant row...so many places to go!  Next to a bunch of really nice restaurants, this place has to be good!. . Went here for a friend's 21st birthday because she really likes garlic.  Therefor...where else would we go?  Reservations were made and a buddy and I arrived about 45min early because we thought of traffic...none.. . Valet parking made it really easy to park because the streets...are hell.  The valet did almost stall in my friend's car, but he didn't seem to mind.  Upon walking in you can smell it, then you past the 2nd doors(yes there are 2 sets of doors with a small waiting area between), and BAM the garlic sort of smacks you...but in a somewhat good way.  You arrive at the front desk(host stand) which also acts as a gift store with fun things to look at.. . We made our way to the bar to chill and have a drink before the rest of the party came and ordered a Calamari, which was pretty good.  Expensive drinks of course, 2 drinks and a Calamari  came to about $30 from what I remember.  The rest of our party arrived and we sat.. . Looking at the menu you sort of...ponder what the hell am I supposed to get.  Luckily I looked at some of the reviews here (Thank you!) and had no idea still...lol.  So making it easy I just ordered the Filet, and shared a bottle of wine(Valley of the Moon) with my buddy.  According to my birthday friend, the mojitos were wonderful.  She was pretty drunk later(Lightweight).. . The service was very quick, didn't need to ask for anything.  They give you water pitchers in the middle of the table so you can refill yourself, but those never went empty.  Plates were removed quickly when they were done, and each member of the staff was very friendly and helpful, especially with the mass amount of cameras us asians carry...geez...I felt a little sorry for him lol.. . Last but not least...the infamous(famous?) garlic ice cream.  Now...pretty much everyone forgot about it and was ready to go, when I saw another table eating it and making faces.  I had to ask...we got a single scoop for free since he probably didn't feel like dealing with charging 1 ice cream, thanks for that.  It's a scoop of garlic ice cream with chocolate syrup on top.  Upon first bite, first taste...I wanted to make a face...but needed to see everyone else's expression.  Salty sugar...that's how I can explain it.  It's an experience...one I won't forget...not a bad one, but not a good one...just an experience.
