ReviewID: eJVh5riPR-AnADtFGJxuqQ
ReviewerID: Wvdus3DyQLqhNJXuB8t0aw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
dang this place is crazy crowded. first time i went, we had a party of 9 so it took a while to get seated (also since it took a while for all of us to arrive). . but i just went the night before, a party of 2 on a wednesday night, got there at 9.15, and had to wait for 30 mins!!! insane! they close at 10pm and we got seated at 9.45! but yah, that's probably the least wait ever.. . the food's pretty good. i've tried captain crab, that was my first, but there were time gaps so i can't really compare. . . i got the whole sha-bang, medium (which may be a lil spicy to very spicy after your 1st bag) kind of wish i varied it up like my first time.. . the shrimp is the best!!! easy to peel. lots of meat. . crawfish, i JUST learned how to eat it, pull off the head, pinch the middle and peel some of the shell then pull out the meat. they have a poster by the door, and that was how i learned. cause the first time i had it i was like wtf there's like no meat! but there's some. a lot smaller than the shrimp tho. but i've come to realise that the meat is actually better . . i love the corn as well! mmm def worth every penny and only 75 cents!. . the clams were pretty good. i'd eat it while i'm peeling the shrimp/crawfish, so i was eating the whole time. hehe!. . i've tried the crab, i'm not sure which one. but it sucked!! probably better to invest in the king crab legs. regardless, the crab sucks cause there's no flavour in the meat. and too much effort for flavourless meat.. . cajun fries, sweet potato fries, i'll pass. i always got them, but after eating such flavoured stuff, the cajun fries just didn't seem to cut it. . . i definitely have to try the lobster and king crab next! but always seems kinda pricey.. . i think each person should get a bag (1 lb) and a half. but honestly, a bag is actually enough. because i was pretty stuffed and it actually got to be kinda...too much. too salty. lol. . tip: skip the crab, go there LATE if you have a party of two. week day! vary up the spices unless you can eat really spicy. maybe bring gloves. captain crab gives you gloves. my fingers always smell of garlic for the next 2 days. unless you're big on fries, focus on the seafood. get the corn!!! also bring a sharpie to mark your place on the wall!!!. . favourites: crawfish, shrimp and clams. . do not want: crabs, long wait. stinky fingers. fries were meh. . last words: pretty good value to get FULL off JUST seafood!
