ReviewID: EkCZXAbmacK5Z__dMqUgIg
ReviewerID: beiAKcIwwIy1OObrnHTZWA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Katsu-Ya
Category: Sushi Bars
I can't get enough of this place!  I much prefer the Encino location, but this one is good too.. . Crispy rice with Spicy Tuna. A staple at all Katsu-ya locations for sure.  Better than any version I've come across at other restaurants.  However, it appeared that a novice was preparing these behind the counter...and it showed.. . Honey Hand Roll. Can't say anymore about these.  Baked crab, spicy tuna, creamy avocado wrapped in a black sesame-flecked soy paper.  Luscious.. . Salmon with Caviar. Presentation of this dish differs from the Encino locale.  This one had the salmon rolled around the creamy onion filling topped with caviar and resting on a cucumber slice.  Delicious when eaten together in one bite, but picking up the cucumber with the rest of it was a challenge.. . Spicy Albacore with Crispy Onion. This is one dish that tastes consistent amongst all the Katsu-ya locations.  Packed full of flavor, the textures meld together well.. . Spicy Tuna topped with Creamy Rock Shrimp Tempura. I can never figure out how to eat this one - it's impossible to eat it together in one bite without creating a mess, so I always eat the shrimp first then dip the roll into soy.  Whatever way you choose, this one is delicious.. . Kiwi Scallop Sashimi with Yuzu Vinaigrette. I was craving something - anything - with yuzu and the chef suggested this dish.  The raw scallop unexpectedly melted in your mouth.  It had a lovely velvet texture, not chewy as I had expected.  I love the yuzu zing...it's hot, but not really spicy.  Zingy, I say.  Again, picking up the kiwi slice together with the scallop required a bit of effort.  But once it reached the mouth, the flavors just melted together beautifully.. . For once, service was great.  We arrived early as walk-ins but were seated at the sushi bar promptly.  They kept the iced tea refilled and removed dishes efficiently so we weren't too crowded.  Great experience, will do it again soon!
