ReviewID: EKiKTEal_4V1gF3eBYfO0g
ReviewerID: 0BEfDWfsKa4c0jDieRcL5g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I went to Pizzeria Mozza after making the mistake of assuming that the new Craftbar would be open on the weekend, boy was I wrong. My cousin took me there and we were really really lucky to get seated especially since we didn't have reservations and we had a baby with us! The host was really gracious and sneaked us in and so I suppose I shouldn't complain that the tables were quite small and cramped, but then again all of the tables there were pretty tight, meaning I could listen to the conversations of the people next to us and see what they were eating.. . At any rate, we ordered a fair number of plates, including some appetizers, panini, pizzas galore and delicious desserts.  The food came out pretty quickly and the portions were decent- their panini was large and would definitely have sufficed for a single meal, but since we were sharing it was a nice little snack for the 4 of us.  The pizzas were pretty delish, I split the meat lovers delight (ok that's not what it was called but it basically had 4 types of meat- including 2 types of  bacon so you really can't go wrong with that) and it had a nice crispy flaky crust, and a healthy (i know i shouldn't use that word) dose of grease on top of the cheese and meats. Now my cousin told me someone on yelp said the crust tasted like the tears of an angel...now I'm not sure what that means, because I don't think people run around tasting angel's tears, but it certainly wasn't "that heavenly" if that's what  was meant by that comment. The crust was good, it was salty enough that I didn't need to dip it in anything and it was crispy that it didn't get soggy with all the excess grease from the meats and cheese.. . The desserts though were fantastic- I highly recommend the butterscotch budino which was soooo decadent and rich, but not too heavy. It tasted like fresh butterscotch melting in my mouth and it was a great combo with the rosemary cookies. The Caramel copetta with marshmallow sauce &amp; Spanish salted peanuts was also exquisite, especially the marshmallow sauce and the crispy cookie on the bottom which was like a little buried treasure. We also ordered 3 flavors of the gelato- olive oil (a little odd, but not bad, it just tasted literally like olive oil), raspberry (deliciously tart), and coffee (v. strong, tasted like espresso beans)- it came with a ginormous waffle cookie on top...as you can tell we love dessert!. . All in all, I thought the food was much better than the atmosphere there, mostly because it was incredibly crowded. I highly recommend making a reservation instead of just showing up (it was an emergency situation for us though!) be prepared to feast!
