ReviewID: Ekki5BWSdpGqtMwHu5YEKA
ReviewerID: q_nO8GkPITWy7fOeeFRYQw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Casa Bianca Pizza Pie
Category: Pizza
im sorry, i tried to understand what the rave is all about. . . we were a big party (19 people) and we ordered anything and everything on that menu. long review short, i found the pizza to be soggy and oily. i've eaten quite a few pizzas in my day, and i just didnt get that fresh ingredient taste/flavor when i took my first bite. each pizza, however, did have an ample amount of toppings so it wasnt a total bust. but overall, you cant mask a lack a flavor with an explosion of toppings. . . my salad was more of a thousand island soup with a few pieces of lettuce in it. unless you like your vegetables swimming in dressing, then order your dressing on the side. the minestrone soup was better than the salad. although it wasnt the greatest minestrone, it didnt taste like it came from a can. in my bowl, i had more broth and hardly any pasta and fresh cut vegetables. . . at least they had hot bread. and lots of it. . . SOME pastas turned out better than expected and these two stuck out the most. i had the linguine with clam sauce and it was more on the bland side. the portion size was a bit off too. it was as if someone served me a left-over portion. i honestly thought the server took the initiative and separated the order in two since the pasta was shared.  the Penne All'Arrabbiata (penne in a spicy sauce with pancetta) was something i wished i ordered instead. first of all, the dish could feed 3 people and that's worth my 9.50 a la carte. i LOVE spicy foods, and it just had the right amount of heat to it. also, i didnt have to add a single spice to it - just some parmesan cheese. . . my last main gripe is a restaurant that doesnt serve freshly grated parmesan cheese. what's with the kraft cheese in the shaker? this isnt authentic itialian food. . . the service was pretty good. god bless her soul since we were a big (and VERY drunk) group. . . if it were up to me, i dont think i would return to this place.  i'd rather go to a more laid back pizza place like garage pizza (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) where i can bring my own alcohol and glasses, be corkage fee free, and satisfy my taste buds. dont get me wrong. i dont hate this place.  given the altered (errrr i mean inebriated state) i eventually got myself into, i would give this place another try. i know what you're thinking...why trust a drunk girl? keep in mind, i do trust my taste strongly.  im more observant and honest when i am drunk...hence why i am at almost every appropriate opportunity. i dont expected to be wowed but i think it does have the potential to score higher in my book.
