ReviewID: eLacmPJqBKFemnUMC-b-Nw
ReviewerID: uZhmrZdFQOr4mODKBxdvfw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Marlay House
Category: Pubs
Anyone what knows the Captain, knows that he shoots straight from the hip... leaning slightly to the right, dressing slightly to the left, and usually shoots his opponent before the feller in the top hat shouts "Now!", mostly because he be a coward and don't likes being riddled with hot lead.. . And so, now, too, this report shall be, lost, in commas... let me begin again on the next line.... . The Grange.. . Ah, we cannot move on with this first blush review (and there is indeed a review in here) without first addressing the name of the pub. Grange. Guuuuuhhhh-raaayyynge. It kind of rolls around the mouth like a piece of gravel, you know? Grange... crunch, crunch, crunch..... . Now, perhaps this be a beloved family name by the blessed clan what have elected to bring life back into the husk of our dear departed Angel (the pub's former incarnation) and perhaps I be pushing hot coals up their noses by wrinkling my own up at the name they've chosen (God help me if this be the name of someone dear to their hearts... I'll be drinking Black and Spits from here to eternity if that be the case).. . Still, I think it be fair to bemoan the loss of the lovely name "The Angel" for this rangey, gravelly sounding word that bespeaks gravel and ranginess... like our ship's cook, Stinky Pete McMange.... hey, that's what I could call the place... "The Mange"... it's got a sort of smelly pirate feel to it, no?. . But, what I've just done... complain about the name and all... is what these new owners will be facing for the next three months. We'll see how long they can maintain a polite smile before they (understandably) drift into a rage, screaming "It's OUR bloody bar now and we'll do what we darned well please!!!". . For instance, this afternoon when the bar were opened "for real" (and don't think that my feelings weren't hurt at not being invited to one of those many soft opening nights) I watched several folk walk up to the lass what be part of the family enterprise and give her several suggestions about the way things used to be. I could tell that it was probably annoying to her, but she took those suggestions pleasantly and continued about her work. Time will tell if the old regulars will adapt to the new owner's visions, and the new owners to the needs of the old regulars.... a regular arranged marriage, just like they used to have down around the cape toward Hindoostan.. yarr.. . Shakedown cruise.. . If you were at the Mange tonight, you'll have seen her packed to the gills. PACKED like you wouldn't believe, matey! You can't imagine the pent-up desire people have had for this pub to make its return. But, "packed" has its own problems, as one of me mates discovered right after he informed me that "Sixty feet of bar and two bartenders don't seem enough... they needs two pouring and a third manning the customers at the bar..."  and sure enough, he and his finest wench found themselves on the back end of a 30+ minute delay for their meal order, followed by a confusing over-charge on their food, which they loudly disputed. Me? I'd have comped their meal. Anytime a customer finds themselves trapped in a Bermuda Triangle of non-service you must encourage them to come and sail your waters again.. . In this case, upon my friends' departure, I received a flurry of text messages expressing their disappointment at the service, as if the Mange were MY pub. I suppose that being a fan and a near-regular of a place does bring with it strange and unexpected responsibilities.. . My food and drink? Terrific!. Don't look for the old menu, that belongs to the previous owners. Instead, look forward to some new favorites.. . Today I had their meat pie, which is the size of a large cupcake and contains ground beef and other tasty bits. It comes with a side, and I selected macaroni and cheese. The chips are true English chips, meaning that you're going to get a basket of french fries, not the American-style homemade chips/bacon/bleu cheese mixture that you may recall from the previous owners' menu.. . Some of the other long-time regulars on the other end of the bar were stepping their way through the menu and were reporting genuine happiness with all of their selections.. . All in all I believe that the new owners have a double golden bozo opportunity on their hands and I look forward to an even more gushing review of the Mange in another couple of months!
