ReviewID: EMFAoRCUPWoqnemSSs0mpA
ReviewerID: 4pefQIbqzrkPTlDSM62otA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Last night I had a life changing experience....and it was all thanks to Pizzeria Mozza. After seeing the 900+ reviews I knew I'd have to check it out. I checked OpenTable for available reservations on Monday and was able to get the last reservation available for 2 people on Thursday at 6:45p.m.They have valet for $10, but don't waste your money. There's metered parking (which is free after 8) on Melrose if you don't mind walking a couple blocks. We got there early (around 6:15) but the host said our table wouldn't be ready till 6:45. We came back at our allotted reservation time and were seated immediately. The restaurant is surprisingly tiny which is probably why getting a table is so difficult. FYI- there's also a wait to sit at the bar if you were thinking of going down that route. We were seated at a tiny table for 2 with adjacent tables at our left and right. It's a little uncomfortable at first because you're practically sitting right next to the neighboring patrons but you get used to it (because you really have no choice but to). Our server was a very friendly young gentleman who happily answered all our questions and provided quick and efficient service. We started with 2 carafes of wine. The wine is all in Italian so I have no idea what the names are. I asked for a white wine most similar to Pinot Grigio and my boyfriend asked for something comparable to a Chianti. My white wine ($14) was perfectly crisp and refreshing and my bf enjoyed his red ($15). The carafes hold a little less than 2 glasses of wine. The price tag looks a little steep at first, but you have to remember that you're getting almost 2 glasses. . We ordered the following:. . Fried Squash Blossoms w/Ricotta ($12)- Sweet Baby Jesus....is this what heaven tastes like??? I was really hesitant about ordering these at first, but they were INCREDIBLE. You can't really even taste the squash. The squash blossom is filled with ricotta and fried in the most mouth watering batter. An order only comes with 4 pieces, but definitely worth it. Don't leave here without trying these. . . Funghi Misti, Fontina, Taleggio &amp; Thyme Pizza ($15) - In laymen's terms this is a mushroom pizza. My bf ordered this and absolutely loved it. . . Bianca with Fontina, Mozzarella, Sottocenere &amp; Sage Pizza ($18) - For those of you who have watched Ratatouille- do you remember one of the final scenes when Ego (the mean food critic) is served ratatouille and he drops his fork and has a flashback to his childhood because it evoked so many emotions and tasted so completely perfect?? Biting into this pizza was that moment for me. I'm going to make a very bold statement right now.....but this pizza is the best pizza I have ever had in my entire life. I had to put down my pizza after every bite because I wanted to savor every single second I had with this inconceivably beautiful culinary creation. The mixture of cheeses, the crust, the sage leaves....ohhhh the sage leaves. Every ingredient together made my mouth dance. It was completely amazing. Don't be afraid of the sage...at first I was going to take the leaves off but that would have been a disastrous mistake. You can barely taste the leaves, but they bring a mind-blowing flavor to this pizza.  . Absolute perfection. . . Butterscotch Budino, Maldon Sea Salt &amp; Rosemary Pine Nut Cookies ($9) - This dessert is on crack. Is it sweet, is it salty, what's going on?!It was a party in my mouth- butterscotch pudding with hints of sea salt topped with caramel and a dollop of whipped cream. At first I couldn't figure out whether I liked it or not. It was soooo sweet, yet intensely salty. In the end, my boyfriend and I were fighting for the last bite. It was completely mind-blowing. . . I wasn't expecting it, but Pizzeria Mozza gave me the best foodgasm I've had in a while and I bow down to them with thanks. . . Dinner for two after tax and tip was $111. . . AMAZING.
