ReviewID: eMWJyU_6X034rQrhYHtzwg
ReviewerID: ngmI1v9upWVgSU5pousszA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Well, just got back from an evening at the Magic Castle in Hollywood.  My girlfriend and I took my mother, who has never been to Los Angeles.  We figured it would be a special thing to do for my mother's visit, and given the Castle's rep, we expected a relatively elegant affair at an exclusive club with the fun twist of magic to make it truly special.. . If you don't already know, they claim to have a strict dress code and ban cell phone use inside the castle.  We were seated at dinner next to two women in sweat suits who talked on their phones the whole time.  It wasn't so much the dress code and cell phone violations, it was the fact that they spent the whole time loudly discussing, in broken english, the exchange of money for sex acts.  Yep.  We were chillin' with full-on prostitutes (don't get excited guys, they were seriously ugly disgusting trolls).  Yep.  What an elegant night with my family.  Nothing like trying to swallow a bite of filet mignon while listening to a wacked out  hooker quote $350 for full service and $100 for a handjob (cash only) NEXT TO MY MOM.  Ahhh... good times at The Castle. Classy operation.. . Besides the barrage of sex-for-sale phone calls, they chewed with their mouths open super loud and demanded the waiter's attention in the rudest possible way, even when he was serving other tables.  For a few minutes I was sure that we were on a candid camera show but no one came out and sprung the joke on us.. . So, naturally, we felt compelled to inform the management they had two jacked up ho-bags openly soliciting sex for hire in their dining room and figured management would, of course, opt to politely eject them based on  the "strict dress code" and "no cell phone" rules without having to accuse them of anything.  Well, guess what?  We were promptly informed that these two lovely gems WERE MEMBERS. That's right. These repulsive, rude, nasty-ass prostitutes were actually members of the Magic Castle. A polite "We have warned them." is about all we got for a response from management. . . After seeing that management was not phased by our story at all, we quickly got the sense that this is just what goes on here. Even if the management sanctioned such activity, we figured after receiving such a direct and pointed complaint, they would at least ask the cantankerous hookers to take the night off.  Wrong.  Those same rude and grotesque creatures were slithering around the castle all night long, clearly looking to drum up some business with one or more of the traveling salesmen in cheap suits.. . I would never pass any judgement on what they do for a living but belligerent hookers will pretty much ruin any special night you had planned with your mom.  What was supposed to be a special night for us turned into an expensive downer.  The magic performers were terrific and the decor is great.  Just don't expect elegance or a refined experience.  It's sad because the Magic Castle has so much rich history and you can tell it used to be a class act.  Someone new needs to take over, get rid of the "New Jersey motel by the turnpike vibe", and restore that place back to its classic Hollywood glory.
