ReviewID: En3qVTXtmgzzgApNlWbcqA
ReviewerID: bfDzZWI2cldhOYQlgFKoJw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Gilbert&#39;s Mediterranean Cafe
Category: Greek
I am dissappointed and upset right now....I thought I had finally found a wonderful inexpensive greek restaurant to eat at thanks to all the Yelpers but I was clearly wrong. I went today for lunch and they have a special where you can choose two items and make them a combo for 5.99. . . Now I wondered why would it be so cheap to order salmon w/ rice and chicken kabobs with rice for 5.99....i was like this is an amazing deal. Once again I was wrong!!!! . . Keep in mind the server had told me that the chicken was amazing and the salmon was good. When she brought my food out I understood why it was 5.99. First of all it was small portions which was fine because i am a small girl so I don't eat much anyway! Then, I bit into the salmon and it was NASTY.....I mean amazingly nasty. Then the rice....I mean I thought greek = rice pilaf, but no once again I was wrong. It was some reddish i don't know nasty kind of rice. So I was very disturbed about that  because it came with both my orders. So on to the chicken I said I hope this is good....this is the last thing on my plate....That chicken was sooooo dry I almost died. Now keep in mind I was their FIRST customer of the day. When she bought my food out the rice was cold and she had to take it back! Why would my food be cold and i'm the first customer I mean come on! . . Meanwhile my server keeps asking me is it good? its so tasty huh? and i just didn't have the balls to tell her no ma'am its nasty. Why? Because she was the nicest lady in the world. I mean she showed me the brunch menu....the dinner menu...engaged in coversation. She was great. I just didnt want to hurt her feelings. . . On another great note, I sat by the window which was amazing view of piedmont and 10th st. The view and my waiter were about the only positives. So that explains the one star. . . I'm willing to give it another try. Maybe I just need to go for brunch....because it just seems like their lunch menu is very poor quality....ugh...ewww! . . And they have a parking lot on piedmont ave!
