ReviewID: eNkS4AjrS9vSDwNInY5dKg
ReviewerID: pSoe4XBftnJiTgG1fPw52g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
This visit included Bob C. &amp; James S., fellow foodies and their gluttonous and sometimes dangerous adventures in California searching for the best places to eat.  This place was more of a tryout considering they had not been to Din Tai Fung.  After placing our order (see Bob's review), the waitress kept asking us if we wanted to cancel some of our orders since she thought we may have ordered too much.  WHATEVER!  Just give us our damn food.  Since we ordered each of the dumplings dish on the menu, we were able to experience what Din Tai Fung had to offer.. . In my opinion, the best ones were: Juicy Pork, Chicken, and the Fish dumplings.  The juicy pork is just that... very juicy.  Just be careful not to eat them too fast when they come to your table.  The juices in the dumplings are so freakin hot you WILL burn your mouth.  The chicken and fish were very tasty as well.. . The worst ones: the veggie ones.  Don't order them unless you like having lots of leftovers or you like torturing yourself.  They taste really gross.  Oh... and don't order the dumplings with vegetables inside.  They're basically the same as the all-veggie one.. . To finish off, we had the red bean dumplings.  I normally don't care for red bean, but this was very nicely done.  It is not overly sweet and the dumplings are nice and tender.  Yummy yummy.. . So yeah, counting up all the dumplings we ordered, which was 90 along with the 2 other dishes we ordered, we only left 3 uneaten.  As for the waitress that suggested we cancel some of our orders and possibly order some more at a later time, I wanted to show her how she could've asked us to do such a thing.  But then again, are you supposed to be really really proud for being pigs?  I wonder sometimes.. . As a tip, you don't need to come here 1 hour before it opens or anything.  We got there at 4:45pm on Saturday and we were able to get seated right away when it opened at 5pm.
