ReviewID: eoP_G_R-tOJWwePAPYxypw
ReviewerID: K0mFbYeHkpA6MME2lllwgw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
Over the course of my 24 years of life, I frequented Chinatown maybe a billion times. I basically grew up in Chinatown, I went to the elementary in Chinatown for crying out loud, so I basically knew the place like the back of my hand. I always knew Philippe's was down the street from the CBS Seafood Restaurant that I would always visit for dim sum or dinner with my parents. Never did I ever feel compelled to try Phillippe's out until I started yelping. Seeing all the different pictures had me convinced, I had to try it at least the one time.. . I arrive on a busy day, not really knowing what to expect. Best word to describe this place is CROWDED! All this hype must be true if the lines can be compared with the DMV. . . I am super excited, patiently waiting in line. I stare down at the menu out of curiosity, but in my mind after reading so many reviews, I knew I had to try what everyone else is raving about to see if its true. . . Hi Ill have the French Dip Beef Sandwich with a potato salad and a Fat Tire. . . I pull out my wallet and pay showing my credit card. . . Cashier lady: Sorry we do not take credit cards, cash only. . Me: WTF LADY YOU SERIOUS! (in my head). Me: Lily you have cash?. Ben sister Lily: Yeah here. . . At that moment I was annoyed that they only accepted cash. What if I didnt have cash and I waited in that long DMV line? I would have went crazy!!!! Times have changed and I live and die by debit/credit cards. . . I get my order, not within the specific time frame that Philippe's claims and sit down on a table disappointed about the whole credit card ordeal.. Next big annoyance, used silverware and dishes were left out waiting to be picked up. Wow.... . After clearing off the table, I take a good look at what I ordered. The sandwich was not the size I imagined, so was the portion of potato salad. A couple bites of the sandwich and a few spoonfuls of potato salad and everything was gone. . . DING DING DING DING DING!!!! The crowd goes wild!!! A new world record has been set, 2 minutes! Not because I have a habit of eating fast, but due to the lacking of size from the sandwich and the mini scoop of potato salad that I received. . . My taste buds go in shock, I had no complaints, I thought the sandwich and potato salad lived up to the hype. The fat tire increased my level of enjoyment but what beers don't make everything taste that much better? Glad I ordered the beer, or else I would have still been hungry. I know its not good to criticize a place for their portions when I know that I clearly have a eating problem. Not my fault though!
