ReviewID: eozvkp7ZINbHmf9Fv6-0Cw
ReviewerID: nOfnmFhlCC60u9ozQHJONw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Update: . . After reading my review below, chef/owner Alan wrote personally to apologize, and offer a gift certificate to try Friendship again.  While I don't actually care if I get a gift certificate (I'd already mentioned in my review that I'd be going back), this kind of personal touch from the owner is a promising sign that Friendship will continue to offer the reliable, excellent food they have in the past.. . Original Review:. . Friendship Chinese has been the go-to Chinese joint in Logan Square for years, thanks to their consistently high-quality food and innovative interpretations of classic Chinese fare.  I have ordered delivery from them many times, and eaten in their dining room as well, and have always been completely, deeply satisfied.  Normally,  no other Chinese restaurant in Logan Square comes close, and I dare say Friendship can compete on a city-wide level.. . That's why it pains me to give this very poor, 2-star review. . . I ordered simply: egg rolls, creamy crab rangoon, and "combination" lo mein (which isn't on the menu, but they'll make it for you if you ask.). . Both the egg rolls and creamy crab rangoon were fantastic as always: lightly crispy, hot, luscious, savory fillings.  The sauce that accompanies these appetizers provides a lovely, sweet yet piquant foil for the richness of these classic appetizers.  And a good egg roll is not easy to find--particularly for delivery.. . The lo mein, however, was...gosh, it's almost hard to say this because it sounds like hyperbole, but it was...inedible.  I took a few bites, walked away, came back later, thinking maybe I just needed to cleanse my palate, tried again, then pitched it in the trash.  Blech.  Seriously.. . The noodles (which at least were the right kind--actual Chinese noodles instead of the usual spaghetti you get in most Logan Square Chinese restaurants) were limp, over-cooked, insipid.  But the real deal-breaker was something in the mix that seemed to taste spoiled--a kind of rancid meat flavor.  It truly was nauseating.. . I've had well over a dozen superlative experiences with Friendship Chinese, so I won't let one bad meal stop me from going back.  But I'll think twice before ordering lo mein.
