ReviewID: EpUaBpSiY0b3BwsSYvJzgA
ReviewerID: 8evAGg3M-2v962d9Ku1Nkw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
Perhaps reading all these reviews prior to dining at Savoys was too much hype.  My boyfriend and I walked up to the restaurant and were seated immediately.  (It was about 7:30pm... I was expecting a line since that is what other yelpers cautioned about)  I was happy to see that they got an A posted on their window for health inspection and it shows.  Everything was clean from the counter tops to the floors.  This is what we ate:. . Seafood salad: we got the half portion for about 5 bucks.  Not too shabby.  Good portion of seafood - octopus, scallops, and shrimp.  I can't vouch for the freshness of the seafood.  My guess is that it's previously frozen.  The dressing, thank God, came on the side.  Was a tad odd for a seafood salad... wasn't very complimenting.  It was like honey mustard or something along that line.  I would have preferred something more citrus in flavor.. . Hainan Chicken: meh, I really had better.  They charge you $2 for dark chicken (which I did not order).  However, somehow my plate was mostly dark meat.  I would rather have white meat.  The chicken was not as neatly cut nor thick pieces as what you see in some of the pictures posted.  Mine had skin on it and the pieces were for the most part boneless.  There was one wing.  Yes, I agree, it was tender.  Decent portion, but like I said, I have had better.  . . Escargot: This was served with their pizza bread.  I dipped the bread into the sauce and first bite was mmm...  However, my first bite of the escargo was a bit salty.  Good thing they served it with bread.  It was 6 pieces for about 7 bucks.  Caution: those tongs are dangerous haha We had flying snails... amateurs, I know.  But hey, the table next to us was dropping their escargots as well. : ). . Service: Good!  They spoke English and was really friendly and attentive.  It wasn't hard to get their attention.  For this reason, I want to give them at least 4 stars... but hey... good food is weighed more heavily.. . Cost: about $20, dinner for 2.  (No beverages). . They served pastas, pizza (little odd to me), and other things like casseroles.  Decent food, good service
