ReviewID: ePvyfn-f49NmUkCETHANGw
ReviewerID: oAf9OkoaeE252ijLydHUqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Nakato
Category: Japanese
While I'd had Nakato's sushi a few times, last week was the first time I tried their hibachi - honestly I had no idea they had a hibachi area b/c I'd always get seated on the "sushi" side of the restaurant which I've always thought was their entire dining area. . . And while I do prefer their sushi, their hibachi food is really good, too - can't say I've been to every hibachi restaurant in Atlanta but this is my favorite so far. I liked the flavors of my meats, the portions were huge, and I liked that they did some extras (shrimp apps &amp; noodles) which I don't think other restaurants include. . . We had a party of 6, and everyone ordered combo meats. I ordered the "sirloin steak &amp; scallops" dinner for $19.95, which came with a house soup (*sad face* b/c not miso soup), salad w/ ginger dressing, shrimp appetizer, noodles, grilled vegetables, &amp; rice. . . The soup &amp; salad were ok but everything else had really great flavor - I think the secret ingredient was their herb butter. My favorites for taste were probably the noodles &amp; steak. One tip to keep in mind when ordering steak - I ordered medium but it ended up more like "medium well", and the person who ordered "medium well" got "well done". Still, I enjoyed my steak very much. Scallops were good, too - and they were HUGE!. . Also, if you're going to do hibachi where the food is cooked right in front of you, you might as well eat the food as soon as it hits the plate - that's what I do but I do end up eating everything pretty fast while everyone else is eating at a more leisurely pace (the healthy way, I guess), exercising portion control, and therefore end up w/ enough leftovers for a second meal. Not me, not when I eat hibachi :). . Service was ok - I don't think we got full attention b/c we were in one of the side rooms where we had to take off our shoes and the servers could only access our table from the cook's location ... so drink refills weren't so good. While I guess it's more authentic to eat w/ your shoes off, I don't care what age you are, I think all of us had a difficult time maneuvering ourselves to sit comfortably at their tables. . . Food alone though is worth a return trip. FYI, they do have a few early bird specials Mon-Thur: you can get a 3-course hibachi dinner for $11-13. Just order by 6:30pm. The sushi is great too - although it's been about a year since my last visit. I've tried the Supercrunch, Seafood, Spicy Tuna, Rainbow, Shrimp Tempura, Salmon, &amp; Tuna - and liked them all :). . Parking is complimentary valet.
