ReviewID: EqisyLs2W6suIrIE6dBSVw
ReviewerID: t6KU6I71YriFsmQx0XwArA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ok Cafe
Category: Diners
OK Cafe is somewhat of an Atlanta institution.  They used to be open 24 hours and their menu has changed a bit over the years (they used to make a good cheesesteak I'd order regularly), but their core food has stayed the same.  Their main attraction is good Southern "comfort" food -- it's basically a midrange priced  "meat and three" (well two in their case) place in a diner setting.  They also make a pretty good southern breakfast.. . For their dinner menu, they have the "Blue Plate Specials" and some sandwiches and relatively pricey burgers.  The burgers are all right, but that's not why you come here.  You can get a good burger at a bunch of places.  You come here for the Southern food plates.  I tend to order either the Meatloaf or the Salmon most of the time.  Their Crab and Crawfish Cakes are good too as is their Pot Roast and Chicken Pot Pie.  I also liked their Roasted Turkey, Gravy and Cornbread Dressing the one time I had it.  They also have a rotating daily special -- I've tried the Fried Chicken and it was very good.  In sandwiches, I'm partial to their Grilled Chicken Breast, BLT or Egg Salad.. . As far as the sides go, their Triple Cheese Macaroni really stands out.  OK Cafe makes one of the best versions of that dish.  I also like their Baked Sweet Potatoes, which they top with butter, cinnamon and pecans.  Their vegetables are usually good too: the collards, green beans, corn, broccoli, etc. and they have a rotating "veggie of the day."  If you're getting a sandwich or burger, their fries are usually excellent (thinner and just the right level of crispy) and they also make good and greasy Shaved Fried Onions.  You can get a half &amp; half basket (half fries, half onions), too.  As far as appetizers go, I like their Cheese Grits and their Sweet Potato Chips.. . I usually don't have room for dessert because their food is so heavy, but OK Cafe makes some tasty desserts.  Their pies are very good, and I used to get their Chocolate Icebox Pie or an ice cream dish (sundae, split, etc.)  Their milkshakes are really good as well; some people order them with their meal.  . . In addition to their dine-in area, they have the takeaway store, where you can get a lot of their vegetables, breads, entree portions, etc. by weight in plastic containers.   You can grab a pound of their Triple Cheese Macaroni for the road.  The takeaway section also has a sandwich counter where they'll make you a sandwich to go; they also have various cake and pie slices in a cooled side section.. . Anyway, they don't have much in the way of group seating usually, and they can get pretty crowded during regular business hours (you may have to wait or eat at the counter).  But, overall, the service is usually pretty good.  If you go for the good Southern food Blue Plates, you'll probably be satisfied.
