ReviewID: eQPwpvvWRFJ-wQsy56sm8A
ReviewerID: VSfWC3Msmqn3Zsm6kALPog
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
On the outside you wouldn't think to look twice because it does not stand out. The restaurant sits at the corner of a weird intersection at 3rd  Street and Traction Avenue/S. Hewitt Street and so you may have to circle the block again to find it if driving.  There is a selection of Classic, Gourmet and Exotic hotdogs to choose from all priced at $5.75, $6.50 and $7.50 respectively.  My friends and I tried the Alligator/pork (Exotic); Rattlesnake/Rabbit (Exotic) and the Santa Fe Jack Cheese with Jalapeno Peppers (Gourmet), and the verdict: had my friends and I mixed up our orders, most likely we would not be able to tell the difference, what can I say, at least it did not taste like chicken!  Each choice of sausage is allowed two toppings: caramelized onions, sauerkraut, sweet peppers or spicy peppers.  I chose caramelized onion and sweet peppers - I would have preferred my onions much more browned for the sweetness rather than sauteed, but I suppose the sweet peppers compensated for that.  As a side order you can get Belgian fries with the option of Klein (small fries) for $3.50 or Groot (Large) for $5.50, and as supplementary one can choose various dipping sauces for the fries. I honestly think that the sauces are what make the fries edible otherwise, next time I would pass up the fries.  There is also a huge selection of beers;drafts, bottled and non alcoholic beverages, which are not exactly cheap.  The seating area is very spacious with long wooden tables and benches, a very welcoming attribute to the restaurant, encouraging strangers to sit intimately with one another and perhaps chat up a storm.  The con to the hotdog joint is parking, which can be a bit of a challenge but then again it is downtown LA. Overall, cost for an exotic hotdog, large fries and a hefe weisse beer came out to be about $20 bucks.  I do recommend the place as an experience, good hang out as well as a night out in the town.
