ReviewID: eqTtWBIK3bCLjkbS6BB5ow
ReviewerID: yST12Bf0obaS4gakA3fiKg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alon&#39;s
Category: Bakeries
damn I haven't reviewed alonsies in fucking ages.  probably one of the first places I hit up when I moved out here. . . anyway, I kind of liked them at first, then kind of went blah, but I'm back on their nuts I'd say.  I mean shit, who the fuck else busts out stollens?  french macarons?  and challah every Friday? brioche on Saturdays??. . do you people even understand these things?  MF stollen staring me in the face today. and more macarons in the display case - stayed away this time though.  I didn't used to appreciate this weird shit, but I do now after learning about how you make these things.  I tend to bake more these days, ok?  Anybody up for a cookie exchange???. . anyway, the sandwiches and salads are decent, but def pricey. and I'm still a fan of the cookies.  I actually had a peanut butter mousse bullshit dessert thing the other day that was good.  Because previously the dessert I had were a bit weak, cookies are usually ON though. esp those oatmeal raisin.  still haven't figured out the magic. maybe it's just more butter? chime in baker people, enlighten me.. . what else - ah yeah the main reason I usually stop by - the prepared food section.  shits always pretty straight - enough so that I'll grab some things and just eat em cold like the chicken and meatballs I got today. and somehow I miraculously managed to avoid all the holiday sugar they had blaring in your face.  tough, but I succeeded.. . wow just like my cacao review I'm losing focus.  this time it's because I'm fucking full and cold food doesn't really sound that great anymore. I mean really, what the hell is wrong with me, now that I think about it.  "Hey guys! I really like Alon's because I can get a piece of cold chicken and a couple of meatballs for $20."  Fuck do I sound like Buckhead bachelor or what?. . I don't even think that made sense.  I'm tired ok??. . moral of the story: Alon's makes tasty weird baked shit. that people should learn to appreciate. if they have extra money.. . fin
