ReviewID: eQUp_qgwZ2jOOdZAmykkvg
ReviewerID: MZl00pNhOm24tWQubZp8JQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Nacional 27
Category: Latin American
Last night I ate the BEST dinner of my life. No joke. Ask everybody I work with...I told them all about it. I think they wanted me to shut up.. . When you first walk in you really enter a completely different world. The hostess had a wonderful smile on her face and seated us right away in a booth. Our waitress was amazing...explained everything in detail and offered up some great suggestions for me and my cutie pie of a dining companion.. . Within seconds of us being seated and getting our menus, we were presented with a black bean and chicken deal on a potato chip. Yum. Then we got bread and a plate of mussels with watermelon pico de gallo. I was really hesitant to eat the mussels as I never ate them before, but my DC told me to eat it and man, it was yummy! Next was the mojito flight, which I got to taste. Number 1 was a basic mojito and damn! that was AWESOME. Number 2 was a pomegranate and habanero  mojito that was very good. Number 3 was...I don't remember, but it tasted like peach and was the least favorite of the 3. If you get a mojito, go with an original mojito. You'll love it.. . Our appetizers were a ceviche sampler, all suggested by the waitress, and my DC ate all of it. Which was perfectly alright as I was not at all for eating ceviche. I ordered the sampler platter...BBQ Lamb, Chicken Empanada, Shrimp Adobado, and a Boniato and Plantain Croqueta. I love the croqueta and the empanada. I did not care for the BBQ Lamb and I didn't eat the Shrimp because I don't like shrimp. DC enjoyed what I did not want to eat and loved it.. . Our entrees we decided to order and split. We ordered the Roasted Organic Chicken and the Smoked Pork Adobado. Both were amazing dishes. The organic chicken had a superb citrus sauce and was a light dish. The pork was absolutely outstanding. The meat itself was flavorful and tender and the sauce and garnish left me wanting to lick the plate, but I didn't. I highly recommend either one of these dishes.. . Of course now it was time for dessert. But not before we were presented with a plate of homemade chocolate truffles. We both ordered the Cuatro Chocolates which I think needs to be renamed to Cuatro Deaths by Chocolate or Orgasm times 4. Chocolate sorbet on top of chocolate ice cream on top of flourless chocolate cake [which I am eating right now...we had leftovers and I brought them home!] and on the side a double shot of chocolate shake spiked with Kahlua. I don't like chocolate. This dessert was so good!. . I am really tempted to make a reservation again for tomorrow night to go back, even alone, to try more dishes out at a price I can afford. No matter what, I will be back. I already know I will be here for my birthday dinner...with a crown on...drinking mojitos...and Kahlua chocolate shakes...
