ReviewID: eT6V77dYreFY2ZKeapvmSg
ReviewerID: H4BiIX0gU-Fc2S487g7z1Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Veggie Grill
Category: Vegetarian
Is this seriously my 6th Yelp Review of @VeggieGrill? . . This is surely an indication of how much I love this place :) . . I recently had the chance to go to Veggie Grill again when I heard about an awesome offer they were doing for Earth Day. (A shout out and thanks is due to my Yelp buddy Michelle T for letting me know about this.:D) . . This year for Earth Day, Veggie Grill was giving one complimentary meal for each Veggie Grill Virgin (a.k.a folks who have never been to Veggie Grill before and have never had their oh so AWESOME food). . When I heard about this, I knew I had to partake in this event! It was my chance to introduce the wonderful menu of Veggie Grill to another friend. . . After work, I took one of my friends here at Veggie Grill. I recommended the Crispy Chickin sandwich with sweet potato fries for them. I in the meantime, decided to try the El Dorado. . . I recently found out about the El Dorado through Twitter. It is not on the main menu! I had to ask the awesome Co-CEO of Veggie Grill Kevin on Twitter and he told me that it is "The El Dorado? A double-secret item: V-cheeseburger, carmelized onions, thousand island &amp; jalapenos on a toasted whole wheat bun." That description sounded so delicious that I had to try it! I loved the reaction of the guy @ the counter when I ordered it. He said "Oooh secret menu." :). I chose cole slaw with my El Dorado sandwich since I've never tried it before. . . Here are my thoughts on my meal: . . The El Dorado sandwich is indeed very delicious! It's a bit on the spicy side because of the jalapenos. I loved the carmelized onions and the cheese that were there with the jalapenos. That added in a nice mix with the jalapenos. You will definitely need a napkin for this because it can get messy. . . It was my first time trying the cole slaw. It was OK but I really do prefer just switching my side with the sweet potato fries. (I just wish that we didn't have to add extra for the sweet potato fries). . . As for my friend, the Veggie Grill Virgin...well she liked the food. She was happy with my recommendation of the Crispy Chickin sandwich and she though the sweet potato fries were yummy. (Woohoo I have converted another to be a Veggie Grill fan!) . . Well, I shall end this review by saying thank you again to Michelle T. for letting me know about the Earth Day offering they had and thank you of course to Veggie Grill for making that Earth Day offer! I shall return again here sometime...definitely one my favorite places to eat...(hmm 6 reviews and counting ;)
