ReviewID: EtFSw2q5JfDs_BlsTn8ANg
ReviewerID: nLmmGIR2w_5dpD9NlGCFug
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
If you're gunning for the scenester route in L.A., you'll mostly find yourself in fairly upscale, dressed up hot spots where you dine on exotic stuff and run up $200 bar tabs. Mixed in with this, though, are a few little dive bars and restaurants where the novelty is how they're a little dirty, as it makes them feel a little unexpected and so "anti-Hollywood". The Griddle is one of these establishments.. . It's located on Sunset, east of Crescent Heights, meaning it's well into Hollywood territory, but still close enough to where visiting isn't entirely inconvenient. This mix also makes the crowd a little cool and ecentric - you'll see musicians, actors, producers and other creatives, as well as executives, agents and managers - nearly entirely young professional and definitely sexy. I've never been there when it wasn't beyond crowded with a line waiting outside for seating. The minute you step inside, it's instant chaos - cooks yelling, plates clanking and the buzz of people in various stages of conversation, wrapped up in an environment that feels a little grungy, a little artsy, part diner/part cool coffee shop. It's an interesting mix. The portions are ENORMOUS. People rave about the famous pumpkin pancakes.. . But, to be honest, this place kind of stresses me out. - the noise, grimy feel, tables mashed together. It's almost too much for something as simple as breakfast - especially after being out late the night before. The whole place is well run and well maintained but it doesn't ever really shake feeling a little too dirty - during our last visit, we sat on the sidewalk near the exterior wall and everybody was grossed out and wouldn't put their handbags anywhere but their lap. The food comes in abundance but you can tell the quality of the ingredients is very cheap. It'd be fine if it were at roadside diner prices, but for what you'll pay at Griddle, you can go elsewhere with better food and a more chill breakfast environment. . . I will say the staff is always really cool (even if the service is slow from it being so busy) and there's great parking behind the Rite Aid. If you go, have the pumpkin pancake. It's the best thing on the menu and more than likely a big reason why people keep going back to this restaurant.
