ReviewID: ETzeURPjZkUC3u3UazIw4g
ReviewerID: 9wAKLYO3uplQRBWnOFIB6A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
LoL haha... sometimes people just go to places for the wrong reasons. "Pinks is the bomb!" "Pinks is over rated" "Picks is not the best" in the end it all depends on if you a health freak or if you just don't care as long as you get a damn hot dog in ya. For me I just want to shove a double bacon polish cheese burger down my mouth and love every min. of it with out thinking of the Cal's and all that bull crap. I don't know what you're doing here if you don't like fatty stuff, but i do. I just want to be bad for one night with my friends and enjoy a damn hot dog and burger. What I find funny is when the lame ass people drive by and honk their horns and scream some weird crap that i don't understand. i just hear "-honk- you guys....." yeah, haha try slowing down. PAN-Z! scared i might just throw a hot dog at ya? huh? =P. . I don't know how good a hot dog can get, but i guess it's all up to your taste buds and what you order. The service is pretty cool. The parking lot guy remembers me every time i get there and trys to get me a spot as soon as possible. The line hey, i got all the time in the world at 1am in the morning. Where else am I going to go? My friends are with me already. I like comin' here because my friends and I are just weird. lol we enjoy our time, we could careless about the food even though the facted that we're being bad dieters comin' here. Sometimes you just gotta be bad and enjoy your time. The line anit that bad as long as you have good company. If your friend loves to complain i don't recommend bring him/her cause after hearing anyone complain for 15min straight yeah... you might just shove a hot dog in his or her mouth. but if you always have a great time with your friends bring um, it'll be a blast jokin' around in line. One time me and my friend put on those over size cowboy hats just for hell of it. It was great cause we just started talking to people in line. Hey they loved it, what? stupid as it may be who cares? enjoy your belly buster... =)
