ReviewID: eUjuqvXc5ld08OLqnKxr0g
ReviewerID: C0RkWAPYK58ms-BLBrFCVA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cemitas Puebla
Category: Mexican
See the food in video format:. . . http://www.youtube.com.... . . Since Cemitas Puebla was showcased on the Food Network show "Diners, Drive-In's &amp; Dives", this restaurant has been hotter than a hot tamale!  Foodies all over Chicago have been raving about this place so I decided to check it out myself.  I'm not really a huge fan of Mexican food in general - although it tastes good, I feel like it's all the same flavors just prepared in different ways. I heard that Cemitas are completely different than what I expect of Mexican food. I rang up my fellow foodie, Michelle E.  and off we went to engage in another fun filled adventure to Humbolt Park to seek out the famous cemitas.. . The restaurant is easy to miss with a non-distinct sign out front and a dingy interior.  I suppose that is why it was featured as a "dive".  The handsome young owner greeted us with a smile and offered to help in any way we needed.  Never satisfied with ordering just the Atomica - a three meat sandwich - all topped with their special sauce and chipotle;  we ordered a second dish, a taco arabe - just to taste it!  To wash it all down, we ordered two drinks, all homemade from scratch - Jamaica (Hibiscus Juice) and Orchata.. . First off - the Atomica is ginormous!  Definitely enough to share between two very hungry patrons.  This cemita consists of three types of meat nestled into a crispy, thick sesame bun.  Inside the sandwich is a butterflied  &amp; breaded porkchop, then a layer of carne Enchilada which is simply another butterflied porkchop marinated in Chili Guajillo.  The last meat is Jamon or ham.  All this is topped off with their homemade adobo chipotle pepper sauce (with most of the ingredients imported from Mexico), avocado, and fresh Oaxacan cheese.  The very first bite proved that this sandwich is deserving of all the attention. Personally, I love different textures and flavors coming together - this Atomica had everything from soft, crispy, chewying paired with creamy, spicy, tart and cheesy!    Next, we tried just one taco arabe and I believe this may be my new favorite taco.  It's called "arabe", or Arabian taco - marinated pork between layers of sweet onions, slow roasted on a slow spinning verticle spit and served in a middle eastern style pita.  This was so tasty and delicious!!. . This is street food from the land of Puebla and home of the mole sauce.  If you're looking for authentic regional food that tastes nothing like your typical Mexican fare, it is necessary to make a stop here to try this food!
