ReviewID: Eurj0rODuKunqv0SkrHFxw
ReviewerID: umtnfBLJA0_XO5e4VIVTTw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
I was easily 10 lb's heavier in high school than I am now... based solely on the fact that I worked as an ice cream scooper/ cake decorator at Baskin Robbins.  My love of all things Ice cream stems WAY back.  Because of this, I have wanted to go to MILK since my first time driving past on my way to Topper's for a less sinful treat.  . Today, my bf and I decided to stop in for a late lunch/ early dinner.  I ordered the Herb Roasted Chicken Breast Sandwich and my bf had the Roast Beef Sandwich.  We were both happy with our food.  My sandwich ~ roasted chicken breast, mozzarella cheese, portobello  mushrooms and pesto on a panini-style pressed ciabatta roll, was scrumptious.  The only thing that could've made it any better would've been the usual addition of fresh tomatoes.  However, seeing how we are in the midst of a tomato crisis... I gladly did without.  . I took a nibble of the boyfriends roast beef (wow, that sounds dirty) which was equally as yummy.. After finishing our meals, we opted to bring home the sugar snacks for a little late night indulgence. We ordered a pint of Coffee Toffee Crunch, a Moon Pie, and 2 Ooey Gooey Double Chocolate Chip Cookies. Needless to say, the treats didn't last us until the late night status.  We polished off the Moon Pie in the car on the ride home.  Moon pies will forever remind me of being a kid.  My mom put one in every brown bag lunch I ever took to school.  For that reason alone, I think I will always love them.  And this home-made version did not disappoint. . We just polished off the pint of ice cream and I think we made a wise choice.  It was DELICIOUS.  Along the lines of Ben and Jerry's Coffee Heath Bar Crunch ~ but creamier... if that's possible. . Last but certainly not least, and although I was feeling the intense need to purge (j.k)... we powered down one of the Ooey Gooey cookies. And wow.  That's all I can say. Melt-in- your- mouth-double-chocolate-heaven!. MILK will no doubt, be my new "I-could-be-PMS'ing-I-think-I-need-chocolate" place of indulgence.
