ReviewID: evdlnzImPCRI1oj_qItDgA
ReviewerID: 2ansbSUtJ9EIzIDhiPVMtw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
My first review is dedicated to Mastro's, one of my favorite restaurants serving the finest steaks. We have been loyal regulars of Mastro's since 2007, but I must admit to being a bit disappointed with the last couple of visits. The steaks are just not the same, and it's hard to describe this inconsistency I recently discovered. I am going to guess that something changed in the quality of the finest meats chosen for the restaurant. Regardless of the difference I've noticed, Mastro's will still hold the number place for serving the best prime steaks.. . Although we head to Mastro's Ocean Club in Newport Beach more often since it is closer to home, I still favor the steakhouse in Beverly Hills. The ambiance is breathtaking, and the food is mouthwatering. Prepare yourself for a truly phenomenal dining experience! Being escorted upstairs to your table always feels very fancy and exclusive, especially when you are greeted with the sound of live piano entertainment and stunned by the number of beautiful and glamorous people of LA gathered here for dinner on any given day of the week. Downstairs has its charm as well. I have dined in the bar area downstairs, and I really enjoyed people watching by the entrance door and the crowd action by the bar. Yes, make a reservation because you will likely wait 20 minutes even with one. You will probably need 20 minutes to nurse your first drink while waiting to be seated because the bartenders pour a mean cocktail.  . . Although everything on the menu is good, this is a place for steak! I have sampled a few fish dishes, but I'll go somewhere else for my seafood fix. Of course surf and turf is always a plus. The filet is good, but I find the bone in ribeye more bold and satisfying in flavor. Try your steaks topped "Oscar style". It's a lump crab béarnaise, which is pretty much a whole crab cake with rich sauce (the perfect "cherry on top") for your steak. The side dishes are to die for, but the winners would have to be the lobster mashed potatoes, Mastro's mashed potatoes, king crab gnocchi, and gorgonzola mac &amp; cheese. The Mastro's experience is incomplete without trying their signature warm butter cake. It's the perfect ending.
