ReviewID: evn00Lf6b6eJRbpkB1sMxQ
ReviewerID: Eqib4cOeyioI_27tf993sQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Magicians are hot!  . . You can do magic  (oh yes you can Mr Magician). You can have anything, that you desire (5 stars for you baby). Magic... (yes, give me more) and you know, . You're the one who can put out the fire (porque? me gusto fuego papi!!). . This place definitely deserves 5 stars (and I'm stingy with my stars), because only in America and only in LA can you find a place like this.  I have been wanting to check out the infamous Magic Castle for a long time now, and with a little magic conjured up by Kelly H, I had one of the best times in a house full of booze and mystery!. . Friends and I went on a Sunday night (day before MLK Monday) and it was a full house (haha, ok lame joke).  Ladies, be sure to wear comfortable shoes because you will be doing a lot of standing/walking and you might want to bring a shawl because it can get chilly in certain areas.  I recommend going with a member since they can explain the history of the place, fill you in on magician bios, and show you the secrets of the mansion without doing the whole tour thing.  It's easy to strike up conversation with anyone as guests and staff in the house are genuinely friendly (except the bartender in the main foyer who was being mr. meanface).  Like Judy H said, be sure to stand in line for one of the shows early enough so you don't miss out.  We got to see the performers: Lincoln, Pop Hayden, Eric Evans, Mystina, Christopher Hart, and Tom Ogden.  The shows were all entertaining and left you scratching your head on your way out.. . We didn't do the dinner, but from what I could see it looked like regular steakhouse style fare.  It smelled all right? *shrug*. But I did get to try their appetizers: potato wedges and onion rings, and those were pretty tasty.  Drinks are pricey at $12 for Grey Goose, so naturally I did what any vodka loving lady would do... I asked for it straight up :o). . Magic used to be dorky with overly exaggerated hang gestures, abracadabras, and pouffy haired assistants covered with sequins and feathers.  How times have changed!  These days magic is sexy and magicians are hotter!  I hope I will get another chance to visit the Magic Castle again... and maybe next time I'll get to work my hocus pocus on a cute magician? :: poof ::  *running away as a white rabbit*
