ReviewID: evP6oaM_3ayLhUHbkWbzdQ
ReviewerID: 3KK7L2Q6NMfJA1Ky4Ntmdg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
Okay, okay.  I don't even like Ramen, so why the hell am I giving this place 4 stars?  Well for one, I feel generous tonight :). . I came here for the first time with the boyfriend for dinner earlier tonight (again, another random Yelp search :]  We've been doing a lot of those; it's just fun to try out new places!) around 9:30 pm.  Parking was easy and there was only one table seated inside (it was Monday night, I wasn't surprised).  One of the employees saw us walking toward the restaurant, so she opened the door for us and welcomed us in.  There were about 3 other employees working the floor, including the sushi chef and they too, immediately made us feel welcome by greeting us in Japanese.. . Our waitress sat us down, gave us our menus, and immediately asked us what we wanted to drink.  She gave our waters quickly and took our orders efficiently and was very upbeat - like she was excited to take our orders.  The boyfriend and I both ordered the Hakata Ramen, where you have a choice of soft, medium, or hard noodles; high, regular, or low oil base; high, regular, or low soup flavor; and a bunch of toppings (for an extra price) such as extra pork, corn, shredded seaweed, etc.  I also liked how they ask if you want ginger and green onion in your soup, which I said both no to.. . Our ramen came very quickly and was actually pretty mediocre tasting.  It definitely tastes a lot more authentic than Ajisen Ramen though; and this was the FIRST TIME I've ever actually finished my soup!!  Usually I'll just eat the noodles and my boyfriend will finish the soup for me, but this time I actually wanted to - that must say something, right?  Oh, and the corn in my soup was so sweet, it was delicious.  We also ordered a plate of 12 piece Gyoza.  Those were whatever, I've had better at Maneki.. . As it got later, more and more people arrived, and soon the restaurant was full even though it was 10:30 pm and they close at 11:00 pm.  The fact that the staff is so friendly, welcoming, and upbeat is definitely a plus - and the main reason why I rate this restaurant 4 stars.  Would I come back?  Definitely, over Ajisen Ramen, any day.
