ReviewID: Ew4_qrrL71xLu3Ppqdskuw
ReviewerID: ZBLZIOrO3DZJzDFlFO-bJw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
How can you go wrong with a name like Cobras y Matadores? Sounds like the name for the next hit novela if you ask me. . . I've looked far and wide for a tapas place that was to my liking in the aftermath of my visit to Spain. . . SF has proved disappointing thus far and I'm happy to say my hometown (though saying LA is a town is a bit of a joke) of Los Angeles has the winner thus far. . . So many things were done right here. . . 1- It's loud. My memories of Spain involved me being really loud (as usual) and others being really loud. If you're tapas place is quiet, it's already dead in the water in my "vibe category". . . 2 - Outdoor seating. One of the things I loved about Spain was the ability to sit outside. While most of the restaurant is indoors there are a handful of tables outside for you to check out the scene on Beverly blvd. . . 3 - Mood. This would make for a pretty sexy date if you have a loud voice and like to share food. The place is BYOB so get wine at the store next door and let the magic happen. . . 4 - The crowd. The wait staff is very attractive. The patrons are  a cross section of attractive yuppies and hipster. Either way - good looking people everywhere. . . What am I forgetting? Oh yes, the food. . . I started with the patatas bravas, which are my favorite. They are spiced with paprika which was a nice touch. Very tasty. . . The bacon wrapped figs were DELICIOUS. You have to get these. . . I also had the skirt steak which was ok and didn't blow me away. For $18 was pretty expensive and a VERY small amount of meat. The winner with this plate was the corn with butter that came with it. It reminded me a lot of Los Angeles and all the guys selling street corn which I love. . . The churros and chocolate were very good. Larger than I expected based on my time in Spain but freshly made and very tasty.. . All in all the attractive wait staff were very attentive and friendly and we spent $45 and it was worth every cent.
