ReviewID: exrmy-XyZ4KXN2NUBYF65w
ReviewerID: v7LqyIJIYpBo8DBQH4vs0w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Katsu-Ya
Category: Sushi Bars
Having nothing to do on a Friday night, I asked a couple friends what they were up to and they were like "we're driving up to the Valley for sushi at a place where you have to wait an hour for a table."  I briefly considered pretending to remember some other pressing engagement, but that would have too rude (even by my standards), so I piled in the car and we sat in the trans-mountain traffic for an hour before arriving at a strip mall in Studio City.  Marvelous.. . Then, things began to get better.  True, there was a long wait, but we went next door to Firefly and got some drinks and sat on the lovely outdoor patio.  Nice.  My mood lifted and the time for the wait flew (as it always does when sipping on a Ketel-rocks).  . . Still, the venue did not recommend itself.  Small-ish, packed, and not well-air-conditioned, I felt claustrophobic as soon as we sat down.  But then:  the waitress brought over the whiteboard with specials, and I thought "hey this looks pretty good".  I pretty much let my friends do the ordering, and either they know just what to get or everything there is unbelievably awesome.  . . I can't remember a lot of the details because it was a blur of utter deliciousness, but the superstars were the hamachi carpaccio with yuzu pepper; yellowtail belly nigiri; halibut cheek; and crab + tuna cones.  I did not want to be full.  I did not want dinner to end.  To the waitress, I was like "Can you pump my stomach so I can keep eating?"  And she was like "no".  . . Good sake selection, too.  The rap is it's pricey, but for an unlimited, fantastic sushi bonanza, plus lots of booze, we all got out of there for $50 or so per person.  I don't consider that so bad, and it was well, well worth it (this coming from a sushi snob and someone who's very keyed into the price/value ratio).  . . Postscript: on the way out I mentioned that they should get a location closer into civilization, and my dinner companions were like "well, there is a location right by where we live (Grove-ish)".  But was I upset that they hauled me into Studio City to have the original (and, I'm told, less expensive) version of Katsu-ya?  Oh hell no.   I'd brave traffic and the crowds and the Valley all over again to repeat the experience.  It ruled.
