ReviewID: Exsa273lUO7pcCTkrt_GUQ
ReviewerID: 9IqLo4q-SseUKgOkAChEsQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Varsity
Category: Fast Food
The Varsity is literally a block away from my apartment. Yet despite its proximity to me, I have only eaten there 3 times in the 2 years that I have lived here. Simply put, with the prices that they charge, if this place wasn't a landmark, it would be out of business. . . That's not to say that the food here totally sucks. The chilli cheeseburger is satisfying in a super greasy, "I dont give an eff what this is going to do to my body when I wake up from my fat induced food coma.". . The fact that the first time I came here was with my 400 lb RA speaks volume to the clientele who regularly come to the varsity. As for the food, in my opinion, if your going to come here, you might as well say EFF YOU to your body and get the double chili cheeseburger and either a heavy dog or a chili cheese slaw dog. If your going to kill your body and stomach, you might as well do do it with a nuke. . . The double chilli cheeseburger is actually pretty good, the chili isn't super salty, though it could definitely have more of texture and flavor. It is VERY VERY messy. The Chili Slaw Dog was actually pretty unique. The cool  and soothing slaw provides a very nice contrast to the hot and spicy chili. The hotdog itself isn't anything special. Neither is the bun (though the Varsity custom orders their buns). . . When at the varsity, you should also get the Frosted Orange drink to help wash down that hotdog and cheeseburger which you just had. Its basically an orange creme milkshake. Not anything special if you have a 7-11 nearby. . . All in all, the food isn't bad enough to warrant a 1 star rating. In fact, if the prices they charged were a bit cheaper by like 50 cents (because you'll definitely have to eat more than just 1 burger or hotdog to get full), I might consider raising it another star.  Oh and the chili cheese fries aren't bad either. . . Oh and if your wondering, its famous because its the oldest and supposedly first drive in (like sonic's) in America. Oh, and you get to watch big screen TV while your eating if you eat indoors.
