ReviewID: EYliM2zBLM5OFvT-5K_jkA
ReviewerID: AHKSSaeYZ8h4nOXm5tyWzg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I'm quite late to the Kogi party, and in fact I half expected the crowds to have gone on to newer and hipper scenes, yet here we were standing in line with dozens of other lemmings. The roar of the crowd is deafening, lovers and haters yelling in equal volume like a food fight on Jerry Springer. . . Now that I've tasted it, I can understand both viewpoints. There is no doubt that early adopters were treated to something special. Marrying Korean food to Mexican fast food was a stroke of genius, partly because there are similarities that make the union work extremely well and for a few moments in time it was a taste no one had really had before. On the flip side, interesting as it is, it's not as revolutionary as it's been made out to be. It is however, still really really good.. . We ended up buying the truck, a lot of food mostly because we weren't sure if we'd bother waiting in line again. . . Short rib tacos and Spicy BBQ tacos were both good, though they essentially taste exactly like one would expect them to. Maybe that's where some people's disappointment comes from, they are what they are and nothing more. There is no magical ingredient that shoots the flavor into the stratosphere, it's just good tasty tacos with a slight twist. The size complaints are just silly, if you've ever eaten a real south of the border style taco, these are EXACTLY the same. Think King Taco size and you'll be fine. I vaguely preferred the Spicy BBQ, it was more flavorful and had some real pop to it.. . The Blackjack quesadilla was even better, my favorite of the night. Flour tortilla, cheese, a touch of kimchi and some very tasty cilantro sauce that brings it all together. . . Short Rib Burrito was good, but we were so full by that point that I barely tasted it. I think I'd try it again though, love the addition of egg and for some reason the short rib worked better in the context of the burrito.. . Completely unexpected but quite memorable was the Chocolate Tres Leches cake. It actually tasted nothing like any tres leche I've had, and I've had many but it was oh so good. The kind of moment that makes me want to go back and stand in line again. It's overpriced at $4 but I'd order it again in a heartbeat.. . So there we sat in our car, feeding spicy tacos to our baby girl who was hooting happily, gorging ourselves on funny street food and the forty minute wait seemed worthwhile. Kogi isn't for the masses really even though it's insanely popular. It's not for traditionalists, it's not for those with simple palates, it's not for people who are just following the trends.... if that's you then you'll likely be sorely disappointed. It's not overrated, it's every bit as good as . . Forget the buzz, sink your teeth into the meat and get lost in the joy of something uniquely Angeleno.. . Best Plates: Blackjack Quesadilla, Spicy BBQ Tacos, Short rib Tacos, Short Rib Burritos, Chocolate Tres Leches. . Food - A-. Ambience - B. Service - B. Value - B+
