ReviewID: eYrLqgtEONcLATEyMYkeRQ
ReviewerID: yST12Bf0obaS4gakA3fiKg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sotto Sotto Restaurant
Category: Italian
Hah Dio's review reminded me I needed to crank out a review on this place.  Let's do it.. . Ate here on the great snowstorm day, aka my bday.  I'd been meaning to try this place for a while, it was close, supposed to be good, we had a winner.  Mosied up to the bar without reservations.  Place was pretty damn empty, given it was a Sunday and Atlanta had been PARALYZED by the day's snow.  People tend to flip out when the white stuff falls, and today was no exception.. . Anyway... I didn't take notes like Naoya does.. so my memory may be a bit... hazy.  I think I had a bite of some salad.  Eh, I only really like the salads my mom makes.  I don't remember anything bad about this one.  Since it was my big day, I went for a first course size of a pasta as a starter.  Looking back at the menu online, I don't see what I had.  I think it was some sort of squash brown butter tortellini.  tasty.  better than Saba. which was the last place I had something like this.  yeah low  blow.  but maybe I'm just not a huge pasta person.  which is why I went for a real dish for the main.. . I had the whole fish for the main course.  something or other something white fish something.  It was done nicely.  with spinach and potatoes I think.  The weird part, as Dio mentioned, is when the server brings out the whole fish, and then proceeds to massacre it in front of you.  I was kind of horrified watching this dude mash up my fish.  Kind of gross.  My date had to turn away.  It was a bit of a trainwreck.  I suppose it's suppose to be a nice gesture, but I think I can fucking work on a whole fish myself.  I felt like an invalid, like after the server stripped the fish he was going to chew it for me and hand feed it.  I mean damn don't touch my food.. . Anyway, the fish, aside from being weirdly presented, was good.  I think I would get the dish again, but ask to work on it myself.  . . Finally, I had the chocolate soup for dessert.  I had heard about this legendary dish from reviews floating around.  It was aight.  I mean shit, it's chocolate and cream. What can go wrong?  They do put some crunchy things in there that are pretty good.  They're definitely not Kashi, which is good because I hate that shit.. . So, all in all, I thought the food was pretty tasty, but a little on the pricey side.  I think if you stick with the pasta, you can get out pretty reasonably.  I do like that the space is nice and cozy and the restaurant itself being in Inman Park is cool.  The bar area is nothing too crazy, but it's nice for people like me who like to crash.. . Final thoughts - I thought the food was pretty solid.  Definitely give it a shot.  I think the only thing that really ruined the evening for me was a couple of foodie douche bags that couldn't keep their douchery to a minimum.  Trying to sound all knowledgeable and worldly with their discussions about food, drink, random bullshit.  Bitch, sip your negrone and shut the FUCK up.  Or maybe order a real drink like a kettle and soda and try to blend in with us commoners.  Ok, so I'm on grey goose now, but whatever.  Speaking of which - $4 at Zaya for a greygoose and soda?  WTF!?  . . tangents ftw.
