ReviewID: eysnNU2mO_KNHehE4Z1djA
ReviewerID: NcIVAyjpdXVNomQej-bATA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
Joan's is one of those places that makes me look forward to someday having money.  The shelves were full of delectable goodies, the refrigerated cases held many kinds of delicious-looking salads and taboulehs and whatnot that I would've loved taking home.  The store is mostly white and metal, which makes it look and feel clean and bright and deli-like.  Classy: when we asked for a glass of tap water, we were given a fancy glass carafe with a metal top!  The patio out front with the large plaster cows is nice.  Having to actually leave the building and go around out back to use the restroom was odd.  Were I rating Joan's on Third overall, I'd give it a 4/5.. . But I'm not.  I'm rating the cupcakes, 'cause that's what I do.  The cupcakes were displayed prettily in tiers behind the glass and there were probably ten flavors or so.  We'd arrived at an odd time, so the line was short, but gave us time to ponder our choices.  We chose vanilla with vanilla frosting (always need to include the plainest in the judging), raspberry filled, and peanut butter/chocolate.. . The vanilla was ok, the cake was crumbly and dry, overall unremarkable.  The frosting didn't have a flavor other than sugar, it was very sweet.  The raspberry filled had the same unremarkable cake, but eaten with the jam inside, it was tons better.  The frosting was plentiful, pink and decorated with little pink curls of chocolate, and somewhat raspberry flavored.  The pb/chocolate had ganache icing - looked like it was dipped - and a peanut butter dollop that we were excited to find was the top of a peanut butter core.  The pb itself hadn't been made into a ridiculous sugary mess, it had obviously been sweetened, but you could still put it on a sandwich.  The chocolate cake was better and more moist than the vanilla, not overly sweet.  The chocolate frosting was gooey and delicious.  The pb/chocolate was the winner out of the three, but not something I would wait in long lines for.. . So yeah, cupcakes were decent but not OMFG.  Don't eat somewhere just 'cause celebrities do.
