ReviewID: EyVBz0IF-nSIooaoPk8kOg
ReviewerID: fP5-u5yZ683B0Mdd7Zjb6A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Father's Office needs to be reminded that it's a restaurant/bar, not a club. . . Food: The food is actually fairly good, but not as amazing as the price might suggest. My entree was the Office Burger (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) with some sweet potato fries (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). The burger is big enough to split with another person and they give you way too many yam fries. One cool thing about the burger is the bun; it's a sandwich roll so your food is oblong making for easy biting. I was irked that they asked me how I wanted my burger (medium) and then completely ignored what I said and brought out a bloody medium rare patty. The sweet potato fries are a bit too much... they're so sweet that after snacking for 10 minutes you feel nauseous. They should mix those with the shoestring potato fries for a better variety. One other annoyance is the false pretense of a full bar. They have all the equipment for mixed drinks up on the counter, but NO tequila/scotch/bourbon/gin/vodka/rum. This makes Toni angry. . . Atmosphere: It looks really exclusive as you approach the place because there's a bouncer and a very short line to get in. Once you're inside, the place actually does look like a "father's office" if your father is some sort of CEO of a Fortune 500 company. The collective basin sink by the bathrooms is enough to make you feel like you're in a higher tax bracket. Unfortunately, the seating is extremely limited and you'll probably have to wait and/or fight for a place to chomp. . . Service: So insanely slow. There's a zillion people behind the counter, but they spend most of their time fraternizing with customers who look more affluent. I wanted to slap someone several times for carrying themselves far too pretentiously. . . Synopsis: Not going to be waiting in line for an okay burger and soggy sweet potato fries again.
