ReviewID: EYwsmi1afY0ngOwg2Wm9OQ
ReviewerID: LFMxDJ5C-L81c-mFs2q4Jg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Uncommon Ground
Category: American (New)
I'll have to come back and try this place when it's not "earth hour" and when it's not so early in the evening that it's slammed with people that bring along their screaming babies and kids. Man it was like a day care center. I honestly did not enjoy my experience. Ok, so it was Earth Hour and I randomly walked in with the girlfriend for dinner at around 6 or 7 pm, I can't remember the exact time but it just happened to be at the start of this hour. The restaurant turned off the lights to comply with Earth Hour. Are you serious? Man, I could not see my menu and even worse I could barely see my food by the candle light when it came out. I ordered the crispy chicken. It was basically just a small, kind of dry chicken breast that had a slightly crisp layer of skin on top. I was expecting a couple of pieces of fried chicken or something but instead I got the one small chicken breast and a huge serving of red cabbage. It was all kind of bland. I can't tell you if the chicken was golden brown or whatever because they had the lights turned off for Earth Hour! I noticed some other people around us complaining about the lack of light so the waiters were actually standing over some tables with  flashlights so that people could see the menu, etc. Ridiculous. I mean, I get the whole save the environment deal and all but come on man. This is a restaurant where people are paying a lot of money for food. I'd like to see my food. And why are so many people bringing their babies and toddlers out to eat at rather pricey restaurants?! I complained about the lack of light in the place and our waitress just said, "oh, it's Earth Hour" and quickly walked off. I'd like to note that they did not turn the lights back on after the hour was over. Our bill was $78 for two. I never got a good look at my food and I had to listen to several tables with loud kids the whole time. I'll give it another shot someday but I'm going to make damned sure that it's not Earth Hour and I'll go late enough so that there aren't many kids in there. Two stars for the kick ass appetizer of muscles with chorizo.
