ReviewID: ezGS2CgGcAn6fPKHKimRrQ
ReviewerID: Zj8oIdKPUdMXUfrmwbqPug
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Wurst. Summer. Ever.. . So, after trying to sneak into an after-hours E3 party (not so easy...), we were left with a tough choice--go home to lick our wounds or see where the night takes us.  Natch, we see where the night takes us.  Hm, Hollywood ain't my scene...Wurstkuche it is.. . Giddy as an alcoholic schoolboy, the thought of gnarly sausages and plentiful beer was making my mouth water.  After a misguided journey around Little Tokyo and skid row, finally we arrive.  Having read about the place online, I was the most stoked for the Rattlesnake/Rabbit/Jalapeno sausage.  My friend, Chris ordered the Duck/Bacon sausage.  Both with grilled onions.  Now the beer...I could try my hand at a classy craft beer.  OOOOOOR I could spend five bucks and get a liter of PBR.  Yeah, the bar down the street from my house serves cans of PBR for $4 (shenanigans!).  This was a manmug as big as my goddamn head for $5.  Yes.. . So the Duck/Bacon comes out first, and we decide we're just gonna split the two down the middle to experience both.  Holy hell, man.  Okay, duck and bacon are pretty fatty meats (heh), and encased in a sausage, this fat meat in a sausage tube (heh) melted in my mouth after the soft pop of biting into a fresh sausage.  Noice.  On both sausages, it was the grainier mustard that did the trick.  Next up was the Rattlesnake/Rabbit/Jalapeno.  That was a great sausage as well, but a little tougher, and less overwhelmingly good than the Duck/Bacon.  . . The ambiance was nice.  I hear a lot about it being overrun by fixies and chrome bags, but this must've been an off-night since it was mostly pretty low-key folks and a some working-class dudez as well.  Meanwhile some mellow music was playing off some laptop, but not too loud as to drown out our conversation.  The beer selection was really nice, but a bit pricey, which is why I opted for quantity over quality.  And to be fair, I legitimately enjoy the taste of PBR.  So, a liter of PBR down, and a sausage filled belly.  Yeah, screw an E3 party, this was bliss.
