ReviewID: eZvF3F5PZkvAN7QYcWdofQ
ReviewerID: 7wE7vNlcZkMXz5mxMlCt4A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Luckie Food Lounge
Category: Lounges
Luckie is one of those places that's nice...but it simply doesn't know what it wants to be.  A sushi bar?  A sports bar? A club?. . We went on a Friday night, and the first thing that struck me was the big brothers standing outside in suits with earpieces.  My wife looked at me confused as we walked past.  They opened the door for us and nodded respectfuly...but all the time I'm wondering...why are you there?. . The girls up front were over-worked but cool and we were seated promptly.. . The food...hmmmm.  The menu is all over the place.  Sushi, seafood, regular American diner food, 'Mexican'...no focus whatsoever.  My wife ordered the sushi and I ordered a pork chop.  My meal wasn't horrible but it wasn't really good either.  In fact, I can't remember what it tasted like.  The sushi was ok but it was, like, breaded or something and that got tired really quickly.  The deserts were bland as well.. . The atmosphere is nice...it is loud, so I wouldn't recommend this spot for intimate or romantic intentions.  The restaurant is bathed (at the time, I understand) in blue light with a huge aquarium on one side of the building.  There are several large screens on the back walls that were playing random whatever until, suddenly, 'Cool It Now' by New Editions starts blaring from the speakers accompanied by the music video.  The crowd (especially the girls) responded with a lot of enthusiasm and that made it more palatable, since I really wasn't in the mood for throw-back R&amp;B which continued the rest of our stay.. . So, all in all, this is a fun place.  The only thing that stands out is the atmosphere...but, sometimes, that's all you need.  Oh, and uh, definitely check out the bathrooms.  Took me about 20 freakin' minutes to turn the sink on :-). . Oh, and Atlanta, please stop paying for parking.  Atlanta is not that dense (population wise) of a city yet that you have to pay for valet...park down on Luckie St and walk!. . Peace.
