ReviewID: f-OT4toxtKS2FNREBAiRfQ
ReviewerID: jcYa2MOwewGSfhBryjQxfQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
The big selling point for me here was the Indiana Jones angle. I mean, Indiana Jones' son runs a restaurant? I was pretty sure I'd have to evade some traps and punch out some nazis to get a table. That didn't turn out to be the case though.. . Instead, we got a seat at one of the cocktail tables very quickly, but the place was filling up even by 7pm, so I'd strongly recommend reservations. We both noted the crowd was sort of arty, but not extremely pretentious. It's like - you know how there's two parties, one for the on-screen talent and producers, and one for the techs and writers? It's like Ford's is the up-scale, trendy joint for the techs and writers. Which is, in my opinion, a good thing!. . We both started with a "Babylon' drink, which tasted like very sinful limeade, and had a kick like a French mule. The service was fairly good, though like any busy place in a rush, it was crowded and nothing happened too, too quickly. We started with a smoked trout grandade, which was creamy, warm and delicious, and served with garlic-bread toast. I had a brisket with garlic mashed potatoes and something that seemed a lot like broccoli raab, but probably wasn't. The brisket was very tender but seemed more like a yankee pot-roast than bbq. Not a bad thing, necessarily, of course. We also had a side of brussels sprouts with smoked bacon that was fantastic.. . For dessert I had a "Big Lebowski" (white russian) and creme brulee, and my date had a Mexican coffee. The creme brulee was doctrinaire, but then that's the point, isn't it? Actually it was quite cold, except for the caramelized top, which ... you know, is that how it's supposed to be? I'm not sure, but I don't think so. . . I'd give this one four stars, except at the end of the meal, the check was quite hefty, and I'm not sure the solid, comfort-food fare was quite worth the damage.
