ReviewID: f0tukAD7qSN1qyKFx2e13w
ReviewerID: XADjSbRA7arnvZyqin73xg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Yup: I did it.  I went to Cut.  . . I definitely enjoyed the bedazzled clientele, the various age combos of couples, and the fact that the vast majority of people, including myself, were wearing black.  Makes me want to go back wearing orange.. . Started out at Sidebar for a drink.  Had a Kir Royale with a little too much Kir and not enough Royale, but Bartender was nice enough to splash some more bubbly in there.  Despite the many people running around behind the bar, only one man seemed to be able to take orders and make drinks.  Everyone else cluelessly pointed at him if you wanted something...odd.. . Sooo, we get to the table, I gawk, and we sit in the sublimely comfy chairs.  All meals should be eated in those chairs.  The bread comes -- eat the pretzel bread! -- and Waiter Man comes over.  He espouses a barrage of cheesy jokes and cliches, brings over a tray of raw meat to walk us through the various patterns of marbelization, tells us that "Cut isn't an ordinary steakhouse because they also serve fish," and ends his spiel.  I laugh on the inside because, well, many steakhouses offer other things.  But if you go to a steakhouse and order chicken or fish, you're just kinda dumb.. . We start with the Kobe Sliders and the Squash Blossoms.  Both are eeeeeexcellent.  Those sliders were doused in the perfect amount of ketchup.  Big glass of wine and I could have stopped there.... . Until I saw my 8 oz. American Wagyu.  I eat steak every now and then but this steak let me look at meat in a whole new way, through a very expensive, diamond studded lens.  That was one HOT ASS STEAK.  Accompanied with creamed spinach -- they're a big fan of the tableside presentations here and Ted Allen from "Top Chef" would be amused -- some perfectly done onion rings, and awesome haircot verts with onions.  . . My only beef with the beef is that they don't give you a proper steak knife.  Thus, my hands slipped constantly trying to cut my tender piece of deliciousness.  A little bothersome: who doesn't give you a proper steak knife in a steak restaurant?. . Oh right: they also serve fish.. . Dessert included the absolutely awesome chocolate souffle and the white nectarine crumble, both of which were fantastic.  Then Wolfie followed it up with a tray of finger-sized desserts: a lemon bar, a Snickers-type thing, and a fudgy bar that was so rich I felt my aorta seize up.  . . Cut is fabulous.  You want to roll your eyes at just about everything -- the theater, the glitziness, the clientele, the snobbery -- but then you take a bite of Wagyu, you spear a green bean, cut open a squash blossom, and dig into a souffle, and you suspend all your misgivings and enjoy the good life.. . And today I'm back to eating turkey on dangerously close to being stale bread.
