ReviewID: f2Iud8RmmX6g2adR92_hGw
ReviewerID: M9CEFHagwh02jCAZ97jCQw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hamburger Mary&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
Decent place to eat and chill outside, wouldn't really want to eat inside unless perhaps I needed to get fired up for some roller derby battle.  . . The wife and I were thinking burgers were the call tonight and we wanted to eat outside.  Those were our two criteria.  So we strolled to Andersonville and were able to grab a table outside at HM's, which was fortunate b/c the music was cranked inside.   I'm sure some folks are fine with it, but we just wanted to relax a bit.  . . The food. Burgers were great.  And though I'm not usually this delicate, I actually   decided to go the fork and knife route with my 'Spicy Mary' [pepper jack cheese, pickles, red onion, tomato, some kind of sauce, lettuce - it was madness, but a tasty madness].  I am sure I looked like some kind of freak or Fauntleroy, but I just didn't feel like dealing with having sauce running down to my collar bone, but neither did I feel like passing up on that Spicy Mary, so I struck a little bit of compromise with my dignity.  I'm prepared to have my man card suspended - so be it.   Side note:  the slaw is pretty fine, too.. . On a menu featuring some pretty provocative items, my wife went with  the most salaciously named option:  the 'Guacamole B.J.'  B is for bacon, think the J might be for Pepper Jack.  I hope so.  Anyway, she liked it, too.  At least half of it.  The other half we ended up giving to a guy on the sidewalk of Clark St.  Yes, I gave half a Guacamole B.J. to a guy on Clark St.  And what of it?. . We also got the Popper's Tini, which is stuffed jalapenos and asiago cheese olives or something.  Jalapenos were mediocre, but the olives were a nice little somethin' different.  . . Service. Overall pretty good.  Seemed like they might be a little tired, exasperated, envious or a combination of all three as it was Pride weekend and if the table of geeked up over-laughers behind us was any indication, the servers surely had dealt with a few hundred folks whose energy and escapism levels would be hard to keep pace with all weekend long.. . Random note. Your bill comes tucked into a woman's shoe [a pump?  I don't know - see the photo].  Shtiky, maybe, but it kind of works here.
