ReviewID: F3RyIFvQAGnsO47gwWOKug
ReviewerID: tNUjGxh_pI5AtOpxvPb1Vw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
It's like my prayers were answered. An upscale place that serves all vegetarian food. I don't have to worry about getting served meat accidentally or order all sides to make a full "meal". . . My husband took me there for my birthday. We made reservations the day of and there wasn't any problem. But I would suggest making reservations. . . I think the decor is nice and clean. I love the little leaf shaped bread plates that wait for you on the table. The colors are all pleasing to the eye but I would knock off half a star for the close quarters in which we have to sit. You can hear what everyone around you is saying and you can practically eat off their plate if you wanted to. But please don't. . . I ordered the spring onion and green garlic soup with truffle cream for my first course. Delish! And the way they served it was fun! My truffle cream was in my bowl and then they poured the soup from a really interesting looking pot, it looked like a teapot but with a bigger spout. Anyhow, it was wonderful! And just the right amount. I don't see the problem with the portion size at all. The dishes were enough so I felt satisfied but not so much that I didn't have room for the following courses. I think we are so used to gianormous amounts of food, that we should really only be eating half of anyway, that we forget what a correct portion looks like. And I understand that it's pricey for "smaller" amounts of food. But you are paying for the chef's abilities to make unbelievably tasty and complex vegetarian dishes, not for quantity. I will always pick quality over quantity when it comes to food. Don't hoover it down, chew slowly to really experience every component. Do I sound like a snooty foodie? Maybe a little but I'm not! I just know it's more enjoyable if you chew your food. :0). . Then I had Crispy Potato Tots, Tomato jam, Osaka greens, with Mustard beurre blanc. Again, wonderful. And for my last savory dish, I ordered parmesan and sweet peas risotto with grilled ramps, and pea tendrils. LOVED it. Probably my favorite of the night. Again, a really nice sized portion. Obviously I wasn't stuffed to the brim, but I wasn't left starving either. . . And finally my dessert! They brought me two little puffed pastries with a candle and then I ordered the chocolate layer cake with peanut butter mousse,and banana malt ice cream and a nice triangle of peanut brittle.. . YUM. YUM. YUM. It was moist ( I hate that word in general, but I think someone else said when they had the chocolate cake it wasn't the m word, so I wanted to share what my piece was like!) and rich and it was basically two servings of cake on one plate. This I felt was almost too much food on a plate. But I won't complain when it's still quality and it's something chocolate. :0) I'm not stupid. Normally I don't like banana flavored things but the ice cream really complimented the rest of the dessert. Soooo gooood. I think that cake visits me in my dreams sometimes. . . Overall, very attentive and kind service, very efficient. We never felt rushed and truly enjoyed every minute. . . One word of advice to patrons- It is a dressy place. Please dress up a little. I guess, by the others I saw while we dined, that a tie and jacket isn't necessary, but it would be nice.Why can't there still be places where you get dressed up a bit? But if you don't want to do that, just don't come in sneakers and a windbreaker. And for that, I am mostly talking to you, tourists. Also please don't bring in your two year old unless they can behave. Why you would bring a toddler to a fancy restaurant that serves courses and "smaller" portions with NO kid menu, is beyond me. If you can't get a babysitter, wait it out till they are 5 years old and can sit still for more than 20 minutes. I'm sorry but a screaming child running up and down the restaurant sort of put a damper on my romantic birthday date. Call me crazy. . . Just some random advice that you didn't ask for! :0) . . Go to Green Zebra and enjoy a perfectly prepared meal with new flavors and combinations you are sure to love! Trust them, they are pretty good at what they do!
