ReviewID: F5M6U4lX9NOBWyVyBDkxWQ
ReviewerID: P250RtZhrW2eMDnfYS6B6Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I went here for dinner and drinks on a weeknight.  . . It's a very pretty place.  Decor is of an imaginative, classy, and sophisticatedly whimsical variety.  Yes, I'm asking you to picture such a thing, haha.  It's more quiet than most might be used to; the noise level is characteristic of a more upscale establishment (sans the ruckus of knuckleheads or uber-inebriated patrons) but not so much that it feels like you're dining in a library.  You won't want to go in slippers or a shirt that says "I'm with Stupid".  . . As soon as we were seated, the waiter was on us like tight leather.  He offered us drinks, asked us if it was our first time there, offered suggestions, and drink recommendations.  I ordered the signature Craft cocktail - a delightful concoction of champagne and grapefruit juice, if I'm not mistaken.  I had two of those babies.  He had...beer. . . For my main course, I ordered the Alaskan Halibut.  Delightful.  The skin was crisp to perfection and the meat was flaky, buttery goodness.  Of course that's all that comes with the order (save the plate) but when you're savoring each bite like I was, that's all you needed. The other order, I believe, was the Farm Chicken.  Didn't nab any of that, but he seemed to enjoy it for the most part.  . . Also, given the soft lighting and spacious arrangement of the tables (you won't ever feel like you're about to elbow or knee the next guy), Craft is an ideal place to have dinner AND stay for drinks comfortably.  While I don't advise you go after you've decided to tighten the purse strings, if you're looking for a very classy, high-brow spot to take a certain someone to impress (and are in a place where you can condone a slight slaughter of the wallet, if you will), consider this place.  There's also an outdoor patio area that would do you well should you find yourself on a quest to 'set the mood'.. . In sum, it's worth the 4 $'s you see above, but it will take each $.
