ReviewID: F6lNtK3-cdczul7ZXqNDUg
ReviewerID: 9IqLo4q-SseUKgOkAChEsQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lou Malnati&#39;s Pizzeria
Category: Pizza
Tip: You can actually call in your order ahead of time if your touristing in the area, and have them make it for you as you walk there.. . Lets just put it out there, I loved deep dish pizza. If given a choice, I would get deep dish over NY style pizza anytime (sorry NYC). However, my experience with deep dish has been limited to the national chain of UNO's.. . Lou Malnati's makes Uno's (the chain not the Chicago restaurant) look like an amateur in a pro boxing match. Not only is Malnati's a good pizza restaurant, based on their bruschetta (which I use to judge all Italian places), it's also a pretty decent Italian restaurant. . . The pizza itself was pretty big. My mom and I managed to put away a 12" medium sized pizza. For all those people who say 2 slices will fill you up for sure... well I;m sorry your wrong. My 5 foot tall mom could put away 2 slices easy (and that was after getting a big italian dip sandwich earlier) so if you can only put away 2 slices.... well you need to man up. We got the regular, which I think is sausage, peppers, onions and mushrooms. The ingredients were plentiful, like everyone says, because of the way they make the pizza, you get sausage in almost every bite. YUM. . Anyway, for the price, I thought the pizza was pretty big. it was bought out to us as soon as it was out the oven, with the cheese still sizzling. In fact, I would have preferred them to keep it in for a bit longer cuz I thought the center was a bit soggy. But just a bit. We got the  . Massive serving sizes, great pizza, good bruschetta (big portion too), good prices.. . And the best part for me? The crust. crunchy on the outside, soft on the inside with a great buttery flavor (I didn't even get the butter crust). It was like having a great breadstick built into your pizza.. . The bruschetta was huge and served fresh as evidenced by the crunchiness of the bread after we received it. Usually there are 6 slices of bruschetta for around 6 dollars, Lou Malnati's gives you 8 slices. WIN.The topping was chopped tomatoes with onions and a little bit of basil and Romano and Parmesan cheese. The tomatoes could have been more fresh, but they weren't overly soft.. . The dessert was a little bit disappointing. I got the individual sized ice cream pizza thing. the ice cream totally overwhelmed the pizza crust, and because the bowl is heated, that melted the ice cream as well. Sometimes, simpler is better.. . Overall, a pretty good deal. We ended up paying around 20 dollars for app, pizza, and dessert. The pizza and appetizer were great, but they were let down by the dessert. Oh, and microwaved pizza in the morning? awesome. (yes we ordered more)
