ReviewID: f6QFgsTDnAzYi3XDFcUOXQ
ReviewerID: eg-zW4NlXyaWsWAWWDWTrw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Eleven City Diner
Category: Diners
Eating at this restaurant was one of the worst experiences i have ever had, and you can pretty much blame 95% of it on the EXTREMELY obnoxious douche bag owner. The other 5% can be blamed on the mediocre over priced food and the fact that this place seems to think the Judaism is not a religion but a marketable commodity.. . I will start by explaining my comment about the owner. Not  only does this guy walk around the restaurant talking way too loud and bossing his staff around unnecessarily, but he also is constantly coming up to tables and talking to them for too long while they are trying to eat (classic arti buco move). Nothing is worse than having to talk to a hugely intense douche while you are trying to eat.. . Secondly while i was eating at the front window table i watched the owner as he stormed out of the restaurant and angrily approached my bicycle which was locked to a fence right outside the restaurant (there was construction going on at the time). I could see him pacing back and forth and throwing his hands in the air which greatly perplexed me. Then out of nowhere he picks up the back wheel of my bike, and jams it into the fence to the point where is was completely vertical on the fence. At this point i rushed out of my seat and confronted him at the door. When i asked him what we was doing, he said that he was angry that my bike was blocking the sidewalk (which it wasn't) and that he was worried about losing business from foot traffic.. . He did not apologize, he did not put my bike back, and he made no effort at all to correct the situation. When i finally de-mangled my bike from the fence my front rim was bent, and my handle bars were also slightly misaligned. When i went back in to confront him he was nowhere to be found and would not return my calls.. .  What kind of business owner destroys his customers property, then refuses to apologize? Not only is this man an obnoxious coward, but he clearly doesn't care about his customers. Needless to say i do not recommend ever going to this restaurant.. . Also, It is completely ridiculous that half the things on the menu are named after famous Jewish people. This is reminiscent of  gimmicky places that name their food after cartoon characters or famous musicians. In fact this is closer to something that you would find on a menu in Disney World or the Hard Rock Cafe rather than a Jewish diner. Why does this man feel the need to advertise the religion associated with his establishment so blatantly and obnoxiously? In new york (where there are real Jewish diners) they have no need to advertise their religion because you just know, and its not that important. What is important is the quality of the food, and customer satisfaction which 11 city diner fails miserably at delivering.. . Judaism is a religion and culture that has endured thousands and thousands of years of some of the roughest hardships known to mankind. Please Mr. owner, do not trivialize this tradition with gimmicks just so you can sell your mediocre over priced food.. . ok..i am done.
