ReviewID: fa_U4LPOlk-7HGARSDTcUQ
ReviewerID: J7-bv0iYXZXrhg7O3haBiA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zaya Mediterranean Cuisine
Category: Greek
Last night was my second night going there. My first time was also midweek. Got there about 6:30 and it was fairly quiet. by about 7:30 the tables were filling up. . . ATMOSPHERE: . Capable of hosting large parties, they have tables running along the outer wall which allows for half booth half chair. There are plenty of dividers between sections that create a cozy atmosphere. There is plenty of modern decor but not overdone as there is a lot of dark stained hardwood. The lighting was good. My only complaint was the fast techno music that was playing. It was not overly loud, just a bit too fast for the night and not want I want to listen to when I'm at a nice restaurant trying to relax. This is the ONLY REASON I did not give it a 5 STAR rating.. . FOOD &amp; DRINK:. Food was excellent. The first time I went, the owner was there, and he and my uncle know each other, so he brought out a nice sampling from the menu, everything we had was great. This last time, I went with a friend and just ordered a variety of appetizers. We had the Grape Leaves, the Tabbouleh, The Stuffed Kibbeh, Lamb Kabob, and Baba Ghanuj. All of it was great again. The wine was excellent and I suggest you must try one of the Lebanese wines. I've tried the Hochar 2002 and the Ksara 2003. Both went great with the lamb. For desert we had the Ashta, which was a perfect end to the meal. A good after dinner drink there is the Arak. It's a Syrian liquor that reminds me of Sambuka but not as strong. It goes great with the Ashta. . . SERVICE:. Service was great. Granted it was a slower night, the waitress was very helpful and attentive. I know mediterranean food fairly well so I did not get to test her knowledge but she did suggest the desert so kudos to her for that. . . OVERALL:. I would highly recommend this restaurant to anyone that loves Mediterranean food. It has a good balance of "traditionally safe" dishes for those that are not very adventurous, but I suggest that you explore the menu and try something new. I have not been disappointed yet.
