ReviewID: fai1aP9z7AZLnieA5N9wsw
ReviewerID: lgbZM9CNM98_vbttnPj3XQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Las Tablas Colombian Steakhouse
Category: Latin American
Everyone needs to stop going to Tango Sur and start going to La Tablas. (I may have just kicked myself in the pants for saying this because it's a hidden gem, but I like to share things that are great.). . First of all, it's BYOB (wine only). There is no corkage fee Mon-Wed and if you go online to their website, there is a coupon for free sangria. Use it...it's fantastic!. . Everytime I have been to Las Tablas I have always been seated right away. It never gets too crowded to where we have to wait. We started with the chicken empanadas and the pisao. Both were done perfectly. The fried plaintain chip in the pisao was unbelievable. I could sit down and eat an entire bag of those plain, without being topped with tender shredded beef and melted cheese!. . I usually get a combination plate when I go there. I've tried the skirt steak and shrimp and the skirt steak and chicken. The steak is phenomenal. Juicy and done perfectly, pink in the center, slathered in a chimichurri sauce that is thick and flavorful, not too spicy, perfect.. . It came with a baked potato and fried sweet plantains. The potato was dry and overcooked, but the plantains were again, delicious. . . I wasn't impressed with the shrimp. I found them underseasoned and overcooked. The chicken was well done...tender and light, with a garlic and white wine sauce that wasn't overpowering. . . I'm going back tonight and I'm going to try the grilled octopus and the carne asada. I will get back to you with my reviews on those! . . For my money, Las Tablas is so much better than Tango Sur. It's more intimate, you get better service and the food is just as good, if not better. Did I mention the free sangria?. . *UPDATE*: So last night I went with the Picada Columbiana and split it with my boyfriend. Let me give you a word of warning: this is a heaping plate of meat. You will not finish it, but you will savor ever moment trying to. . . Here's what's on the plate: Entrana steak, rib-eye steak, chicken, pork loin, chorizo, pork ribs, arepa, crunchy green plantains, sweet, creamy fried plantains, yuca and baked potato. . . Here's what I loved: the skirt steak. It was so tender, you could cut it with a fork. Perfectly cooked, delicious. The chicken was also in my top two. Moist and seasoned, flavorful. The homemade chorizo would be a close third, with the pork coming in last (too dry). The sweet plantains were fantastic as usual. A soft banan-ey, gooey, sweet end to the meal.. . Order the pisao for sure when you go. Its always been wonderful and perfectly crispy and melty. We had the chicken pisao this time. Mmmmm.. . Once again, Las Tablas delivered!
