ReviewID: fAnJQnAek4BF33gv3ZPvIA
ReviewerID: -OfZKIII5kmPGAguLbSDbw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Boy oh boy do I just love this restaurant! . . When I was a little kid, I would look forward to going to New York to visit my grandparents so I could go to the famous "Joe's Shanghai" in Flushing. A few years later, I moved to Manhattan to attend NYU (perhaps just for the dumplings). I'd make my weekly pilgrimage down to Pell street to eat a steamy order of my favorite Xiao Long Bao.. . Once back in California, a friend of mine sent me to Fin Tai Fung in Arcadia, knowing how much I love my soupdumplings. I made my first of many drives from the San Fernando Valley to Arcadia (32 miles) for my chinese meal. Yes, I must have done that drive about a dozen times now, JUST for my meal.. . Din Tai Fung is the ONLY place I have managed to find this type of cuisine along with Xiao Long Bao in the entire state of California. The quality of the menu items here are extremely high as well.. . While not as juicy or large as the Xiao Long Bao of Joe's Shanghai, Din Tai Fung's have a thinner and more delicate dough -- they feel more gentle and more delicate than their New York counterparts. At Din Tai Fung, I prefer the pork only dumplings, whereas in New York, I prefer the pork and crap dumplings. The crab in the ones at Din Tai Fung overwhelm the pork taste significantly.. . Another great menu item here is the spicy beef roast soup with noodles. I've seen a few other people eating this in the past and have loved it since. It is a unique soup and perfect for someone who likes a little bit of spice. Likewise, the fried rices here are much cleaner than any other chinese fried rice I've found; I think the absence of soy sauce is part of the reason for this.. . I've ordered many things here, and have loved everything with the exception of the sticky rice Shu Mai (go for the regular meat Shu Mai). The red bean dessert dumplings are good too when eaten in moderation. I don't like them anymore after I've eaten one or two.. . I will continue making my 32 mile one-way drive here for dumplings, they are THAT good and THAT unique. I suggest you do too.. . Keep in mind that the wait can be long (up to about 45 minutes), and they don't take reservations. Always be sure to ask about the wait at "the other restaurant," which has an identical menu and is literally located on the other side of the building. The food is equally good at both.. . Enjoy!
