ReviewID: fBGS_Edoo-G5dFvXJ-Yslg
ReviewerID: qKVLocEUZUvceYXkiFX9BQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Southern Sweets Bakery
Category: Bakeries
This is a cool little bakery off of Laredo near the DeKalb Farmer's Market.  I stopped in a while back and picked up a few slices of cake to try.  Unfortunately, my helpers backed out on me and left me with 3 huge slices of cake to contend with on my own. :(  It took a few days for the record. . . - German chocolate cake: This was my favorite.  The chocolate cake was good flavor-wise and the cake had bits of chocolate in it.  The traditional coconut/pecan icing was good, but there needed to be more of it.  In addition to the regular icing, there was a second chocolate icing that was really tasty and had maybe a hint of (Kahlua?) in it.  While it was great, there was maybe a little too much of that secondary icing though.  All in all, this was very good, but needed more of that standard German chocolate cake icing.  . . - Key lime pie cake: The concept was intriguing, but I wasn't feeling the execution - it really just didn't taste much like key lime pie at all.  The cake part is just regular cake.  For some reason, they put tons of shaved white chocolate on the outside of the cake which makes it way too sweet.  The only time you can even tell it's supposed to be like key lime pie is when you get some of the lime filling in between the layers - but it's so minimal that it doesn't really make much of an impact.  Overall, it was too sweet and not tart and limey enough to recall key lime pie.  . . - Caramel cake: I'm a huge fan of caramel cake, but I thought this was only ok.  I think the caramel cake at Piece of Cake is much better.  The caramel icing was decent, but nothing special.  And the cake...  . . My main problem with all of the cakes I tried was the texture of the cake itself - it was a little too dry and sponge-y/airy for my taste (I prefer a moister, denser texture).  It wasn't bad or anything, but it just wasn't totally in line with my taste.     . . Overall, I thought the cakes I tried were good but not amazing.  The slices were a little over $5 each, but I thought it was a decent value since they were large slices.  I think I'll be back to try a couple other types of cake and definitely some of their other offerings (pies, bars, cookies, etc).  . . 3.5
