ReviewID: fbpXl_dflfAR5LPuPEjdmg
ReviewerID: 1U9asD55YxdSXjgFfgeI4A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
The Kogi truck experience is kind of like going to Disneyland. Lots of hype and excitement the night before, a bit of fun in the middle, but ultimately you are left feeling exhausted and robbed after paying $5 for regular churros sprinkled with Disney magic.. . When you get that tweet telling you the Kogi truck will be in (or near) your neighborhood, you think, yeah!! Mythical Korean taco truck! This will be so awesome. You round up all of your friends and drive out to some sketchy street corner, where there are already tons of people waiting in line even though you are AN HOUR EARLY. You suffer through some guys trying to turn the whole thing into a bonding event by bringing their guitars and strumming Jason Mraz songs, but the wait in line is actually pretty fun because everyone is so excited.. Then! your heart begins to flutter as you see a big truck slowly driving towards you. It is the Kogi truck!! You watch in anticipation as the people prop open the side of the truck and slowly, slowly begin preparing to serve the now-massive line.. . End mood-building narrative.. . My friend said the Kogi Dog was pretty good, so I got that in addition to the short rib taco. I also bought an awesome Korean drink called Milkis that is actually not milk... it's this candy-like soda that tasted like heaven. Prices were a bit high - it was ~$9 for a meal served out of a truck, but I guess there is a big demand.. . The Kogi Dog turned out to be a hot dog drenched in vinegary shredded cabbage (sorry, I'm not well-versed in Korean food lingo). The cabbage soaked through the bun, causing it to fall apart, so I had a really hard time eating it.. . The short rib taco was good - it was like a regular street taco with a reasonable amount of cabbage mixed in, very easy to handle.. . I also tried the chicken burrito and kimchi quesadilla, which, like the other dishes, were Kogi-fied by the addition of the cabbage. Everything was extremely salty, so it's good to have water on hand.. . Hunting down the Kogi truck was worth it, if only for the experience. Service was fast once we got to the front, and the food itself was inoffensive, but it's not something I would readily seek out again.
