ReviewID: fbTzmyATorWhssP3dqisWQ
ReviewerID: 7KsXJ8MvU9VIG78W10s0SQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
Honestly, I was really disappointed by Blu Jam, especially after reading such rave reviews.. . The hostess at the door definitely did not appear friendly, nor were we greeted in a friendly manner.  Good thing we didn't have to wait TOO long (15-20 min), but then it was 1 pm after all.. . I ordered the Power House, which was one of the most disappointing dishes I've seen in front of me in a long time.  On the menu, it is described as "Four egg whites scrambled with spinach, topped with flamebroiled chicken breast and sautéed tomatoes and basil."  I'm not sure if they're using quail eggs here or what, but I'm used to making egg-white omelettes at home with only 3 egg whites (from normal-sized eggs, mind you) and those always turn out to be pretty sizable portions (as in 20 times more egg than what I saw on my plate at Blu Jam).  What I was served at Blu Jam was more along the lines of sauteed spinach sprinkled with some egg whites.  I honestly don't believe if I had picked out all the egg-white from my plate, that it would have amounted to even one-egg's worth.  How pathetic, right?  At least the two pieces of grilled chicken lying on top of the spinach (+ egg whites?) was decently-sized...except everything was basically sitting/soaking in the tomato basil broth.  Not too appetizing if I do say so myself.  Sorry I didn't have my camera on me that day because this was definitely a photo-op.. . My boy ordered the Morning Hash and also claimed it wasn't up to par =/.  I stole a bite, and yes, I agree it wasn't very tasty, and then it was STILL better than my Power House.  How sad.. . The organic non-fat latte (nice and hot too!) I ordered was the only factor keeping this place from slipping down to 1 star.  Oh and I suppose the prices were sort of reasonable given the location.. . If you want to have delicious, well-portioned, no-nonsense breakfast/brunch, I recommend you check out the Griddle Cafe (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ).  It's SO MUCH BETTER.  You won't regret it.
