ReviewID: Fd_hfndRqtp_q4I9Geds8A
ReviewerID: ZBDh6XD98hTp9_w0mLgCVw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Yelpers love tacos.  Yelpers love Korean BBQ.  Korean BBQ AND tacos together?  Could it really happen?  It has!. . Saturday night, after the AC/DC concert in Inglewood, Tim and I were hungry.  The $5 "super" hot dog at the Forum just didn't do it.  So, half deaf from the loudest concert we've been to in a while, the conversation went like this:. . Me: What do you want to eat?. T: What?. Me: WHAT DO YOU WANT TO EAT?  Will someone please answer that ringing phone?!?!?. T: I don't know, how about you?. Me: I read about this Korean BBQ taco truck on Yelp today.  Want to try that?. T: KBBQ taco truck?  Hells yeah!. (ok, I don't think he said hells yeah, but I know he was thinking it). . I couldn't remember the name of the truck, but I remembered the listed address was on Sunset and Ivar in Hollywood, so we headed over in that direction.  Once we got to the area, the only taco truck to be found was not this one.  We drove around a bit and couldn't find it.  After searching on his Blackberry, Tim finally found the page for Kogi.  He got to their website and we found out that they were in Westwood until midnight and then in Venice on Abbot Kinney from 12:30 until 2AM.  It was about close to midnight at that time and the conversation went like this:  . . Me: Want to go to Venice to find this truck?. T: If you want to.. Me:  Hells yeah!. . So, off to Venice we went.  We arrived in Venice about 12:20, turned right on Abbot Kinney and what do we see in the parking lot of The Brig club?  Kogi!  The one and only (that I know about) Korean BBQ taco truck in LA!  Their menu consists of tacos and burritos with your choice of four different meats: Korean short ribs, spicy pork, chicken or tofu.  The tacos come street taco style with two tortillas, meat, sesame-chili salsa roja, julienne romaine lettuce and cabbage tossed in Korean chili-soy vinaigrette, cilantro-green onion-lime relish, crushed sesame seeds, sea salt and garnished with lime wedge, orange wedge and red radish wedge.  The burritos are breakfast burrito style, with meat, hash browns, scrambled eggs, cheddar and jack cheeses, and the other fillers you get on the tacos.  Tacos are $2 each and burritos are $5.  According to their website, they sometimes have specials too, like Chicken Quesadilla w/ Sesame Leaf and Pomegranate, Vegan Sesame Taco w/ Asian Pear and Pomegranate, Korean pancakes and short rib sliders.  I don't know if there was a special tonight, I didn't see anything listed on the truck, but their normal tacos are special enough for me!. . To start out, I had 1 spicy pork taco, 1 chicken taco and 1 short rib taco.  The chicken taco was good, but nothing special.  A little plain, but still tasty.  The short rib taco was very good.  Nice size chunks of tender beef.  Solid!  Finally, my favorite taco was the spicy pork.  Great taste, a bit of spice and especially good with some lime squirted over it.  For round 2, I decided on one more spicy pork taco and another short rib taco.  I really liked the flavor the greens and sesame added to the tacos.  Very different (in a good way) from any other taco truck I've been to.. . The people there were very nice.  Apparently they've been open about 2 weeks and move around to a few different places throughout the evening and on certain days of the week.  Check their website to find out where they'll be and then go try it!  Trust me, it was worth the drive from Inglewood to Hollywood to Venice!
