ReviewID: fdft6wk5h_MBygy-7dIEZA
ReviewerID: JvnsKdVBj5AYckVxBB9vCQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Bagel Restaurant &amp; Deli
Category: Bakeries
This is THE place.  Seriously.  Born and raised in NYC on matzoh ball soup, knish, kasha varnishkas... you name it.  I recently moved to Chicago and was SO excited that The Bagel was close by but also apprehensive because, really, how good - better yet, how AUTHENTIC - could this place be?. . (Let me just tell you that I love being surprised!). . The matzoh ball soup is to die for, as I am sure other reviews have said (haven't read them yet).  You can order the soup with noodles, with the works, with a matzoh ball... I like mine with noodles AND a matzoh ball.  That's a filling meal right there.  They do their soups kettle style and you can tell.  They also have excellent corned beef sandwiches, and their kasha is pretty good too but a bit sweeter than I am used to, personally.. . The service is great and very speedy.  If you are hungry that's another reason to go for the soup. Since it's kettle-style it's served within a few minutes, piping hot.  Once you are seated, bread, toasted bagel crisps, and pickles are brought over immediately.  . . Our drinks never go below the halfway mark.  This is a huuuuge pet peeve of mine when I dine out.  When I'm thirsty, I'm thirsty.  But the service here is spot on.  Coffee is always hot and your mug is always fresh.. . Oh and they also serve Dr. Browns sodas which is a real treat and something that shows how truly authentic this place is.. . Desserts look amazing there too but I have yet to have any room left to try one.  I have also heard that the fried chicken dinner is top rate but I haven't ventured as far.. . Will update this after my next visit in which I am determined to try something new (except the matzoh ball, always have to have the matzoh ball soup!). . If you love kosher-style food I highly recommend this place.  Inexpensive, big portions, speedy service, friendly atmosphere - what more is there to want?
