ReviewID: FdGg4LBQQUONO98D4xVCWg
ReviewerID: EIbWDlpI3jCKBQlqaW-ZfQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Can somebody tell this Guy S. person to stop reviewing everything I review. Seriously, is he trying to BE ME? . . Anyways, after much much much much anticipation, I did it. I went here. I've been wanting to for a year, and yesterday I said I want to be strong. I want to wake up early and go to Griddle Cafe. Ohh Griddle Cafe, if starving children around the world could see you now.. . You see this is DEFINITELY a love-hate thing I have for Griddle Cafe. Breakfast is undeniably delicious, yet I'm wasting food and supporting an institution thats influencing an unnecessarily higher demand for food and supplies. In other words, our world is limited in its resources, and I hate hate hate skinny bitches who eat a bite of this shit and bounce.. . We came here at 8:30am and there wasn't a wait, nice. Now, I was dying to try the French Toast or even the pancakes. But, you see I just hate wasting food. I think about Africa, I get sad. So the choice would have been gain 14 lbs. or be (as I feel) personally irresponsible. So, I got the Baked Potato Omelette. And Guy got the banana nana nananana (there might be too many "nana"s in it, I was tired) pancakes. . . His pancakes were great. They really reminded me of banana pancakes that my mom makes arrr the time. Not to brag but, I could get that at 11am, no wait, and decent sized (as in, smaller). My omelette was good, except for the massive sour cream they amassed on it (again with the 14 lbs.). The potatoes were decent, the omelette itself, really good (minus the sourcream..srsly sour cream at that magnitude is just gross. Why didn't you just put a stick of butter on top of my fruit?). I got the fresh fruit side, which was bigger than most places' side of fresh fruit (which is NICE), and it came with a toast--which they almost forgot to give me, but thankfully didnt. It was buttery goodness.. . All in all, I'm not down for a wait, but if I'm feeling like a champ at 8am, I will be back for the french toast (I wonder if they do short stack on those). I will not be back here any later than 8 though, because the lines and the scene isn't worth it.
