ReviewID: fdnevGfmO9-Z1-q6YcoTQQ
ReviewerID: QG4woWg7xagorSImgjg3_w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Iberian Pig
Category: Spanish
We made our official "full" visit to Iberian Pig this weekend after having dropped in for dessert a few weeks ago.  I've had this one hiding out on my bookmarks for some time and I'm pleased to have finally made it in.. . This was one of those experiences where you truly feel like little could have been better.  From the outstanding, unique food to the amazing service experience i can't think of anything short of free back massages that would have enhanced my meal.  Our server Zach took time to explain each dish as it was placed in front of us and was attentive to all of our needs.  Owner Fred(erico) dropped by as well to be sure we were enjoying everything (i think it was my food-stalker picture taking that caught his attention).. . On to the food: . -Pork Cheek Tacos - yum, as expected. -Eggplant Fries - holy crap, eggplant fries!?. -Salchica 3 ways - 3 excellent sausages (maybe a tad dry on the lamb but the fennel and chorizo made up the difference).. -Baked Calamares - like calamari in tomato soup with dressing.  Seriously an explosion of flavor. -"Choose 3" - this was a mix and match meat/cheese plate that reminded me of Krog bar, only better, because there's legit food here too.. . I've now sat both downstairs and up but i don't think i have a preference.  Maybe sitting at one of the few booths would be the secret as it can get a little crowded on the four-tops downstairs.  Still, even when every table was full it was never loud, something i think we all could appreciate more i think.  Upstairs is smaller but also more spacious when it comes to seating.. . I think the beer selection, while a little short on selection, is well appointed in variety.  House wines are cleverly separated into groups by "Pretty Darn Good", "Quite Good", and "Damn Good", which elicited a chuckle from the missus and her mom.  Zach suggested that the "Pretty Darn Good" was damn good enough and we agreed and appreciated his honesty.. . Each of us ordered a dessert, and i have at this point had all 4 currently on the menu.  While not all are for my palate i have witnessed someone enjoy each and every one.. . We snuck out the door having paid just over $120 before tip, in my opinion quite reasonable given the excess of food and booze we devoured.  While I dare to suggest that we should expect (or demand!) such an experience each and every time we spend our hard earned money, i found our level of satisfaction was something i would have expected from a much more expensive restaurant.  Ironically, they'd do well to visit Iberian Pig to learn a thing or two.
