ReviewID: FDWH8gHIC7lmYs8Wx3dBtA
ReviewerID: 6kWAL8wWRAe17ARc78Ay9w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
There are times when you go out to dinner and the company makes the food seem that much better. And then there are times where the food is amazing, but your company sucks. And then there are those rare, magical outings where the stars and planets align and the sun blasts rays of light down from the heavens and birds sing and flowers bloom and the choir kicks in.. . That last one - the magical one - that was my night at Craft.. . My companions, Rodger R and Hana K, had spoken to me earlier about going out to Craft. When it finally was going to happen, I had no choice but say yes. I was dying to try the food, to have one of those great nights. I'm not ashamed to say I hyped the place up in my mind way before we went.. . When the hype is fulfilled, life is good.. . And life was good that night. Our amuse bouche, anchovy bruschetta, was devoid of that briny fishiness that sometimes overwhelms the senses when you dig into anchovies. It was the pefect way to start the night, and it was the signal to our group that things could only get better.. . Our first courses arrived next. I ordered the big eyed tuna with horseradish. The tuna's color was perfect, and the sharp tang of the horseradish made the dish totally awesome. Rodger ordered the duck egg with argretti and duck confit, which had a totally amazing balance of flavors, especially with the open yolk covering the other contents with creamy goodness. Hana's pork belly was the winner, though. Of the whole night, no less. I love porky things with a passion I normally reserve for things like my girlfriend and nerdy endeavors, so to have a truly delicious, crispy, moist and perfect size hunk of porky fatty goodness - ah, life was good. Cap off that with a half dozen fresh and tasty Kumamoto oysters, and I already ready to just go home content.. . Our second courses arrived. You know that Arnold documentary, Pumping Iron? Where he compares working out to constant orgasms? Yeah, that was the wagyu beef we ordered - every bite was skeet worthy. At rare plus temperature, the fatty marbling was able to totally shine through, and the superbly seasoned crust that accompained the searing of the meat highlighted the already buttery awesomeness of the beef. The aged sirloin made my own loins quiver and shake with its mighty flavors. The seared big eye tuna also rocked the house, a lovely take on the almost played out dish of seared tuna. It was better than most other restaurants can muster on even their best nights.. . I have to add that I'm just not a dessert guy. However, I found the perfect dessert for a dude like myself - olive oil gelato. Subtle, delicately sweet, with the added texture of crumbled gingerbread to really bring all the flavors home - good times. My companion's desserts also looked great, and the little tiny slivers that I tried seemed pretty darn impressive. I also appreciated the dessert amuse of cucumber sorbet with melon. . . The service was impeccable, and the company was even better. I had just as much fun nutting over the flavors in my mouth (fuck, that sounds so wrong...but so right) as I did just spending time with the two best friends I've made on this site. Eating, drinking, talking shit, laughing, and just generally enjoying each other's company - this is why I love my life right now.
