ReviewID: Fe45FWjo2tiTWIFK6q670Q
ReviewerID: 5mijkhM0Z6mKY2TxqgF9XQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
What, another four star review from me! I mean I never give four stars ever, ever, ever...OK, so like a LOT! However, Comme Ca was perfect in every way, apart from one way .Hence it loses a star. It was wrong in the way that so many yelpers have written below .It was wrong, because it was LOUD and I mean LOUD in the way that my man had to shout over the table and loud in the way that we had conversations like this:Me: " I really like my duck!" Him: " Why don't you give a f*ck?!" Me: No, not f*ck, I said DUCK" and so on... . . However, everything else was sublime. The decor is fantastic! Dark wood, tiny little chairs and tables (I am a fan of tiny tables). Its an intimate space and has a laid back but glamorous feel, so is so so so..me! The food was good. The man had the pumpkin soup, which he said was "delicious", I had the onion soup, which was nice, but a little heavy for my little stomache.It has lots of bread and cheese in it, so don't go for that if you are looking for soup as a 'light' alternative. For our entrees, the man had the sea bass special, which was a full fish complete with head and tail.Just the look of it ,with its cooked eyes, was enough to make me gag, but again he said it was 'delicious'. I had the 'off menu', steak frites. People who have been here before, are reading this going 'No, the steak frites is ON the menu'. Well darlings, the steak frites YOU ate IS on the menu, BUT the aged for 21 days, shipped in from New York, does a little dance for you at the table before you eat it, steak that I had, was an off menu item.It was fantastic! I had it medium rare and it melted in my mouth!The very cute and attentive male server, told me that when he ate that steak he smiled for a week afterwards and I just thought 'sweetheart, if that made you smile well you should ..." The fries were OK, but nothing special. The garlic mayonnaise was yum!The man tasted my steak and said it was 'delicious'. We didn't have dessert. We were both as stuffed as Thanksgiving turkeys at this point at decided to waddle our way home. Would I go back to Comme Ca? Definitely! Thisplace made me feel even more of a star, its just that next time I would sit at the back, where it looks like it could be less noisy and  maybe take some girl friends with me to ogle the eye candy!
