ReviewID: feKP6HW4d-ogADcVXVRCDA
ReviewerID: AbMVAxBE-ZtEYYQDHB5B0g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
So I am sitting here thinking about the smell of the pancakes I ate today at 11:30am, and it's now 1:50am. Holy Cow, did they smell so goo. Never in my life had I smelled something so sweet and heavenly.  You have no idea how long I've waited to come to this place, it has been MONTHS! I wanted to save it as the "special breakfast" to have for my boyfriend's birthday--so worth it, so perfect.. . Let me just say I was afraid my pancakes wouldn't come with whip cream and powdered sugar as it was not listed so, and they sure did :)--so does that mean they are all? Perfect, perfect. I mean, Perfect.. . I got the "Hear me Roar" only because I am so not a fan of chocolate pancakes--and that seemed to be the theme in this pancake menu--and to be honest I was expecting to be disappointed. Holy Cow was I wrong, this was better than a Strawberry Shortcake! Let me just say that I am the queeeeen of "drenching it in syrup", but this doesn't even need syrup--yeah, I said! It's so good on it's own! Still, I tried the syrup--because I love syrup :) And it was good, nothing mind-blowing, just perfect, sweet maple-syrup. Still, I ate most of the pancake by itself because it just didn't need any syrup, and I wanted to appreciate the taste--plus the fabulous whip cream more than moistened it, and it is BY THE WAY the best whip cream that I've had in my life! UGH, so good! I can't wait to go back for my birthday--I'm reserving this as my "special" place.. . I'm a pancake snob, and for the most part I mostly just liked[loved] my own, but this place takes the trophy.  I just cannot explain to you all of the deliciousness--and oh my god do you want to just stare at people's food at this place!. . The staff is friendly, and the waiters all look trendy/hip and what not. The place looks like a diner on tv, and they play cartoons. I went on  a Thursday morning expecting to find it empty, and it was still busy and full!. . I asked for only 2 pancakes (thank you, Yelpers), and they knocked off $3, but then the waitress tricked me into buying a $5 dollar maple-turkey sausage that was good, but unnecessary. I was caught off guard.  The $5 orange juice just isn't worth it...yes, it is fresh-squeezed, but it's not exactly good-tasting or anything. (by the way, it's not that big--just the same size as all the cups, so don't let the shape-cups in the pictures fool you) I may just stick to the cold iced-water that they serve next time.. . My boyfriend ordered the Caballero and said he was disappointed in it, and oh so jealous of my pancakes. He said he wouldn't order it again...because it was a more "healthy" option--how a burrito stuffed with eggs could be the healthy option, I don't know. But anyway, it wasn't exactly ginourmous or anything, but it was more than enough of a serving to make you full. I did try it, and it was spicy (yummily, not overwhelmingly), but he is right in that it was bland--it's "the Simple Man's meal. But really, I'd just stick to regular breakfast here. LOVE IT. . Do you hear me? LOVED it.. . The service wasn't super fast, as some of you have listed here, but I don't care...I will wait anything for these amazing pancakes--next time I will just order one. OH MY GOD, SO GOOD.
