ReviewID: fEOHZqA5hXRr86mPyZQsug
ReviewerID: xCI1KQEdvNx1-CbILPrxkQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Los Nopales
Category: Mexican
I decided to eat at Los Nopales recently due to a combination of inclimate weather and the recent installment of the Urban Spoon application on my iPhone.  Needless to say, I was pleasantly surprised by the overall food quality and comfortable dining experience for such a small restaurant.. . The size of the restaurant cannot be overemphasized, as after we sat down, all of the remaining tables filled up at an alarming pace, leaving future patrons waiting outside in the cold.  Therefore, be wary upon approaching this establishment at the usual dinner hours.  I would estimate that Los Nopales contains approximately 10-15 tables, which are often occupied by various hipsters and proverbial Lincoln Square families consisting of greying templed fathers, Obama volunteering mothers, and small, organic clothing wearing children of various ages.. . The "wait staff" seems to consist of one extremely pleasant woman, with various family members helping out as needed.  One of the more interesting aspects involves the two salsas presented upon arrival.  Both salsas (red and green) appear to be blended with guacamole, and have a very smooth and creamy consistency, with the red predictably being more spicy than the green.  I have honestly never had complimentary chips and salsa quite like this, which was a pleasant surprise.. . Our meals consisted of a roasted veggie plate for my companion, and fish tacos for your humble narrator.  My companion had rave reviews for her meal, which included cactus, red peppers and an assortment of other fine vegetables.  My tacos, which contained grilled tilapia, avocado and pico, while quite delicious, were incredibly small and left me craving more.  My suggestion would be to order these tacos as an appetizer and not as a dinner.. . For dessert, we went with the standard fried ice cream, which was quite good as well. However, it took a very long time to receive said dessert, which was a tad frustrating.. . Overall, I would definitely recommend this place for someone who enjoys good Mexican food at a reasonable price.  Also keep in mind that no alcohol is served, but there is a BYOB policy that includes a modest cork fee.
