ReviewID: Ff2bxlV4dtm0m_lYNsoAJA
ReviewerID: UJLawpwU6o-JXjLP4ffVLg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I'm sticking to my guns...I HATE this restaurant. . . My husband convinced me that we should give this restaurant another try...it's Mario Batalli's place for goodness sake! So, we were able to get a reservation (easy breezy compared to last time) and was excited to try out the food again. The way my hubby convinced me to go again was by saying the last time we didn't "go all out" and missed out on some great dishes. Well, this time, we went all out ($200 dollars worth) and was equally and maybe even more disappointed than the first time. I knew my palate was correct from the start. . . Here is what we ordered ( 1- 5*, 1 being bad) . . Prosciutto di Parma &amp; pomegranate + persimmon (2) . Mozzarella tasting (4) . Linguine (1) . Monkfish (2) . Beef Brasato (2) . pink &amp; red wines (4) . . Get the mozzarella tasting. Just the mozzarella from Italy is good enough. The plate was not as great as I thought it would be but the bread it came with was really good. The wines paired with our dishes were good. Very smooth, not too sweet or dry. . . The prosciutto di parma, monkfish, beef brasato was mediocre! For the price, I was expecting much superior foods. I could have gotten these dishes at a local restaurant in Montrose. The beef brasato was soooo tender, the beef was mushy. I'm a texture girl, I hated it. Plus, it was way too sweet for me...and I love love love sweet stuff.  The monkfish at Roy's is way better. The prosciutto was just too "pork" tasting for me. My hubby did enjoy the prosciutto though. . . The worst dish, the linguine. First, the noodles are served "al dente," which I hate. Second, it was soooo spicy, I thought my lips were triple the size after eating a fork full! I just don't understand why the linguine had to be sooo spicy?!?!?! Third, and the worst...the clams had rocks in them. Hello Mozza, please wash your shell fish a bit better, please. . . I was so pissed and disappointed with the entire evening, I refused to see the dessert menu. I'm sure I would have been disappointed anyway. . . Oh yeah, to top it all off, valet is $10 after 5 p.m. That is just ridiculous! Plus, we waited at least 15 minutes in the freezing cold for our darn car! I will never, ever, ever go to Osteria Mozza ever again.
