ReviewID: ffW8aiSkvUKcWoyaZU8r9Q
ReviewerID: mjiR9DJ6lKdIvv_C31cylw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
I was really tempted to return to Spacca Napoli tonight, even though I just ate dinner their last night; it's that good. But let's get the "why this isn't a five-star review" tidbits out of the way first, though, shall we? It's always much better to end with a bang. First of all, climate control, or lack there of. I know that it was really friggin' cold last night, especially for the end of May, but the restaurant had this arctic draft blowing across it, except for two brief moments when the brick oven's 900 degree heat wave became way too apparent, and the air smelled burnt. Hours later, when I was still relishing the prosciutto, the tiramisu, the crust, my core body temperature was still below normal. Secondly, the waitstaff was brusque; our server did not smile once. I guess I expect at least a little warmth from Italian restaurants. . . But, ah, there is so much to love about this place, even if my druthers require a sweater and a smile! Walking into the space is like walking into Naples. I have never even been to Italy, much less Naples, but Spacca Napoli has a downright foreign feeling to it. I have never gotten the "we're not in the U.S. anymore" vibe from non-Devon Avenue restaurant before. With a great deal of the menu in Italian , red wine served in juice-like glasses, and four Italian bieres and espresso only, this place smacks of Euro-authenticity. The "Vero Pizza" banner  sealed the deal. Apparently, this is the only restaurant in the United States to belong to this exclusive Italian restaurant association, in addition to winning the "True Pizza" award at a competition which is held each year in May. And perhaps our server's cool attitude was really one of genuine jejune. After all, who among us has had an enthusiastic server over on the Continent? Pas moi! The service was precise and punctual, which is what really matters anyway. . . We began our meal with the buffalo mozzarella and prosciutto platter. When the astronomer Galileo sent his daughter, who was living in a convent, mozzarella cheese, he called it a "buffalo's egg." The mozzarella that arrived on our platter was accurately the size of an egg, if buffaloes actually laid them! It was artfully cut into so that a slice of prosciutto bloomed from its center. Two large slices of prosciutto framed the ball of mozzarella, and the whole arrangement was drizzled with olive oil and garnished with pungent basil leaves. It was accompanied by five thin slices of baguette, also drizzled with olive oil. The cheese was so creamy and fresh,  the prosciutto was perfectly salty and smoky...it was heavenly. . . Next came our pizza. Spacca Napoli offers about 12 pizzas and 3 special pizzas, all with simple, variation on a theme-type toppings. For the neophytes: 'bianca' pizza does not have any tomatoes. The pizzas that include tomatoes still do not have a true sauce, more like juicy pockets of tomato goodness. My boyfriend and I decided upon the Funghi e Salsicca, mushroom and sausage. I'm guessing that 'fior di latte mozzarella is not made from water buffalo milk, but it was still delicious.  While the toppings were fresh and flavorful, the crust was the real showstopper. "The charred bits taste like those I would expect from a steak," my boyfriend declared. . . Next came our dessert, a creamy, appropriately rich, marsala-wined moistened but not too sweet tiramisu. Mmm! Washed down with thimbles full of sharp espresso, and the evening was a success. A bitterly cold one, but still a success. I mean, where in this city can two enjoy wine, antipasti, pizza, dessert, and espresso for $50? As the Carter Family sang, "Keep on the Sunny Side, always on the Sunny Side." . . When I can enjoy my meal in the warmth of the summer night in their outdoor seating, I will certainly return.
