ReviewID: fh9DqvRdWsodA3YFIR2x2Q
ReviewerID: qy2mk6METDMN3xd158aliA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
This has got to be the most reviewed burger in America!  For that reason alone, I will start with the bartenders.. . I love the bartenders at Father's Office in Culver City.  My favorites are Mike and Ariana.  The others are all perfectly lovely, I have bias.  I have been a fan of Mike dating back to his Bandera days in West Los Angeles.  He is always a gentleman, efficient, welcoming and crazy knowledgeable about beer!  I like to ask for descriptions merely to showcase the breadth of his knowledge; It boggles the mind.  Ariana is equally as knowledgeable and she is a Patriots fan, so she gets extra snaps!  I know I just lost some readers there, get over it.  I went in to watch the playoff games a couple of weeks ago and Ariana was working.  I asked her to hook me up with something (they also serve wine) to compliment each course I ordered.  I started with Malpeque Oysters and she suggested a beer!  Horror!  S8zon, or some crazy spelling, from Chico, CA (I think).  The owner of FO collaborated on the beer, and it was delicious!  The oysters were yummy too, especially the Ponzu Gastrique; a very nice departure from the classic mignonette, which was also served.  Recovering from a cold and craving protein, I opted for the steak poivre with frites.  Again, I asked Ariana to pair the beer with the steak.  She suggested Scaldis Noel, a seasonal beer.  I loved it!  To wrap up the day, I was there for 2 games; Ariana hooked me up with an Abbey Grand Cru.  What a meal and what incredible knowledge!  . . I treated my friend's husband to football and burgers last weekend; I was paying off my debt to him for helping carry a 500 lbs. coffee table I purchased at H.D. Buttercup months earlier.  No joke, it is a wonder he talks to me.  Anyway, we were burger bound!  We watched the Ravens get pounded by the Steelers while enjoying Malpeque Oysters with S8zon (I am a creature of habit and good pairings).  Mike served us for the first half of the game and recommended we try Bear Republic Red Rocket with our burgers and fries; Success, a great pairing indeed.  Now, for the burger; I have indulged myself on many an occasion.  I like the burger; I don't think it warrants the attention it gets.  First off, burgers are a very personal culinary delight.  Much like wanting to choose my own toppings on a pizza or frozen yogurt, I want options for my burger.  I have to be in the mood for the FO burger because substitutions are not an option.  The quality of the meat is always high and I enjoy the nutty flavor leant by the arugula.  The caramelized onions and Roquefort reduction sauce (I think this is correct) are a bit messy, yet yummy.  I am not a fan of the bun.  On more than one occasion it has arrived tasting and feeling a little on the dry side.  I am a big fan of the skinny fry and enjoy them every time I order the burger.  So, due to the lack of options on the burger, I have to say it is good, not great.  To round off the evening, I tried the Hitachino Classic.  Now this is an interesting beer with wine like characteristics.  The beer is aged in a cedar cask and gives off the scent when you take in the nose.  Although not an everyday beer in my opinion, definitely with a spin!. . Finally, let's get to the newish space.  I believe FO has been here over a year now, rendering it newish.  The bar is spectacular!  Solid wood and shiny, shiny!  I love sitting at the far end and gazing straight down.  The space is very open, with a wall of glass doors leading to the generous patio.  . . All in all, this is a very comfortable spot to go with a group of friends or on your own.  I stop in en route home from the airport on occasion.  Whenever I show up solo, I always meet interesting people and the staff takes excellent care of me.
