ReviewID: FhooS41sq9wfLmg-zIob6w
ReviewerID: 2sMRoBEndp8rNFjfihaz3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Ahhhhhh, those tiny little bags of steamed dumplings can bring so much happiness..... . One fine Sunday morning my friends and I drove west to go snowboarding by driving 2 hours from West LA, only  to find out the lifts at the resort were not operating due to this naaaasty gusts blowing at 50mph.  Broken hearted, we started driving back home, but we knew we couldn't just go back to our place and go on with our Sunday afternoon life of getting ready for work in the morning.  We had to do something.  Something to cheer us up, something to satisfy our adventurous minds and oh, something to fill our empty stomach for Buddha's sake!. So, what do we do? Go to this Dumpling place that everybody in Yelp community seems to be raving about! After all, we were driving by the neighborhood of REAL Chinese food! (which doesn't exsit in West LA). . So here it goes.. The Place/Ambiance: Clean!!! I mean, this place was spotless.  no dust collecting on plants/vases.  This is very important for me.  It is a big dining room where as many tables are crammed in, but still manages to look open and airy.  Everything is run in a very organized manner; you mark your orders on the sheet they give you, they come and take it away, they bring your food out, you enjoy them, and when you are finished they take the empty pot away.  Even though we don't speak a word of Chinese, the system is simple and easy enough for us to feel comfortable. . . The Dumplings: I don't think I can add anything new to what others have described.  They are these steaming hot dumplings filled with sausages of your choice and the juice that comes out of the sausage during steaming process.  It was a bit hard to eat them, as I bite into one the hot and steamy juice rushes out spilling over the edge of your spoon, but once I got a hang of it (there's even an instruction on the chopstick holder on how to eat them ),  they were delightful to eat!. Pork dumplings were really juicy and perfectly cooked, but the ones with crab meat were not my favorite.  They tasted fishy to me.  Next time I would stick to pork dumplings and shrimp shao-mai, which were also very good.. . Other stuff: Green beans!!!!   I don't know how they cook them (somebody tell me how to make this dish!!), but they might be the most memorable of all for me.  Tender and crunchy, just perfectly cooked green beans are one of my favorite foods, and they had them perfect.  ummmm, I could go back there just for them.  They also had broccoli on menu and some tables had them.  They looked very yummy too.  We also had Hot/Spicy Beef soup.  Good stuff, but not for me. I liked the tender chunks of beef in it,  but it had a hint of Star Anise, which I am not a big fan of.  . . The Service: Non-existent.....in a very good way!! The restaurant is run so systematically that everything you need appears on your table without you noticing! There are many wait staff who are walking around the floor, and when they spot an empty pot they take it away.  If you wanted to order more, you flag someone over and they'll take your order.  In fact, they move so fast it almost feels like you are in some sort of assembly line.  If you are looking for welcoming, warm personal attention from a restaurant, this place might not be it.  . But for this Dumpling house, I think it works perfectly, and I really enjoyed their quick service and their yummy food. . . The Miscellaneous: Their bathroom was clean and nice!  I don't know many Chinese restaurant that have a beautiful bathroom, but this one scores big!! Pleasant bathroom is such a nice thing. . . Overall, we loved this place!! If it wasn't an hour and a half drive away, I would come eat here every weekend! . When can we have a place like this in West LA?
