ReviewID: fI52oPM5iFjEHlEEqawmeA
ReviewerID: gWIG32KTNkh3hubHihMUDA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Johnnie&#39;s Pastrami Restaurant
Category: American (Traditional)
This is a decent pastrami sandwich. The most unfortunate thing is that this is probably one of the better pastrami sandwiches you'll get in L.A., which is sad as hell. But then again, when your competition consists of places like Jerry's Famous Deli and the like, it is hardly difficult to come out on top (on a side note, I would love to see the abomination known as JFD completely erased from existance). Langer's has a pretty badass pastrami sandwich but I don't see any reason to head off to MacArthur Park unless you happen to be running low on heroin or fake IDs.. . So while I would say this is a decent sandwich, I will also say that it is a complete rip off. Sorry but I just don't see how the sandwich is worth $11. Maybe half of that is acceptable, but just because you are trying to compete with garbage delicatessens doesn't mean your prices have to be comparable. . . Let's be fair though, everything on the menu is a total rip, not just the pastrami. Then, as if you don't feel humiliated enough with the final bill, you will see that the place is cash only. Now, I used to believe that cash only restaurants had better food because they saved money, bought higher quality items, passed the savings onto consumers, blah, blah, blah. In a word: Bullshit. Cash only is nothing but an elaborate tax-evasion scam. Johnnie's certainly doesn't pass any savings onto the consumer (just the opposite in fact). And of course you know the usual scams going on with cash only places...ATM in the back, insane transaction fees, etc.. . All of these negatives can be overlooked...let me tell you why I'm really getting tired of going to Johnnie's: the waitresses. I don't know what the deal is with some of these places, but there seems to be an ongoing gimmick in some restaurants where the waiters/cooks/waitresses are all *WAY* passed retirement age and all cop some serious fuckin' attitudes. I don't give a shit how long you've been working here or how miserable your life it, if your customer service skills are on par with government employees in the Soviet Union, I consider you worthless.. . There's nothing specific that happens to me here, I just don't like how the waitresses conduct themselves. They have this whole pseudo-frustrated aura around them as if they are in their own homes and doing us a favor by taking our orders or bringing us food. Here's some advice: quit.. . I've always liked Johnnie's but I'm liking it less and less due to the women that work there. It's as if they're trying to have the same vibe going on as Apple Pan (grumpy old employees), but at least The Apple Pan knows the line between customer service and attitude. Besides, the old guys at Apple Pan are totally great and their attitudes are charming and sweet...they're happy people who have a life of experience (plus the food is way better). Johnnie's is not like that at all...the people who work at Johnnie's are completely unhappy and miserable. . . Some people may like it, but I get just a little more disappointed with Johnnie's every time I go there. Soon I'll just lose interest altogether and never show up again.. . Cliff's Notes:. Decent food, rip off prices,cash-only (tax evasion) scams,  totally annoying waitresses.
