ReviewID: fIsNN-98_t7Nkni4yr9lUA
ReviewerID: d7RmwzAHpeQsmEqxTVNiEQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Urban Belly
Category: Asian Fusion
Bamboozling Trendy People One Dumpling at a Time. . . I was looking forward to going to Urban belly since it was said to carry a ramen dish and it won some award for being the 1 of the top 50 new restaurants.  And going somewhere closer than Mitsuwa for a bowl of Ramen would be nice.  . . The overall feeling I was getting from Urban Belly was of being "Bamboozled". . . "Bamboozled customer service wise". Having to pay $13 for a bowl of Ramen and still have to go and get my own chopsticks, napkins, and water is too funny to me.  You can also tell that the Chefs never taste their own food before serving it or manage any sort of quality control  . . "Bamboozled ambiance wise". The seating arrangement is horrible.  Smaller restaurants have managed to use their space better.  I really don't enjoy being ushered to a table and squeezed into seating arrangements that make it difficult for me to converse with my friends.  The seats them selves were rather uncomfortable.  The decor of Urban belly is about as underwhelming as the food.. .  "Bamboozled quality wise". I ordered the Urban Belly Ramen $13:. Looked like brown mush.  . The Pork Belly was cut thick to hide the fact that it was mostly fat/poor quality.. The broth was based off of Pho soup which I believe to be just lazy.  . The Shitake mushrooms while fresh were over cooked and lacked texture. . The noodles were not homemade and tasted like they were instant noodles.  . . Overall the dish was too salty and lacked any sort of chef attention.  It manages to fail as a Pho dish and fail as a Ramen Dish.  . . My friend ordered the Duck Foie gras  Dumplings $10. We get a total of 4 dumplings.  4?  Hahaha.  I figured out that they must have cooked hours beforehand and reheated.  This causes the insides to be mushy and lose texture while the outside is hard and dry.  Overpriced, improperly cooked, and just didn't taste good.. . "Bamboozled price wise".  This place is over priced by about 7 dollars for the noodle dishes and overpriced by about 5 dollars on the Dumplings.  Sides like Kim chi should just be free. . Now I would have paid $6 dollars for the Ramen Dish and this would have been a slightly different review.  However, I didn't pay $6... I paid $13.. . I will still happily go to Mitsuwa for their amazing Ramen.  I suggest you do the same.
