ReviewID: fiYSmHBwr7vu0eImGh_GDQ
ReviewerID: OHrxEUsjpYIi8tr9BS788w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tokyo Delve&#39;s Sushi Bar
Category: Sushi Bars
We all own a lot to my friend Steve Cho:  A) He's Asian and I'm sure somewhere along the line he has a relative that helped invent Play Station.  B) He ALWAYS brings his A Game and the party never stops.  C) He's a fire fighter in LA and saves lives!  So when he text me and said "it's my bday and we are all going to Tokyo Delves in NoHo!" I said "hells yeah!"... I owe it to him for protecting LA.. . I'll cut right to the chase.  Tokyo Delves kicks ass.  First of all, as we waited in line to get in (This place is called a restaurant but feels like a night club/theater) we had quit possible the largest black man security guard come and ID us and give us our wrist bands.  When the security guard asks you "are you ready for this?" you know you're in for it.. . Ok, This place is a PARTY!... The bar tender is nuts.  He's like a cross between Bruce Lee and Jake Gyllenhaal "Bubble Boy".  He and all the waitresses are obviously trained entertainers as they danced on table, served countless Saki bombs and sang to the top of their lungs.  The chefs are even entertaining.  (At the close of the night, they were introduced:  "and a special thanks to our chefs straight from Tokyo Japan, Javier Gutierrez.  From Osaka Japan, Raul Rigual and from Tijuana Mexico, Niguru Takanashi Okira!!!"  LOL). . We as a group had a good 15 people there and that is the norm for this place.  Our table was sandwiched between a table full of Gay men and a table full of single sexy females.  The energy was 10 out of 10.  The sushi was good... not great... but good, good enough to remember.  The service was 10 out of 10!  I mean, when my waitress (Ps: smokin' hot... and by smokin' hot I mean "sweet JJJJJJesus") comes up to me after some Saki bomb fist pounding caused some soy sauce to get on my favorite shirt, and in front of the whole bar, she pulls my shirt up and clean me off with a damp rag and some soda water... well... that's service guys... that's service.. . The night flew by with good food, great service and awesome energy.  If you haven't been to Tokyo Delves, You must GO!  Go with a huge group and go on a week end.  You will have the time of your life.  You have to make reservations and it can get costly, but it's worth it.  Did I mention my hot waitress cleaned my shirt and rubbed on me a little?  well, she did.... . The whole group I was with had a blast.  And Steve, the fire fighter, got hammered on saki bombs and beer... Steve, any time you wants, I'll see you at Tokyo Delves!. . For the love of all things holy... GO!. . Ken
