ReviewID: fjpFbgc7PNpRkTZ_IV9J8w
ReviewerID: ZH7KtmBGuaeDdcm5wwqZ-Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
The place from the outside is really nothing special, just your typical hole in the wall mom n' pop shop. The interior decor has it's ramen shop style flavor, with a splash of post world war 2 posters hanging on the walls. Seating is very limited so I would suggest going there before you're hungry, because the wait is long enough where you'll be starving by the time you get seated. . . All that aside, the food was simply blissful. I've had ramen in japan, and all over J-town and then some, but I seriously have to put down that this is one of the best ramen adventures I've experienced. I ordered the popular combo of Shredded pork on rice + Daikokuya ramen. Going for a hefty $11( I wouldn't know how else to spend that money to equal the amount of satisfaction I got) but you get a small bowl of salad with really good dressing on it (not exactly sure what it's called, but its found in most Japanese style salad dressing, but it had a tang to it like thousand island). The wait for the food was fast, so in no time our party was being served the noodles and shredded pork bowl. Presentation of the food was good, it seemed like a bit of effort was put into it, with my egg at 11, my two pieces of mouth watering pork at 2, and a mountain of green onions in the center. Broth was just right, not too salty not to bland. The noodles can be cooked to your liking (soft, med, hard), and the meat was so juicy and tender, even writing this, my mouth watered a bit. The shredded pork bowl was no different. The meat was so soft, it literally melted in my mouth, with enough teriyaki sauce to really pack a good punch of flavor in your mouth. . . Definitely a good spot to check out if you are a connoisseur of good ramen. Just be prepared for the wait, and to find parking. There are various parking structures around for a few bucks a hour, or you can try your luck at the metered spots around the streets.
