ReviewID: fkFEmCX_LkYtfrbauE_cuw
ReviewerID: fI36ihAfQcwwdAdJJOKSHg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sotto Sotto Restaurant
Category: Italian
Went here last night as a part of the Inman Park Restaurant week. It was our first visit to Sotto Sotto, but it has been high on our list of places to eat for a while now. All in all, the food was exquisite and well worth the wait to finally get here.. . To start, the place is small, lovely, and somewhat intimate. When we first arrived, the place was 1/3 to 1/2 full. It was (mostly) quiet, and the ambiance was in full effect. After 20 or so minutes, the place filled up and the intimacy of the place started to work against it. Given the size constraints, tables do get placed close to one another, so it's a bit more difficult to enjoy a more quiet evening.. . The service was also very good, with a few notable exceptions. For the good, our waiter was very attentive and knowledgeable about the menu and the wine list. We didn't order any wine, and never once did he make a fuss about it. The main issues we had were with the timing. To start, our waiter was almost immediately trying to get us to put in our food orders. He promised us that the meal would be paced appropriately (which I've learned means that the meal will be paced super quick). Once the orders were placed, our first course came within five minutes; after finishing our first course, the second courses came (again) within five minutes; after finishing those, the dessert came (again!) within five minutes. All in all, we were rushed out in about an hour. Now, the place was booked solid because of the restaurant week, so I won't hold this pacing against them too much. But it was unfortunate.. . What about the food? Luckily, the food was downright heavenly. To start, I had the Ceasar salad and my wife had the steamed mussels. The salad was fine -- I've had better, and it's difficult to get too excited about a salad. However, my wife's mussels (which I typically hate) were actually really good. My wife (who loves them) thought they were the best she's ever had. They were nice and moist with great texture -- signs of being perfectly cooked.. . For our main courses, I had the chicken, veal, and pork ravioli with brown butter and sage sauce. They were to die for. The dish is decadent, and a bit heavy with the butter sauce, but the taste was out of this world. My wife had the seafood risotto, which was also a home run. The seafood flavor really permeated every aspect of the dish, and all of the seafood (shrimp, clams, mussels, scallops, and calamari) were all perfectly cooked -- not an easy feat with so much seafood. Easily one of the better risottos we've had out.. . I wasn't much of a fan of either of our desserts, but I rarely am, so I tend not to hold that against any restaurant too much. I had a marscapone dessert (not on their restaurant week menu) that had way too much Frangelico in it to be particularly edible. My wife had the chocolate soup, which was all right, but had a weird flavor that I couldn't get passed or identify.. . All in all, Sotto Sotto served up some pretty amazing food. The portions were generous, and everything came out exactly as expected. Given the extreme business of restaurant week, I'll try not to hold the pacing against them too much; I just hope that's not par for the course with this place. I'd give the food a 4.5, and the overall experience a 3 stars. 4 stars seems pretty reasonable, if for no other reason than they got me to actually enjoy mussels.
