ReviewID: fLNkub3qo9--MTOVruFOxA
ReviewerID: WPw0LDmsT5HLc5itX8YLVA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
Brunch Menu Review--. . Came here for Saturday brunch  and had high expectations after all of the hype around it.  We started off with the 3 cheese plate. I don't remember all 3 however it was delicious. In my ignorance, the cheeses tasted like 1. Brie 2. Some Hard Crap 3. A dry Blue Cheese. The presentation was also excellent. To the west of the plate they cut up a dried apricot and arranged it in the shape of the sun with a balsamic vinegar drop.  To the north of the plate we had 4 paper thin slices of radishes. Down south there was what looked like Asian cock sauce, aka Siracha, however it was actually a shriveled up piece of sun dried tomato.  Finally to the east we had some chutney jam stuff topped with pistachios.  Served with this fruit bread that was great as well.  . . My friend had the Croque Madame which had a generous portion of ham and cheese with two thick slices of bread.  In my opinion, it was a little too thick.  The sandwich was hard to cut through and near the end of the menu we just dissected the sandwich apart and just pick what we wanted to eat. . . I had the infamous cheeseburger that was featured in the magazines.  It was more like a huge ass meatball with a side of bread. REALLY meaty.  The taste however is very pure.  The meat tasted delicious and fresh, the aged cheddar, onions and brioche bun made this complete.  It was a down home old fashioned burger that was huge.  Served with pomme frits where were seriously no joke the best fries I have had in a long time. They were awesome!!. . Great coffee- $4 per person for drip however so keep that in mind.. . Overall, Comme Ca is a place that I would recommend for perhaps an out of town guest or when you are in the mood to really live it up and feel "LA" about yourself. I would also recommend the motto of GO BIG OR GO HOME. Would skip brunch here however I have been told by many that dinner was delicious.  The space is modern, smart and in my opinion one of the best that I have seen in a while.  As other reviews have said, don't think this is a romantical quiet place- its borderline Dim Sum shouting fest when you eat here. LOUUUUD. My only downfall for now is the service. Ultra slow. It seemed like it took 45 minutes for them to make a burger and a ham n cheese sandwich.  Our waiter seemed a bit flustered, but he looked like Pedro from Napoleon so I got a kick out of that. Very French.. Oh LA LA!
