ReviewID: fLQ4v1ZAqbD3zFdenStl0g
ReviewerID: 0XvRWMbbb0M3WXHZBA3dEg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Butterfly Sushi Bar &amp; Thai Cuisine
Category: Japanese
I signed up for Yelp JUST so that I could review Butterfly.  . . I generally go to Zen on North Av once or twice a month, and couldn't decide if I wanted to go there for dinner tonight or the House of Sushi and Noodles buffet on Belmont and Ashland.  I decided I didn't want to overstuff myself, but I definitely had a craving for sushi and wanted to try something new.  So I hopped on Yelp to see what what everyone here had to say.  I read a lot of the praise for Butterfly , so I decided to try it out, and I am super-glad I did.  . . I went on a Sunday night at around 6:30pm, and it was almost empty except for two couples.  So I was seated immediately at one of the booth-tables towards the middle-back of the uniquely shaped dining area.  The waitress promptly took my order, and I was shocked with the speed in which the food was brought out.  Usually when I order sushi, I expect to be waiting a while for it to be prepared, but it came out shortly after the appetizer (a standard, but good edamame) arrived!  I tried a few individual pieces of sushi, and was very pleased with the size and quality they presented.  The saba (mackerel) in particular was fresh and not frozen, as is often the case with many sushi joints.  The hamachi (yellowtail) was absolutely to die for - it didn't taste fishy at ALL and simply melted in my mouth.  I also tried their signature "Butterfly Maki", and it was very good, and reasonably priced for the large-sized rolls.  They forgot to bring me the piece of ikura I had ordered, but when I reminded them about it, they were very apologetic and immediately rushed to bring it out.  Then to further make up for it, they brought out a small slice of cheesecake drizzled with a savory light raspberry sauce ON THE HOUSE!  Needless to say, I left a big tip, and will be coming back to Butterfly very soon!  Thanks, Yelpers, for helping me find my new fav local restaurant!  :)
