ReviewID: Fm9JT4NZjMeCknoapDJ9kw
ReviewerID: BMfvTU6Ell9pSQY4zf3yTg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
I always feel like Asian restaurants would rather get your money and lose you as a customer than make sure you leave satisfied and have you for life.. . That unfortunately is the case here (I've yet to find an exception) and it's probably my fault.. . Their bun (Rice Vermicelli bowls) selection is REALLY small for a Vietnamese restaurant some are claiming has a "huge" menu. This isn't a huge menu, but it's certainly very sizeable. And it's legit, you can not only get a Pho with cow penis, but for $5.00 more you can get "Extra cow penis". . . Because the rice noodle bowl selection was so small, and the server's English was so poor I was forced into getting a bowl that I didn't want. I wanted a bun cha tit, which is my STANDARD go to at Vietnamese restaurant (Grilled pork, with vietnamese egg rolls). Here though, only one pork bowl came with vietnamese egg rolls, and it was the "Shredded pork" bowl, and I ordered it - failing to see that it also came with pork vermicelli (of which I had not heard of before).. . So long story short, my bowl comes and it's just disgusting. The "Shredded pork" is thinly sliced roast pork cold cuts, which are then julienned. The pork vermicelli was congealed pork fat/pureed pork skins which was sliced into vermicelli-like "noodles", and the egg rolls very greasy, and not Vietnamese style (Which are classically deep fried rice paper, these were Chinese style). I asked the waitress if everything was supposed to be cold (Yes, that fried pork was supposed to be cold, ditto the cold cuts). I asked her to check the menu to make sure that this is what I had ordered (These are CLASSIC signs for her to be like "Would you like something else?" but in classic coquettish southeast Asian style she shrugged and smiled), and it was indeed. I just hadn't read carefully which is my bad. But this was a $7.95 meal and I eat out FREQUENTLY and almost exclusively Asian.. . My ladyfriend ordered a grilled chicken bowl (Which is not on the menu, though they graciously made it for her), which was SUPER SUPER heavy on the Thai Lemongrass. I HATE Thai lemongrass, and its made even more inappropriate in a Vietnamese dish with its subtle flavors. At least in Thai food the Thai lemongrass is meant to compete with intensity, not subtlety. It left her chicken tasting like lemon pledge.. . Lastly, the boba I ordered was gross. It had the consistently of frozen spit, the flavors were muddled, and the papaya they had cut into chunks and put on the top was on the border of turning which really put a damper on an unphenomenal meal.. . I walked into Tank and I was really excited. It SMELLED like a legit place.
