ReviewID: fmBwJISGOc9VZmB8GBhqKw
ReviewerID: NEOgKYjWkCIF8Ntb6F1yIw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I went a couple weeks ago to Rosemead since they seem to be going there every Saturday night now. I was pretty excited to see what all the hype was about.. . Well the truck was going to be at the location at around 6PM so my girlfriend and I got there around 6 knowing there would already be a line. Eh... We ended up waiting for 3 hours. Not that much of a problem though since it is an "experience.". . Anyways when we came up to the truck, we found out that there was a 3 taco limit. That again wasn't THAT big of a deal since I understand that they want to serve everyone. I ended up buying 2 pork and one beef taco while my girlfriend ordered 1 chicken, 1 beef, and 1 tofu taco. The guys taking the orders were pretty friendly, so that eased my restlessness. . . At this point I was just really really hungry. Also, waiting in a slow moving line for 3 hours in the cold isn't the most pleasant thing to do. So my girlfriend and I went into her car to eat since it was chilly outside. I pretty much shoved those 3 small tacos into my stomach. Partially because I was hungry, but also because it didn't taste that great anyways.. . I was a bit disappointed. The tacos were drenched in their kimchee sauce. The sauce was good, but it was a bit too much. Plus, the meat was nothing special. It was an interesting food though. Korean style meat inside a taco is a pretty cool idea.. . Anyways, I'm not giving Kogi 3/5 because I had to wait. I'm giving them 3/5 mostly based on the taste of their tacos. I would've wanted to try their burritos, but they weren't offering the burritos at that location.. . Okay, so I gave it 3/5 stars, but that doesn't mean I think anything bad of it. It's definitely worth it to try once, but if you know of a location where they visit that won't be a 3 hour wait, then do that instead. I'd say try to go somewhere that you'll know will be a 1 hour wait tops.. . When it comes down to it though, I prefer King Taco over Kogi anyday.
