ReviewID: fmQB6f026-QPpuOVE7HXsA
ReviewerID: 0Dm2sZvXBONOWfGA3tpsCg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: May Street Market
Category: American (New)
We had a Groupon for dining at May St. Market, so we headed over there at 5:15 on a Saturday evening. We had a reservation and for about 20 minutes were the only ones in the restaurant. I'm not really self-conscious so this didn't bother my date or me. We just enjoyed our wine and bread, and took note as it got busier and busier as 6pm rolled around.. . For starters, we had the Maytag blue Cheesecake which was delicious. It was a small, round cheesecake which was tangy and not too sweet. On top was an lightly oil dress arugula salad and next to the cake was a dollop of pear sorbet. The plate was dressed with candied pecans and blue cheese crumbles. Overall, it was a perfect balance of flavors.. . Their breadbasket was basic. They served it with plain butter and an amazing truffle creamcheese spread. So good!. . The boyfriend and I both had the beef filet with melted brie cheese on top. It was surrounded by porcini risotto which was a good combination with the filet (his was cooked perfectly, mine was a tiny bit overcooked). The side was a potato basket made from waffle chips filled with a mixed herb salad. Again, this dish was very well balanced. I liked the flavor of everything and usually I'm a pretty picky eater.. . For dessert, we went with the "S'mores." Be advised that this is not something someone stuck on a stick and made over a fire. This is a delicious elegant dessert dish. It is a rectangular piece of bittersweet Italian chocolate mousse on a graham cracker crust, topped with meringue and with a toffee piece in the middle.. . Overall the food, wine and service were enjoyable. We probably wouldn't have even thought to come here if it weren't for the Groupon, but it ended up being a fine, elegant place.. . The inside was interesting. There are two different rooms. We were in the first one which was dark and had tables with comfortable booth-like seats on one side and chairs on the other side. The other room seemed brighter and more family-friendly.. . Oh and their bathrooms were nice and clean, something I always check for at a nice place. :)
