ReviewID: FMrYF0dLhFD8G3rJh-5BOA
ReviewerID: bIhhH7SURXRZzI4RVOG91g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
I can't past up a great deal especially when I can try a fancy restaurant . Every year, we always wanted to go experience DineLA but never really got to it, however, this time around, we were adamant to try Fogo de Chao after hearing great reviews so we made reservations the first day they had their DineLA special. We saved about $20 bucks each. The price for dinner regular is about $56 but with DineLA, it was $44 plus dessert. . . The salad bar is basic; it has some cold veggies, creamy type of salad, cheese and cured meat. I was a little disappointed, since I was hoping they would have hot foods at the salad bar like other churrascaria I have been to. So, if you come here for the salad bar, don't waste your time but come to think of it, I don't think they have just a salad bar price. . . At Fogo de Chao it is definitely about the meat! I am not really a "red meat" eater but once I tasted one bite of their sirloin, my carnivore in me was wide awake. I don't think I have ever ate so much red meat in a seating in my life not even at other Brazilian BBQ. Their meat came quickly once we turned our pass to green. I focused mostly on their filet mignon, top sirloin and the sirloin cap. It seems like I couldn't stop, I wanted more and more. The meat is juicy, tender, flavorful and not overly salted. It was just right! . . They provided complimentary cheese balls, cinnamon sugar bananas, mash potatoes and polenta.The cheese balls were so light, soft and with a light cheesy taste; the mash potato was a compliment to the meat; the bananas were cooked to perfection; and the polenta has a great crisp even though there wasn't much flavor. . . For dessert, I opted for the Tres Leches; it was moist and delicious, so good that words can't explain. I also tasted the papaya cream and flan and both were also good but not as good as the Tres Leches cake. It was a great ending to an affordable, great meal. . . The service was okay. Near the end, although I was still eating, a waiter came and took the banana plate away without asking. My fork was half way on getting another piece so I thought that was really rude. Our main waiter seems like he was rushing and wasn't really paying attention to our table. The only one who I though was really nice was the lady who gave me my dessert.
