ReviewID: FN6kddJH1WHNYOeEiGGZPQ
ReviewerID: ya3mbvTaymecfrTc08SxhQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Highland Tap
Category: Steakhouses
Jimmy never knew that there was a restaurant attached (guess he hasn't walked that far into the bar) so he was excited to find that they're a steak house.  We had the first booth on the left, but surprisingly the bar noise wasn't an issue.  I much prefer being on the restaurant side where you can watch all the self-important people talking to each other and meeting up by the bar. . . We started with the crispy calamari.  Excellent sauce, but the breading did not stick to the calamari rings at all, so it was more like eating calamari and breading rings.  Good combinations of peppers and onions to make you feel a little less guilty by counting a serving of vegetables with your fried food.. . Still feeling full from the late lunch, I opted just for the beet salad.  Besides, Jimmy got the queen cut of prime rib, and I knew that I would get some of that.  Keith got the chicken sandwich and Rachel the french onion soup.  All tummy's were happy.  . . The beet salad was good, but the beets seemed a bit too firm,  as in undercooked, for my liking.  Also, for the price of the salad, they could have put a few more greens on the plate.  The prime rib had good texture, but not much flavor if you ask me.  . . I splurged for the coffee with kahluha, bailey's, and grand marnier.  The server double checked to make sure I meant the coffee and not just the shot.  Thank goodness - else I would have been done before the party started.  It was a great combination.  Jimmy got the chocoalte bread pudding - very rich and very chocolatey.  . . Our server was quite the enthusiastic expert, so much so that his head bobbed making his ponytail shake as he talked and moved.  The other staff was friendly, except for the guy who asked for the extra wine glass on the table by pointing and making the kind of "give me that" motion that a child makes because he can't properly articulate what he's after.  Not so welcoming.. . I will definitely go back, though I'll make sure to get a . http://restaurant.com.  certificate next time.
