ReviewID: FO-bC23M-qj5WTnoyJ03BQ
ReviewerID: bRStRCZAWqXZt8f2zcSM6Q
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Get ready for a complete paradox unlike anything you've heard before. A CSI-like team would be required to sort out the pages of this coincidental cluster fuck. . . I go to "Friendship's" website and order myself a meal and appetizer. Somehow after delivery fees this comes out to be around $25. Eh. This better be some high class Chinese food because it is going above and beyond what a good dine-in meal + glass of wine would cost. . . About an hour later an old Asian man comes to my door and hands me a bag and credit card receipt slip to sign. I tip him well and send him on his way. As I sit down for a long awaited dinner, I realize that he has delivered another customer's order. Ugh. Of course, I can't win! Whatever...common mistake.. . Not such a big deal to have the delivery driver pace back around the block and give me my meal, but, unfortunately Friendship hasn't trained their employees to recognize the ringing sound coming out of those weird plastic things you hold up to your head and speak with. So 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 30 minutes, and hour goes by with my intermittent calling and this place still refuses to answer their phone (yes, it was the correct nombre!). . . I sit and stare at the meal in front of me and wonder if I should just stop being a pussy and eat it, when I realize that it is nothing a Chinese place would have...the meals were very very unique to Thai food. I check out the number on the receipt, and to my surprise, this isn't even from Friendship! It is from some Thai restaurant a few miles away. WTF?. . After phoning the Thai place and sitting on hold for 15 minutes to speak with the Engrish speaking manager, I realize this food is for my upstairs neighbors, and the delivery driver apparently had trouble reading names and numbers. Well, you don't even have to read names and numbers, just compare the symbol from the receipt to the symbols on the door, right?. . So I deliver the grossly cold weird Thai dishes upstairs to my emaciated neighbors, almost relieved. But wait, where the fuck is my dinner? I try calling Friendship another 5 times unsuccessfully and figure the order didn't go through and ate something else an hour and a half late. . . While eating some mac n' cheese I check on my debit card history and guess what, Friendship (or whoever maintains their website) did indeed charge my card for the never delivered purchase, and they still haven't answered their phones. . . Is it worth $25 to drive up there and try and explain what the hell is going on? No. Probably not. I'll complain here instead like a repressed pussy.
