ReviewID: FoFr3fz_PGR4CCIWgdP5qQ
ReviewerID: YF1JCIbZ7aIZ8Osrj_ehBg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Spring - congratulations, you are my favorite restaurant in Chicago.. Came here on Sunday to use my groupon - late, but they still accepted it for $50 off.  From the second we walked in from the snow/slush mix I could tell that this place was different.  The host took our hats and jackets and hung them for us, while engaging us in light conversation.  "Did you walk here?" he asked.  I WISH - but just to be asked that question set my heart ablaze with excitement.  Could this restaurant be the one?  He helped both of us to ge seated, an unusual treat since I rarely have my seat pushed in for me.  Our server, Christo, came quickly and was quite attentive throughout the evening.  He helped me to select a beer, a blonde ale which happens to be France's only distinctive beer style.  I really just wanted something to sip throughout the meal, and I was in the mood for beer.  My guest and I had decided that we would split the pork belly appetizer and then I would get the sea bass and she the duck.  After hearing that they had a tasting menu, I opted for that instead of the sea bass.  I pushed that voice out of my head saying, "but the cost, the COST" and went with it anyway.  FYI, the tasting menu is $75 for six courses.  Shortly after ordering we were served some crispy flatbread and white bean puree.  The puree was incredibly addictive.  They made it with sesame oil, which is the first flavor to hit your tongue.  By the time you are finished chewing and swallowing the bread/puree mixture, your mouth is ready for another hit of the sesame oil.  We ended up going through three bowls of the puree.  Extra points to them for offering more!  Shortly after ordering, while eating our bread, the server presented us with samples of butternut squash soup, with apples and raisins mixed in, compliments of the chef.  What???  OK.  I'll sip this delicious sake glass full of soup.  My first dish was an oyster, which was naturally salty and served with bloody mary wasabi on a bed of sea salt (separated by the shell).  I ended up eating the wasabi first then putting some of the sea salt on the oyster (oops) so this dish was a bust but the oyster itself I could tell was tender and naturally salty.   They served my second dish, "charred tuna sashimi nicoise" and the pork belly at the same time.  I'll start with the crispy pork belly.  It was just the right amount of crispy, and the flavor of the pork melted in my mouth.  The buns were chewy but equally melty so the chewiness offset the crispiness of the pork wonderfully.  The pickled cucumber threw my head for a loop because it was exactly what it should have been.  Oh how my taste buds delighted in the flavor.  Now on to the charred tuna sashimi nicoise.  When the server set the plate down, I was scared.  I enjoy sushi, but get nervous for sashimi - well before this.  The tuna was charred with black peppercorns which gave it a spicy flavor while the tuna tasted flaky/mushy.  The egg, potato, and tomatoes on the side each provided a different flavor/texture accent, so that there was this crazy balance of flavors and textures on the plate.   The third dish served, the fam egg ravioli was another excellent balance of flavors and textures.  The chef included ox-tail with it, on their menu they offer it as vegetarian.  In fact, I was thrown off at the time.  I was satisfied with this being my meat dish.  My barramundi was served at the same time as my guest's duck, and we shared both.  The duck was tender with a crispy crust.  The barramundi was flaky, well seasoned, and the sides complimented the barramundi and kept the focus on the fish.    After about twenty minutes of letting the fish sit, the server came back, this time with a short rib!  I was shocked.  Another course?  But I was already full!  The shortrib was very tender, juicy, and savory.  My guest's eyes lit up upon tasting the meat.  Fantastique.  Finally, for dessert, they served us dark chocolate fudge (I think it was fudge).  My guest doesn't like dark chocolate but she loved this dessert.  It just goes to show that if you keep an open mind, you never can know what you might enjoy.  Actually, I said finally but just as our meal opened with a sample of soup, our meal concluded with a sample of hot chocolate spiced with sage.  Another sample?  As our server brought it out, he intentionally stated, "with this last course, your tasting is complete."  So all told, I had an 8-course dinner - and easily the best meal I've had in my life.  EVER. yes, EVER.  I've had food that was equally well prepared before, but not in such a welcoming, friendly enviroment.  My guest and I were both wearing jeans.  I was wearing a polo and my hair was probably disheveled, but it didn't matter.  They were just as happy to serve us as we were.  And that's why I love Spring.  I love you.
