ReviewID: fQiEBxobg438b-PhCUtY9A
ReviewerID: ZJ_IIzT1W6NNgh1s-4zXmQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
As those close to me know, I'm a bit french toastsessed (french toast obsessed).  While I have heard the rumors about Square One's sweet brioche babies for some time now, up until this morning the 4.8 miles between the restaurant and my apartment got in the way of my belly's satisfaction.  I normally get a bit scared when I have to go too far east of La Brea, but today my stomach's loud and completely out-of-tune rendition of "I can't get no satisfaction," convinced me to push my Tiffany Toyota to her limits.  (There is no arguing with a tone deaf gastric sack). . Though I was the first in my party to arrive, an adorable hostess/server with the cutest braids since Pippi Longstocking, let me sit down at a table for four on the delightful sunny patio while I waited.  There were a couple flies buzzing about that kept trying to be my friend, but after I firmly rejected them, we went our separate ways.  I think the hungry noises ferociously emerging from my stomach scared them a bit.  Serves them right!  Stupid dirty flies!  Once I de-bugged the area, another lovely waitress sporting hipsterish black attire (it is almost in Silverlake!), came and took my tea order for an abundantly fragrant teapot of Moroccan Green Mint.  I felt rather exotic as I sipped from my over-sized white mug!  And at only $2 for a potful, I was rather pleased with the beverage situation.  These things are important to me!  Of course, not as important as the shining star of the morning.  No, I'm not referring to Love or Lauren M. (though they are quite charming and star-like!), but rather, a glorious food product known as FRENCH TOAST.  For those of you who have difficulty reading screaming capitol letters, I'll translate: French toast.  Whether you order it with the seasonal fresh fruit (warm nectarines and pistachios, hold the whipped) like me, the citrus banana caramel sauce a la Lauren M., or plain like Miss. Love, this is some seriously good, "hold the phone, I need to call my mom," frenchyified toast.  I kind of regret not taking a picture of it on CiCi cell phone so that I can appreciate it's beauty whenever I start feeling lonesome for it's taste in my mouth.  It's hard being in a long distance relationship.  :(. . Besides my shining star, I was also quite pleased with my incredibly fresh-tasting side of scrambled eggs (ordered and cooked "wellish"), and I anticipate being quite happy later today when I dig into the insanely ginormous hockey-puck of a chocolate chip cookie that I brought home with me.  If I can't be with my true love, there is nothing better than a 'roided up cookie to ease the heartache.  Well maybe a 'roided up cupcake, but that's for another day.  I only have so much room in the sack before she starts singing "Do you really want to hurt me?  Do you really want to make me cry.....". . **Update at 5:45 pm, 9/23/07 -- Finally hungry again, and just broke off chunk of the hockey puck.  I have no idea how this qualifies as a cookie, but I'm in love and it burns like a sweet flaming fire in my chest.  Indigestion, perhaps?. . **Update at 8:42 pm, 9/24/07 - Broke up hockey puck cookie into chunks last night and stuck it in the freezer.  Extracted two hunks to eat tonight, but couldn't wait for them to "unfreeze" so gnawed on them while still in "frozen" form.  I don't know how or why, but the hockey puck cookie tastes even better when cold and hard and being gnawed on.  That is all.
