ReviewID: FqRXSbW9cfpSxZCM-cgd1A
ReviewerID: kkTSGJP_8Iq9kkm-kmsKVw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
"Ohh I know where we should eat! And Don't worry, baby.  Trust me, it's nothing strange, or different. It's not Asian cuisine. I think you'll really like it." I cajole.. . While out and about, me and the man were hungry. And since I am much more familiar with L.A than he is, I made a suggestion to eat at Phillipe which he has not heard of.  A foodie-extraordinaire like myself has a companion who is...not. But, slowly but surely I will lead him into the foodie darkness.. . As we approach the restaurant, I proudly tout, "Look at the sign! See it's been around for 100 years! It's a Los Angeles historical landmark.". . He glances at the tour bus that stops, and watches as a bunch of senior citizens exit and head towards the restaurant before he retorts, "Yeah, it seems these people were around when the restaurant was open." . . "Well, maybe they're just really loyal patrons so that must mean the food is good.". . We find parking, and head in and see the excruciatingly long lines throughout the restaurant. All the cashiers had a long queue of people waiting to be served. I look around and see many, many older folks.. . "DAMNIT! Why did the senior citizen tour bus have to stop here today of all places!!" I'm whining, but I really want to eat here so we decide to stay in line to try the food. I will not be turned again like during their Centennial celebration!. . While waiting, a few minutes later, he looks around and whispers in my ear.. "It smells like death in here.". . "That's so mean!!" I gasp at his statement and admonish him quickly... however, in just a moment, I see a gentleman....and..... I jab my companion and whisper.... . "Hi ho...hi ho.....it's home from work we go.". . He laughs. I laugh. I sing, and he joins in by whistling the rest of the song.. Oh fine, maybe I'm just as bad as he is.. . "Hey, it looks really busy here.. where will we eat?" he asks. I respond, "Try checking upstairs. I bet you it's empty.... those old people probably can't climb the stairs." "DAMMMMN. heheh.. Okay I'll check.". . I was right, it was very empty upstairs. We have so much fun joking and laughing that we didn't think much about the wait. We get our food -- two beef french dips, and potato salad with a chili and beef stew -- and climbed the stairs.. Never did I feel so young and robust as I did at that moment. . . The french dips were gooood. It wasn't out of this world, nor the best that I've ever had but for $5.55 I don't have room to complain. It is definitely delicious to come back for. The man liked the chili, and I liked the beef stew -- that was surprisingly really good and a definite recommend as a side dish.. . We were happy and we were filled. I liked Phillipe the Original very much, and would like to be back soon when I happen to be in the area.
