ReviewID: FRaV6TrlVpn4QN3gnMo-PA
ReviewerID: Dg1cJ224IfS2YwuJV5d5wQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Do you believe in magic? I don't! But I went to the magic castle with an open mind and had a GREAT time :). . Truly one of a kind place in Hollywood - literally a castle in the middle of LA! As you drive up the winding road to the lit-up castle, you feel like you're stepping into a scene of a fairy tale movie.. . Everybody is dressed to the max and the crowd is definitely mixed. Old and young, all different ethnicies.. but everybody up for a great night of magic :) Bars are spreadout throughout the castle and there is also a dining room for dinner (we tried to get a reservation on Friday and only avaliable times were 6pm and 945pm). We filled up on appetizers - fried calamari, shrimp cocktail, and beef tartar. What else is really good at the bar is the Pale Moon beer ($7) - one of the most DELICIOUS beers I've ever had! I guess I like them wheat beers :). . My date had to feed me because I was whining like crazy about how I was starving - but after we pounded down a few appetizers, we set off to explore the castle and see the shows. Every part of this castle has a trick involved. Talk to the piano - it plays whatever song you want it to. Ask the owl at the bar a question - and he will either nod or shake his head as a response. Step into the phone booth - and find a ghost in your reflection! Yell "OPEN SESAME" to the bookcase - and the sliding door will open with your verbal command! FUN in every corner!. . Unfortunately, magic castle is one of those exclusive hollywood joints - either you have to know a magician or you have to be a member (which costs you an arm and a leg = $6000?) - if you ARE a member, you get in free (w/friends). if you just KNOW a magician or a member, its still $25 for admission!  Everything is WAY overpriced, catty girls, crazy outfits, big spenders, people cutting in line, the cold hollywood stare..  if you can forgive all that, I think magic castle is a great experience to have, at least once!. . TIPS = No photographs inside; Dress code STRICT: Guys MUST wear jacket/tie or it will be provided. Girls dress up, but definitely more lenient! Drink!!! - makes all the shows more enjoyable! Go early and try to see as many shows as you can! :)
