ReviewID: FrN-7gMefLidP0LEIS-wnw
ReviewerID: 49EVOXwLnE81c9mv2B9r9Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Everybody&#39;s Pizza
Category: Pizza
I kind of didn't expect to like this place.  I really didn't.  But Everybody's has kept me coming back!  The first time I went, it was just for the beer.  After being sorely disappointed by the pitiful beer selection at Highland "Tap," (the name is highly misleading) Kyle and I stumbled in to Everybody's pizza, lured by a sign boasting Dogfish Head 60m IPA (see, that's the kind of beer I expect out of a place with "tap" in the name!).  To my surprise, they actually had a pretty good beer selection all around.  And I've come to find that it rotates frequently, which keeps it interesting.  .       After a good experience with the beer, Kyle and I decided to return to give the food a try.  The menu is actually pretty innovative with stuff like pizza sandwiches and pizza salads and plenty of cool toppings.  Mmmm honey roasted garlic....  I'm also impressed with is their flexibility.  They're totally cool with you ordering "this pizza, but this topping instead of that topping and on thick crust instead" type thing.  Speaking of the crust...  you can choose from a thick crust and a thin crispy crust.  I don't do crispy pizza, so I've never had that one, but I really like the thicker crust.  I think the thing that makes the pizza is the sauce.  Be warned, there is a lot of it and the pizza is pretty messy, but the sauce is nice and sweet with plenty of herbs.  Also, the servers are always pleasant and attentive, but in a laid back kind of way.  .      All in all, a great place to come for a chill dinner.  I just wish they were open later as Everybody's would definitely make a perfect late-night stop.  I always kind of feel bad if I go there past 10 on a weekday.. They always do that "we're going to close things up even though you're still here and we don't close until 11" thing and then I feel like I have to leave....      And, for the record, I gave in and got Kyle his pizza sandwich.  It was good, but really hard to eat.  Be warned, ladies with small mouths!
