ReviewID: FrnahyILaW_QV60iMxfXsg
ReviewerID: r2kLXci4vk2HY3P3jCqrQA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Twin Anchors Restaurant &amp; Tavern
Category: American (Traditional)
I had high hopes and expectations coming in here on Saturday night for dinner. From what I saw when we walked in, it was all that I hoped and thought it would be. A real iconic and nostalgic Chicago institution that looks like it hasn't changed a thing since it was opened. . The atmosphere is great. Old looking bar area with booths and coat racks for each table. Small dining room in the back that was busy and casual. Everyone from large families to couples were enjoying themselves. The waitstaff is casual and friendly.. There's a nautical theme to the place, hence Twin Anchors. And this was a reported favorite haunt of Sinatra back in the day. So I was sold.. . We had a short wait, while we sat at the bar, and I was surprised to see the great selection of beer they had. I expected your typical Miller and Amstel type list, but they had a good cross section of microbrews as well.. . I knew what I was getting before we even saw the menus. The RIBS. I had heard and read a lot of good things about them. And It's listed as the house specialty. I was a little skeptical though, because I love ribs, and if they were in fact that good, I'm sure I would have had them by now.. But I had high expectations.. . Let me  just say that the ribs were the only disappointment about the place.. And they were a total disappointment. I found them to be bland, and yes, they were of the "fall right off the bone" variety. Literally. You couldn't pick up a bone without the meat falling right off. And that in my book is not how true BBQ ribs are supposed to be. The meat is supposed to be tender and flavorful, but there should be a slight tug to the meat. My suspicion is that they boil the ribs first and then grill them. Unlike real deal BBQ places that hickory smoke the meat for hours under low heat.. And the sauce itself should be something secondary entirely. If the meat is that good, you really shouldn't even require much sauce.. . I have to agree with some of the more negative reviews about this place with regard to the ribs. If anyone claims these are the best ribs in Chicago, then I seriously have to question their judgement, including Frank Sinatra. ( though I'll let it slide since Fat Willey's and Smoque did not exist back then.).  I don't think it's even fair to mention Twin Anchors ribs in the same sentence as  Fat Willey's and Smoque. Those places are the best I've had in town so far. And TA's rib plate is $20 with one side. For shame.. . However, I really did like almost everything else about the place, and I would come back in a second with the caveat that I will try anything else except the ribs.
