ReviewID: fRrWjW-J1h5gTTaxqk5Zbw
ReviewerID: YEk-6rfOCLmEA7Cu-u8xmw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bite Cafe
Category: American (New)
Apparently I am waaaay to un-hipster for Bite. Actually, scratch that. I was doing okay until Roscoe Village Barbie (aka Brett D.) showed up for our brunch yesterday. Good thing Erin P. dressed down for the occasion (ha) like me so our service returned to just sub-par instead of abysmal. . . Does that make sense? Probably not. So let me break it down: Bite doesn't like you if you look like you come from an area other than Ukie Village, Noble Square, Pilsen or Humboldt Park. Its kind of like the servers are rude to you unless you fit into the hipster mold. I guess they're trying to weed out the "undesirables" from their little brunch spot so it doesn't get overrun with Trixies and Chads. As a girl who often gets mistaken for a Trixie, I was offended. . . Once Erin showed up to regain some equilibrium, we got down to serious brunching business. In my world, that means mimosas and eggs. And the omelets? AWESOME. I had the avocado, jack cheese and chorizo omelet with a side of home fries and whole wheat toast. Great omelet, great potatoes. When I asked for some grape jam to go with my wheat toast, I was stunned to be given what appeared to be a homemade jar of grape jam! What!?!? Homemade products? Yes, please!  But beauty really is in the eye of the beholder, my friends, because when I asked Debbie Downer (aka our server) about the jam, she was like, "It's Smuckers. We just put in in our own jars." Say what? Buzzkill! . . In the end: . 1 star for service. I mean, come on. The waitress wouldn't even acknowledge poor Roscoe Village Barbie, let alone bring her a cup of coffee.  That's just not right.. 4 stars for food and the fact that Bite is BYOB. Even though the surly waitress outed Bite for masking Smuckers for homemade jam. . 5 stars for being located next door to the Empty Bottle, where Erin, Brett and I continued to drink all afternoon with the fabulous bartender, Will.
