ReviewID: frWv3mOF0rr_rKcQDmhPfQ
ReviewerID: wMk62l3ILf7TKenpbw9PeQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Four words.  Lobstah. Garlic. Mashed. Potatoes.  'Nuff said.  I love lobster.  I love garlic.  I love mashed potatoes.  This review doesn't even need to be further elaborated.  Believe me.  Does 6 stars exist?  7 stars?  8 stars?. . I've never even been in Beverly Hills, much less eaten there.  The whole city is terribly intimidating, as you drive down the street and watch the Rolls Royces and BMWs drive by, and being someone... not that rich.  Anyway, the place isn't hard to find.  The parking is valet only.  The downstairs has a bar where you can wait to be seated.  It seems terribly pretentious downstairs, I sat waiting for our seats and feeling terribly uncomfortable and out of place.  It featured one TV and a slew of hostesses gossiping.  But the upstairs is a whole 'nutha story.  Once you walk up the stairs, you're transformed into an elegant, lively place, a live band, and full of chatter and people enjoying these mouthwatering steaks.  . . We were seated near other people.  The tables were rather close together.  They had to move the table to one side so I could sit on the inside with the bench seats.  I assume they're trying to maximize the capacity, but it was somewhat inconvenient.. . Now here's the next jewel besides their special lobstah garlic mashed potatoes.  Our server.  Her name is Molly and she is so down-to-earth and friendly and makes you feel instantly comfortable.  She has to be Server of the Year because she is the best server I have ever had.  She was so knowledgeable and friendly and had a great smile and joked around and talked with us.  She has hilarious stories and even though she has time to converse, she still gets the job done quickly.  . . We started with the Blue Point Oysters.  They were so fresh and tasty, that we actually shocked Molly at how fast we ate them before she even came back to check on us.  How embarrassing.  . . She recommended the ribeye and I got it.  And boy. Was. I. Glad. [drool].  So streaked with fat and melt-in-my-mouth and it didn't even need any sauce or anything, along with the lobstah garlic mashed potatoes that she mixed up personally for us.  We also ordered the rack of lamb, and that was yummy too, except the ribeye stole the meat show.  I wanted to keep eating and never stopping.  I seriously ate a ridiculous amount and still kept trying to cram more in.  But I had to save room for dessert.... . The famous buttah cake that everybody raves about.  Molly told us how she got addicted to it and she has pictures where she was cramming it in her mouth and how she has to cut down to only one a month.  It was so decadent.  So rich.  So warm and wonderful.  We were stuffed.  I still wanted to eat more.  I wish I had a bigger stomach!. . This place is so much fun, and it totally disproves the stereotype I had in my mind of what a fancy steakhouse operated.  There was no one stuck-up or snobby and everyone just went there to enjoy a good steak.  I'll admit, the lobstah mashed potatoes was rather pricey.  $32, I think.  You can get a small steak for that price.  But sooo worth it.  I promise.. . If I was rich, I'd eat here every weekend.  This was a very nice surprise and a great place to take a date if you're not hard on cash.  ;). . Remember!  Get the lobstah garlic mashed potatoes!
