ReviewID: FtNZiuJvbFqp2-6SuVHnSg
ReviewerID: 574x3ezQTKDSsq37bi3HPw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Yamato Restaurant
Category: Japanese
Ok, how can you put up a 2.5 stars rating for this place without showing 3 stars?. . Well, perhaps they are a little bit arogant because it's been here for a while? It's got valet parking? It's really fancy inside? All that stuff and more is always nice but it's all about the food for me. . . Presentation is excellent. For a place so busy and so packed, you would think the product would move pretty well. I now look for hamachi and toro thanks to a friend or two of mine who really made me a connossier of sorts. I now basically judge a place by this and a few other things. . . I had a choice of ordering sushi which was 2 pieces or sashimi which was 5 pieces. 2 pieces comes with rice. So I ordered hamachi, toro and amberjack sashimi. I'm sure you're asking yourself, amberjack? What the hell is that? I had to ask the waiter for that question too. He told me it was baby yellowtail and is very good. I was already getting yellowtail, might as well try it too. Along with my order, I had squid, uni and halibut sushi. It's been a while since I've had fresh uni. I think it was Hide Sushi was the last place I had it so fresh. . . All of this sounds great but here's my beef with the place. Hamachi should be melting like butter in your mouth. It's fresh but it's not quality to me. Toro is good too. Not really the best for either one but still worth ordering. The amberjack was definitely not fresh. I thought it was the first piece I ate was kind of odd. So I ate a piece of ginger to cleanse my palate and tried another piece. It made it much clearer that the amberjack was slimey and briney in taste. I really wanted to spit the second piece I was eating out. It made my stomach upset and had to order something else to get that taste out of my mouth. Plus I wasn't full yet. Before my order, I had the monk liver and what looked like crab and cucumber roll that was left by the group. I went with the catapillar roll since I was really afraid of ordering one of the dragon rolls which I wanted to try so badly. . . Don't get me wrong, I still left this restaurant satisfied since I skipped lunch today. So it hit the spot. That if we actually had better service because it didn't seem like we had a designated server for our table. Yet, we did. One of the guys in the group flagged a waitress down to ask about the price of one of the dishes because it didn't seem like it was 50% off like the rest of the items on the bill. So the question was is this $7 which is not the correct price on the bill? She replied no and then walked away. What the hell?. . Unanimously as a group, we agreed that the tip will reflect the service rendered. Even though the food could be better. I'll be going to other places before I come back here. The place was decorated very modern and very metro. It screams and shouts LA very well. Too bad the servers didn't have the same attitude the place had.
