ReviewID: fU5wuLXc0U6KQgCCGczRCQ
ReviewerID: yST12Bf0obaS4gakA3fiKg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Porter Beer Bar
Category: American (New)
I'm gonna give a brief update to this place.  I'm not gonna hate on it like I did before.  That was childish and unfair.  Now that I'm 30 I'm gonna be responsible and shit.  When I feel like it anyway.. . One thing I noticed when I walked in... they got  rid of the stupid door handle that tried to imitate the brick store.  good call.. . Anyway... after I sat down.. I noticed that they were doing a bit of work inside.  good deal.  unfortunately they were also applying varnish indoors while I was trying to order lunch.  not so good deal.  fortunately they stopped when they realized I moved because of the smell.  . . So... there's the whole 1/2 off lunch for this month, which is why I came back here.  I had been meaning to come back and check it out, but this gave me a bit more motivation.  So... I had me some mac n cheese, and also the kraut and beer brats.  . . The mac and cheese was ok.  Not very hot, but tasted ok if you like the cheesy gooey thing.  So, can't say I really recommend it.  However, I thought the kraut and brats was actually pretty tasty.  and this after I had eaten a pint of custard about 2 hours earlier.  so I wasn't really hungry.  but I genuinely liked the taste of this plate.  I would have to get a second opinion, but it's something I could order again.. . So, to revise things a bit, I'm gonna give this place four stars.  But remember kids, my scale is basically a 3-5 star.  . . as a side note... honestly, I really have a hard time classifying and rating the food at places like porter, brick store, bookhouse.  I mean they try to do some good things, and they generally succeed, but they are not destination dining in my mind.  so, that's kind of my deal with this place.  The food isn't bad, but nothing too crazy.  . . So.. kind of as a general summary on my experience this time and my previous thoughts... I want to say that even though Porter isn't high on my list, I do appreciate what they're trying to do with the space, especially here in L5P.  They probably have some of the better offerings in this area, and I'm probably gonna sample a few more things, especially this month with the 1/2 off deal, to get a better impression of the place. . . fuck me..  I am getting so old.  I'm just like rambling and trying to be nice.  I do mean most of what I said, but damn. just damn.  and I'm too lazy to bother revising this. ugh. . . bottom line, I think I wrote this place off before... but I will say that I do think it's worth checking out.  just don't sit in the back with the suitcases.  and don't order a waffle.  I forgot how much that sucked.  let's just say 4 stars for the kraut and brat.
