ReviewID: fUNZEam-r5PtfZyFex_KhA
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 2
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
My milkshake is better than yours.....this is what I told Angela after trying her pistachio shake vs. my Krispy Kreme shake.  I'll discuss later.. . I fear this will be a hostile review because I'm angry with FLIP.  I wanted to like it so I came with very modest expectations for mediocrity, which were not met or exceeded in most areas. . . The space is nice but not inviting.  I got over it.. . We were seated after a reasonable wait but there were at least five empty table tops by that time and some had been empty for ten minutes or more.  They weren't seating anyone and were effectively sending people away by telling newcomers that the wait was 90 minutes.  There were issues with kitchen back-up, despite a horde of people in the kitchen.. . We sat in one of the fun-looking booths, got our menus, were not informed of the burger of the day, and were approached by our server.  He apologized for the wait (nice) but warned us that the kitchen was backed up so we couldn't put in our entrée orders yet as they wanted to space things out. They sat us because they didn't want to make us stand around any longer.  Umm...OK?  He then began making excuses for the poor service we were about to receive and flippantly said, "Well, we've only been open less than a week so there will be some back-up. Ha ha".  Yes, we KNOW, but this explanation was weird.  He told us to order drinks now, as well as sides, and then order entrees later.  This seemed OK since I was starving so we ordered sides and drinks (the sides came out SUPER fast - 3 minutes - before we even received water) but later I was annoyed when I saw other people getting their burgers with their sides, well, on the side.. . The fries were decent, the onion rings were quite good (very crispy), the fried rutabaga had no flavor and were a waste of calories and table space (I think they just needed salt) and the sweet potato tots were OK.  I thought it was fine that the tots were softer on the inside - I like cooked sweet potatoes.  What I didn't think was fine was how greasy they were.  Yes, I know they are fried and, quite frankly, I like some grease.  But, I had one bite of a tot and it tasted like it was all grease - the grease was just floating around in my mouth.  And, a single tot left a puddle of grease on my plate.  That's just too greasy.  I did really enjoy the blue cheese foam.. . For our party of five, we ordered a total of eight burgers.  Being a non-eater of red meat, I was only able to try four of them.  I ordered the Codfish burger as my main course.  It was a ground up fish burger but looked like fish and chips on a bun (seemed like a whole piece of cod) with malt vinegar, tartar sauce and pea shoots on it.  In a word, it was terrible.  The fish was remarkably bland (again, no salt, and no salt on the table, either, for me to fix it) and the malt vinegar/tartar sauce combo was not enough to salvage it.  I couldn't finish it and was forced to try and give it away.  The receiver of the fish was not pleased with me.. . I also tried the Po Boyger (pretty good), the Turkey burger (OK but somewhat flavorless - the avocado foam flavor completely disappeared when eating the burger), and the burger of the day, the falafel.  The first bite of the falafel was very good (it was the hottest of the burgers I tried by far) but when it cooled down just a little bit, it was bland and became very mushy.  I like a grainier falafel texture and this one did not have it.  Additionally, I would've ordered this as my main entrée (and avoided that codpiece nightmare) if our Flipster (flippant hipster server) had bothered to inform us of the burger of the day.  But, he didn't - he actually recommended the Codfish :(  In general, I'm not sure about foams on burgers - they seem to lose their flavor when consumed as part of a burger.. . Then, the milkshakes.  My Krispy Kreme was good but I didn't love the effect of the liquid nitrogen on top.  The top of the milkshake was very crusty, and when stirred, it had the appearance of ice cream left in my freezer too long.  Then, I tried Angela's pistachio shake.  Oh, good lord.  I love pistachio but the flavor was drowned by this horrible chemical burnt plastic flavor.  Awful.  When we told the Flipster, he flippantly said he didn't know how that could happen (no apologies and he seemed to not believe us).  And later, after we'd paid and tipped, he asked for feedback (he said he cared) and we finally decided to point out that there were two small pieces of metal shard in one of the milkshakes (not in any way excusable).  The Flipster again did not apologize, said he didn't know how that could happen and acted like he didn't believe us (bad because we clearly were not trying to get something free and felt bad giving this feedback).. . I wanted to like FLIP but found little to entice me to return.  I debated between 2 and 3 stars because there were a few good things but I decided on 2 because the bad things were so very bad.
