ReviewID: FUUFnxYs0taDj0h1eW0IWQ
ReviewerID: 8DuNUJeATDpKXkgrgui9hg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Original El Taco
Category: Mexican
Visiting a restaurant during its first few days of operation is a two-edged sword.  You risk having an experience marred by typical opening calamities, but you also get to be one the first to discover Atlanta's newest "find".  My dining party and I got the best of both worlds.  Not only did the service run as smoothly as if the restaurant had been in operation for years, but we felt fortunate to have found this gem before it becomes public knowledge. Word must already be out, however, because the place, as they say, was hopping!. . The decor surpassed anything that has been attempted in this cuisine realm.  It is funky without being kitschy.  It is whimsical without being overbearing.  It is a comfortable setting creating a mood that enhances the experience rather than detracting from it.  Go there.  You will see what I mean.. . We ordered the Frozen Mojitos and, as other yelpers will concur, found them to be wickedly tasteful.. . The menu is manageable and can be navigated without requiring assistance from your server.  I had to laugh at an earlier yelper who complained bitterly about the menu fonts and lack of highlights that he observed on opening night, and I would direct him to Waffle House, where he will find great delight at the colorful menus and pretty pictures.  I ordered the Mexican Pizza and not only was it delicious, the portion was so large I had some to take home.  My dining companion ordered the fried chicken taco and exclaimed he was in taco heaven.    Of course we had to try to Mexican Coke Float just to see what a Coke imported INTO Atlanta would taste like.  A new twist on an old favorite.. . I look forward to further explorations of the menu on future visits, of which there will be plenty.. . The Original El Taco will undoubtedly become a Virginia Highland institution; a favorite of both the local community as well as those who will come in from the suburbs to escape the cookie cutter Mexican fare that is seen everywhere.
