ReviewID: FvYYjomcU4Wxv-yAfGY2_g
ReviewerID: 4VhaTN8FXYHL-OPUpwj-lg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Not really a fan of steak, but since the bf loves it, I decided to take him to Mastro's to celebrate his birthday.  Upon making the reservation, I requested a more quiet and intimate table.  But our table (downstairs) ended up being literally a few inches away from the next -- occupied by a drunk cougar and her wannabe rock star companion.  I admit observing them was a bit entertaining for the first few minutes, then I started to get just down-right annoyed (not only by the cougar and wannabe themselves, but also by their proximity to our table).      . . We started out with the ahi tuna tartare, which was just OK -- I've had better elsewhere.  Oh yeah, the pretzel bread that comes in the huge bread basket was pretty tasty. For the main course, the bf got the bone-in-filet and i ordered the petite filet.  The meat was cooked perfectly (not too rare, not too well) and was soft and juicy.  I got a bit greedy and wanted to try almost all of the sides on the menu.  I did realize that it was only two of us dining at the table, but  we ended up ordering 3 sides to share (lobster mashed potatoes,  creamed corn, and sauteed mushrooms).  After all the HUGE sides and entrees came, I realized we ordered enough to feed a family of four.  The lobster mashed potatoes were pretty disappointing, the lobster was overcooked and I felt like I was chewing on shrimp.  The creamed corn was sweet and tasty, and the sauteed mushrooms was nothing special.  Needless to say, we were stuffed beyond belief and didn't finish any plate we were served.  But, what was a birthday dinner without a birthday cake/dessert?  I ordered the warm butter cake, and might I add it tastes exactly like its name -- a piece of warm, melty butter, but in cake form.  . . Maybe because I had dinner at Ruth's Chris a week prior to dining here, but I feel like all upscale steak houses tastes pretty much the same and all follow the same formula = "unique 5000 degree" hot oven + USDA prime cut steak + loads and loads of butter.  I don't think there is any distinction between Mastro's and the next shi shi steakhouse.  As with any of these steakhouses, be prepared to spend $$$$.
