ReviewID: fwuQHgv8ykJZ0XI28Kx-GA
ReviewerID: lufa4bHQd3XLYQE1zXis0g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
*****Disclaimer, although the following review is just that -- a review --  please be aware that it also contains a significant amount of hostile ranting and raving.  Reader's discretion is advised.  Thank you *****. . Whoa Nelly!!!  I'm not the biggest fan of this place, but reading Nik d.'s review geared me into the defensive.  Comparing El Tepeyac to Baja Fresh and Chipotle is the dumbest thing I've ever heard...for MANY reasons.  First off, I freaking LOVE Baja Fresh, and I eat the ghetto food in the "barrio" with the rest of my cholas on a regular basis.  I've had "real" Mexican food from "real" Mexican restaurants and in the kitchens and backyards of "real" Mexican people.  I think it's insulting and naive to label the fans of El Tepeyac as incapable of recognizing the difference between a hole in the wall and an American chain.  Puh-lease.  How self righteous can one reviewer get?. . El Tepeyac IS a hole in the wall.  It is run by a man from Mexico, not an American from Mc Donald's who decided to go undercover with a fake authentic eatery.  The place has been open for 50 years, for Pete's sake!  It didn't spring up overnight!  I didn't even know about this place until my MEXICAN friends raved about it and dragged me over.  The food is NOTHING like Baja Fresh or Chipotle.  If it was, I'd immediately love it.  Yet, I'd also realize it would be from an American-like Baja region with a corresponding style.  This is not the case at El Tepeyac.. . Now, for my review.. . The wait was long.  Loooooong.  From what I gather, it wasn't as long as normal, which scares me, but then again I wait half an hour for freaking frozen yogurt at Pinkberry, so who am I to judge?  The only difference is, I'm not exactly "hungry" when I go to Pinkberry, so I can manage my irritation more easily.  . . I ordered the wrong thing.  I got some Oklahoma burrito that was filled with chicken and not much else.  When I read other reviews describing guacamole and onions, etc., I feel like going back and trying another burrito.  In fact, maybe I will.  . . My three stars is based on my poor choice of ordering and the fact that you have to pay extra for chips and salsa.  That's lame.  That should come standard.  I think this stems from their popularity and their sudden boom of success and media recognition.  If they can charge for chips, then let them charge for chips.  Not everyone can do that.  It just makes me pause and flick off a star (cuz I likey me chipsies).. . People love this place.  People of all ethnicities.  I'm going to go back to try something else.  Maybe I got it wrong the first time.  I prefer the super burrito at Taqueria Jalisco in Bell/Maywood.  However, "if you can discern the difference between american chains and mexcian" (Nik d.) I won't say "don't waste your time."  I say try it out, you might like it.  You'll realize it's not an American chain, but a Mexican restaurant.  Just realize you might not like it, because NOT ALL AUTHENTIC HOLE IN THE WALL MEXICAN RESTAURANTS SERVE THE SAME TYPE OF FOOD!!!  If all authentic hole in the wall Mexican restaurants served the same food and had the same standards and were 100% consistent, then that would symbolize a chain.  Maybe they should join together and come up with an authentic Mexican food experience Constitution that all should follow, as well as a blueprint for the design of all their hole in the wall establishments.  This way, all us idiots out there could recognize the difference.. . Or maybe not.. . Realize that I am a Chinese-Swedish-Scottish-German gal working in the barrio with an authentic Mexican boyfriend and an authentic Chinese mother who occasionally likes her Panda Express.  If this denies me credibility, go read another review.
