ReviewID: fX56CcOfWgycN5xo7ZvSeA
ReviewerID: rWnpjkT9j8C-YiJYXBFvQQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
Really on the fence in between 3 and 4 stars....but I am givin them the benefit of the doubt as it was a pre-opening night.  I enjoyed the food and atmosphere at this restaurant.  We were here for a test run night last week and they didn't have their liquor license yet so I'm only reviewing the few things we munched upon and the general vibe of the place, not the service or anything like that.   We had the dry rubbed spare ribs and crab nachos to start.  I'm not a huge fan of ribs, but they were pretty darn good.  They come out with a dry nutty side dish to dip your ribs in, and watch out, because it contains pop rocks!  If you aren't ready for the sensation it can be quite a shock.  The nachos weren't too heavy on the crab, which is understandable costwise, but seemed to be light on everything else as well...once you got done with the top layer of the nachos there was nothing but chips!  The chips were a little flimsy as well and couldn't hold up the excessive guac on top.  Our entrees were simply delicious.  We both had fish....sea bass on my part.   Exceeded my expectations and could match the fish at any fine dining establishment in my opinion.  The dessert I fell in love with was the carrot cake.  I normally wouldn't order such an item, but the combination of the just right frosting and contrast between that and the moist deliciousness that was the cake....to die for.   The other dessert we had was some sort of ice cream bar, and it was just so-so...especially in comparison to the cake!!  All in all a good dining experience.  My only concern with both the set up of the tables/bar areas and the menu was that I couldn't decide whether or not I was eating in a bar or a quirky fine dining restaurant and that kind of bothered me....but then again that may very well be what they are going for.   I can't wait for the bar to open downstairs as it looked super cool, and I enjoyed the spy cams in the ladies bathroom so you could check out what your man was doin' while you were away from the table!  I shall definitely return when they are up and running full speed to try other menu items and I recommend you go check it out!
