ReviewID: FxaPAyx7GhGBV3K8eg7Njw
ReviewerID: qnBgDIln_o-4Klg2oxCCmA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
There are a couple friends that are bad influences on me. One such girlfriend suggested Bottega Louie for dinner one night while I was still in town from NYC. Naturally, I jumped at the chance to food at a new place. Okay - so the main extent of her convincing was "The food is good. The servers are sizzling hot." Right off the bat, I'd completely agree with a handful of the other reviews that there's a NY vibe about the place - if it had been a bit more crowded. My girlfriend informed me that the location was a converted Brooks Brothers.. . We arrived at Bottega Louie and placed our names on the list. Now what to do while waiting? Luckily, the gourmet market and patisserie were up and running for browsing. We wandered about before settling in front of the kitchen area. I swear - an hour passed with me barely noticing the time. I probably could have watched the intricate plating (and the cute staff) for another hour.. . Probably one of my favorite things about this place other than the tummy happiness? It could probably be summed up in the three words that any girl wants to hear- NO CORKAGE FEE.  Result: Bringing a bottle of both white and red to cover the range of dishes.. . The food was nom nom goodness. Between three of us, we split a pizza - half napoli (meh) and half clam (drool) - and a handful of small plates. Listed in order of my personal preference, we had the Roasted Beets with Goat Cheese, Burrata &amp; Grape Tomatoes, Portobello Fries, White Polenta &amp; Chanterelles, and the Prosciutto with Mozzarella &amp; Sage Crostini. Don't get me wrong - it was all delicious &amp; almost too hard to rank. We finished off our filling meal with the Peanut Butter Terrine &amp; some complementary Assorted Macarons (I think they had to get rid of them for the end of the night). The Berries &amp; Cream looked absolutely mouthwatering, but we were already overstuffed by the end of the night. Nothing disappointed me taste-wise. . . What was only sub-par was the service. Sure everyone was friendly, but my friend actually got to the point where she had to pour her own wine refill. And we had to ask twice for a secondary dipping sauce for the Portobello Fries. I hear that the service is better on Saturdays, but until I'm back in LA, I'll have to take peoples' words for it.
