ReviewID: FYgFIKSCmnDwD7e88E8c3w
ReviewerID: hoPA4iBItEUMWUH7bIqrmA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I'm about to go against the grain on this review, so if you're one of the many who love this place, get your stones ready, 'cause it's on.  . . Having spent many of my formative years in Texas, there are a few things I miss about it -- aside from my family, friends, and men who open doors for women without acting like it's a chore or they're a god on earth -- and that's tex-mex and crawfish.  I've given up on finding good tex-mex here; how a restaurant can ruin queso is beyond me.  My alma mater used to hold a crawfish boil here once a year where they flew in big, fat crawfish from New Orleans at the height of crawfish season. I looked forward to it every year.  Then they stopped inexplicably and I was left with an empty void every May.  My sister in Houston would taunt me with her tales of having crawfish multiple times a week to the point where she was sick of it. Blasphemy and evil!  All that was left was to rely on my sweet memories of me and a table full of crawfish.. . When I heard about The Boiling Crab, I was ecstatic.  Another place to try Cajun-style crawfish.  Hell yeah, I'm there!  But, unfortunately, as I discovered for myself, this place is NOT Cajun.  Perhaps Cajun inspired, but definitely not Cajun.  . . I should have known when I saw a sign on the door that said, "No outside food allowed - this includes rice and bread" that I would not be having a New Orleans experience in SoCal.  The only rice that belongs with Cajun food is either Cajun rice or the rice in jambalaya and other Cajun dishes.  . . The seasoning of the crawfish was incorrect.  I can't exactly pinpoint what spice was missing.  But, I do know that Cajun-style crawfish shouldn't be covered in sauce.   Eating crawfish is not exactly a delicate endeavor, but it also shouldn't be as messy as this place makes it out to be.  Crawfish are boiled with their seasoning so the flavor is infused in the meat.  Boiling along with the beady-eyed crawfish are red potatoes and corn on the cob.  They come as a package deal.  Unfortunately, at The Boiling Crab you had to order corn and potatoes separately which is just ridiculous.. . I also tried the shrimp which was unmemorable and I had to force myself to finish the pound and even still ended up with leftovers to give my dining companion.. . What I did like about this place was the cheap prices on beer, the laid-back atmosphere, the good-natured waiters and their idea of serving the seafood in a bag - although again, not really a traditional custom.  . . I would wait hours to eat crawfish. I would listen to a marathon of Pitbull songs for crawfish ("Calle Ocho" makes me want to stick hot pokers in my ears).  Hell, I paid $25 for crawfish at the Long Beach crawfish festival last year (where they did do it right), even though the price was a bit steep.  However, I will not wait hours to eat at this place.  So, my search for good crawfish in SoCal continues.  Crawfish season is pretty much over so I guess I'm waiting 'til next spring.
