ReviewID: FYJAxAD_5KWC1AH_4h6yYw
ReviewerID: Gs9MUwjkKGGJeOv17dfEnA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Terroni
Category: Italian
Oh my God! Have you ever been kicked out of a restaurant because you asked to have your pizza cut into edible size pieces? . ..............................and told that the owner is the boss, not the customer!!! . BTW, they didn't have a problem cutting up the hard dry bread they served with the cheese platter!!! . . We made the mistake of trying this place on Sat night at 10pm. We asked to sit outside and we were seated. The tables had no utensils or plates. We waited 15 min and then I went inside and asked to get service. The waiter approached and we ordered an expensive bottle of wine as well as other drinks. . . They boast on being an "authentic Italian restaurant." Do restaurants in Italy serve "authentic" Lipton tea bags when you ask for hot tea??? . . Ok, I kept my mouth closed because didn't want to make a fuss. Then we ordered food. We ordered a cheese platter, a prosciutto platter, gnocchi, buffalo mozzarella with tomatoes, 3 pizzas, etc. . . The pizzas were not flavorful and tasted just ok. but we were a party of 7 people and wanted to try the different varieties of pizzas. . . My friend, a famous Beverly Hills Oral Surgeon asked the waiter if he could please have the pizzas cut. Yes, just to have the pizzas cut up into small pieces. He told us that they don't cut the pizzas. . . Then he went inside the restaurant and told the owner. So....... . . The owner came out rudely yelled at us as if we are children screaming that they don't cut the pizza and told us to get out of his restaurant. . . Just to let you know, we are all young professionals including a very popular Dermatologist, a successful Medical Business owner, an Oral Surgeon, and a Dentist out of our small group of 7. . . How do you treat people like this??? In America or anywhere??? The food was very average but the service was unspeakable. When people come to your business you should treat them as guests. Guests are supposed to be treated with respect. Can you imagine inviting guests to dinner and kicking them out for asking to have a pizza pie cut up into edible pieces? . . Remember, Max (I think this is the owner's name), in Los Angeles, there are lots of restaurants and in this economy and in general what brings people back is customer service and food. . . Needless to say, Terroni has lost not just 7 customers but our families, friends and this review and other reviews. . . Save your money and eat at Cobras and Madadors instead next door. Delicious tapas and wonderful attentive staff.
