ReviewID: G1Btee9vTHMRuka3lcRRfw
ReviewerID: 6c185JwTFKRVx7d6267VEw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
My girlfriend and I went to the Little Door for my birthday. She wanted to take me somewhere interesting and special for my 30th, and she'd heard a lot of good reviews from friends so she made a reservation for 8 PM (on a Saturday, my birthday.) We were excited about trying a new place that had come highly recommended.. . However, we immediately raised our eyebrows when we were seated. We were put in an area with bench/banquette seating where the tables are terribly close to each other. As in, the tiny blonde next to us could barely squeeze out of the banquette to use the restroom. We had to push our table over so she could pass.. . Also, the close quarters made it feel, erm,  less than romantic. There was a bored engaged couple to our left (the tiny coed had a giant diamond engagement ring), and a scared-looking, even-younger couple to my right. Neither couple looked like they were enjoying themselves. I suspect the blonde goes to Little Door once a week--she looked that disinterested. Like a previous review mentioned, it felt like we were on a double date with some very boring/bored strangers, and it made it hard to enjoy ourselves and have a private conversation.. . Furthermore, service was very slow throughout the meal, and our server seemed very detached. At a spendy place like Little Door, you expect a higher level of attention and care from the server but we simply felt forgotten at several points during the meal. He did not offer any suggestions or show any personality at all. It seemed like he was rushing between tables and didn't care about us. . . The food was okay--fresh, well-prepared, normal portions--but neither of us were wowed by our selections. We both had fish entrees and they were lackluster. I love French food but this was just so-so. The flavors were unremarkable. My girlfriend was a little bit bothered by her dish too--she doesn't eat meat except for fish and it seemed like her meal might contain some bacon or pancetta that was not mentioned on the menu.. . We finished our meal and sat there uncomfortably, listening to the bored couples chatting around us. Once again, it took a while for the server to appear and offer us dessert.. . Now, by the end of the meal, we were a little bit annoyed with the service, and my girlfriend's stomach was a little upset from the thought that she might've eaten pork, so when he presented the dessert menu on a nifty chalkboard, we were ambivalent about choosing a dessert. The server did not make any recommendations and we shrugged and he went to get our check.. . While he was fetching our check (which took at least five minutes--sheesh) my girlfriend looked very grumpy. I asked her what was wrong and she said that they were supposed to do something special for my birthday. The hostess who had taken her reservations said they would make me a special dessert and surprise me with it. Nothing appeared so she went to talk to one of the staff members. They told her that we'd have to order something for dessert first, and then they were going to decorate whatever we ordered (which kind of ruins a "surprise," don't you think? If I had to order it?). . My girlfriend was understandably miffed that this procedure wasn't explained to her when she made the reservation. Finally a hostess came over and apologized for the misunderstanding, and asked if we wanted to order a dessert after all, but by then, we were tired of the whole affair and just wanted to go home.. . All in all, a very disappointing experience at a place we wanted to love.
