ReviewID: G2DZeCHZVe2w0dl694NVcQ
ReviewerID: O70j6FC1Bq09T0xkVNsstA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
1 star for decor. 1 star for politeness. 1 star for clean water. . This place is clearly for special occasions, which was the reason I was here. If you live in the San Gabriel Valley, are Asian, coming here with Asians, have been at an "Asian Wedding Reception" or have had authentic Asian cuisines...DO NOT COME HERE!!!! The only thing that keeps this place in business is people who don't know that Chinese seafood can be had for cheap...cheaper than red lobster crap...but taste much fresher and better! and the fact that they are located the Beverly Hills.. . With a table of 7 we had eight dishes ($550+), their seafood was very fresh, but that's about all the good I have to say. Their "Secret Kitchen" is a sham because the only secret is that they don't know how to cook proper seafood the Asian way. . . The garlic noodles were good, but my mom, dad, aunts, uncles, myself can and have made it for years! their lobsters were undercooked to the point where the middle was not cooked. Their crab are the same ones I get for $3/lb at 99 Ranch market, so it would be $6 max....plus labor, maybe $10, not the $40 we paid. The crab was NOT FRESH, the meat was cooked until the meat evaporated and all that was left was the "fibers" of what used to be crab meat, all their food lacks the "Wok Air" . http://en.wikipedia.or....  . The lobster was lacking... the presentation was nice, but just because they give you the head/skull and two claw meat (aka, the un-tastiest meat of the lobster) doesn't mean they gave you a whole lobster. I felt ripped off with each bite.. . The salmon plate which was labeled at a "large plate" was anything but large, I have made much better salmon bought from Costco with a George Foreman Grill and it would not have cost me anywhere near the $38... for a piece 5X bigger! I seriously wanted to wait for the waiter to come over asked "how's everything" and just eat the salmon in one bite and tell him it SUCKED!. . If you want good authentic Asian seafood go here: . . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . with what we paid at Crustacean, we could've eaten at least 3 times and had MUCH MORE &amp; BETTER food!. . Like I said before, it's like having a stick shoved up you a$$, it's not for everyone. If you like a stick up you butt, come here, if you want good food go somewhere else, message me, I'll give you some suggestions in the SGV, you will spend about $150-200, you can give me $200, that would still save you $100.. . Crap-stacean is an experience, not a bad one, just not great, try it once with a significant other, large group not recommended.
