ReviewID: g3O2dIi3OV6dc8P49HXSQQ
ReviewerID: o00v9qTPAqMleVqyZbkm8A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Crawfish Shack Seafood
Category: Seafood
"Butter vs. Margarine". "Shack vs. Brick Building". "Atlanta vs. New Orleans". . That's what comes to mind after I ate here with "The Original Iron Stomach" that is Sean M.. . Driving up, I dug deep into my memories of eating these things in New Orleans, in a shacky atmosphere... When I rolled into the parking lot, those memories just stopped as I gazed upon a newly built brick building. Oh well. Hope the food is decent.. . The thing about this place is that the food is cheap. So I am not expecting some crazy meal here... It's not quite fast food, but it's not quite "slow" either... Nonetheless, I decided to go with the namesake and got a pound of crawfish and some potatoes and corn on the side. . . "With butter?" she asked... "Sure." I replied.. . What they called butter come to find out was margarine... Blech. Who uses that nowadays? Meh... Onto the crawfish.. . The things were decent sized, but the flavor was a little light. There was another table asking for the things to be super seasoned, and now I can understand why. The boil must have been a bit off based on what I am reading from other people, or maybe my palette/tolerance for spice is just different from others... Nonetheless, I wished it was a bit spicier.. . The texture was also a little disappointing. The things felt like they were left in the boil forever. Some were quite mushy. Not the feeling you want when you're working with your hands like this.. . The sides of potatoes and corn left much to be desired... I expected this though, as I am sure they try and put all their attention into the crawfish. The sad thing is that they just tasted like they were boiled separately from the seasoned pot with the crawfish. Shame... Oh, and of course, with margarine.... . Eh... I have a lot of Buford left to explore, but really, I kinda wanna come back. Maybe when they have butter... or when I bring my own. Hah. Otherwise, I need to tackle Plaza Fiesta. That'll take a while...
