ReviewID: G4mt5bqKVMMm6YayBe5pag
ReviewerID: dEZYEknsAxigSaq2n3tjVA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
This + "The Little Door" are my two favorite restaurants in LA.  5 star meal last night for dinner.  Exceptional in every way.. . The service: Our waiter, Hans, was terrific.  We were seated in the smaller, more private room (but not the room in the very back for private-parties only)... I highly recommend requesting a table back here.  Much quieter.  The service was friendly and efficient.  Great/conscientious recommendations.  Trust your server... he suggested the dessert and I literally squealed upon tasting.  Good call, Hans.. . The food: the burrata was to die for.  SO good.  We had two dishes, the first being sliiiightly better than the second, although I truly loved both.. 1. Burrata with bacon, marinated escarole &amp; carmelized shallots. 2. Burrata with asparagus, guanciale, brown butter &amp; almonds. YUM YUM YUM.. . We also shared a pasta dish (the ricotta gnudi... cheese pasta with spinach + mushrooms.  very good although i would not order again).. . For my secondi, I had the hangar steak marinated in balsamic with an arugula/parmesan salad.  BOMB.  i tried the beef brasato with polenta which was excellent too.  i could go either way on the beef dishes, but i liked my steak slightly more.  i don't eat fish, but the sea bass got rave reviews from my table and the server.. . dessert: we shared the strawberry crepe. i can't even write anything about this other than "wow." . . i have no eloquent words.  just book your "resi" immediately and savor every moment.  order at least one burrata dish, (it's the best), and a dessert.  try a crazy pasta if that's your thing (calf brains, anyone?).  even the bread and olive oil here are excellent.  great wine list too.  we had a great pinot noir -- (p.s. i'd go light on the reds here, this kind of italian food is subtle, not sauce-heavy.  the burrata was perfect with a really light pinot... but they have a helpful sommelier for more expert advice of course).. . cannot wait to go back.  5 stars 5 stars 5 stars.
