ReviewID: G5N0oEpuHxZTYKSDTw4i4g
ReviewerID: At-lIQECuwnFTN2jcbiQZw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Fiddlehead Cafe
Category: American (New)
First time ever walking into Fiddlehead Cafe.........it won't happen again.. . Joined three friends for brunch on Sunday Oct. 5th and one of the guys suggested Fiddlehead......said they always wanted to check it out.. . We arrived and there was no wait at all at 1pm. We were looking over the menu and noticed that there was a direct blast of cold air hitting us from overhead.......we asked about adjusting it and were told they were not allowed to adjust it.......(note to self, when meal comes, be sure and eat quickly so your hot food doesn't get cold). . Ordered two coffees and two Bloody Mary's, they were fine......coffee was actually excellent. Ordered our meals and when they arrived. I ordered Eggs Benedict, received some fish and egg dish......I saw the paltry amount of potatoes on the plate and asked for an additional side of them......they took away the erroneous order and a minute later brought me my correct order which had even a smaller amount of potatoes.....about enough for 4 fork fulls.........btw, never saw the additional order of potatoes.. . When the original order was brought to the table, one of our group had ordered a burger and fries.......but there was no catsup or mustard, so we asked for those to be brought to us along with some Tabasco. Several visits to nearby tables by our waitress and still no condiments. The other guys asked the waitress again and she stammered that she would return with it again........it never happened.......I finally tired of two of our group waiting so they could eat so I tried to get the attention of two ladies at the Hostess Station........they reacted like they didn't know how to respond with something like, "Is there something I can do for you?".........So I get up walk over and now they are joined by what I assumed was the manager or owner........I sternly, but politely informed him about the fact that we had been waiting for condiments so we could eat and were tiring of the inability of the waitstaff to get their act together.......(trust me, it was not busy in this place). . Condiments finally come, oh but geez somehow they forgot the Tabasco.......well at least one person could begin to eat.........that is as the cold air is blasting on the table top and naturally I knew it was going to be a problem if any of the meals got messed up........so finally the Tabasco gets here.........and now for me to start eating.......how do you mess up Eggs Benedict........well they succeeded to do so......no flavor.......Hollandaise was poor.......no tartness at all.......isn't there supposed to be lemon in the flavor somewhere?..........The ham had no flavor as well.........sad, very sad.. . The waitress finally comes back to the table after hanging with the hostess staff behind the bar, not even at the Hostess Station and cleared the plates I had stacked since they sat so long, empty in front of us. Then returned with our check and just dropped it on the end of our table with not a word to us.. . No attempt was ever made to apologize for the lack of service or errors made. The other three felt equally unimpressed.. . And the worst part of the meal was paying the bill totalling $77.00 for a bad experience, sad food and a poor excuse for service........ . Take a guess at how much our tip ended up being?. . I wonder why this pleasantly decorated, well situated restaurant has no one waiting in line to get in the door?.........hmmmmmmmm......I think it's time for a few changes before they have to padlock the door.
