ReviewID: G5Rm7WkVbu4ocBr9rV8qyg
ReviewerID: mlWkJSqc_GIQzgtzadXWWw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sun In My Belly
Category: Caterers
Ok, so after my first trip here I was all ready to give SIMB 5 stars with a glowing review, however my second trip brought me down several notches. Let me explain- . The first time I came here with a friend, he only had awesome things to say about SIMB and they did not disappoint. I had the tuscan turkey sandwich with the soup (black beans and tomatoes) as the side. He had the same breakfast sandwich he said he always gets. The sandwich was divine: soft, fresh bread, just the right amount of turkey (i hate when they pile it up on there and that's all you taste), fresh baby spinach and fantastic cheese. The soup was so good that I asked for the recipe- it was spice yet not overwhelming and the texture was so perfect. The staff was like a ghost, which is how I like it- always taking care of you, but never in your face and interrupting.  Buttttt- . The second trip. Ugh! it was like all the worst parts of eating out thrown into one trip. We got there (same friend) when it was no busier than last time, during a weekday lunch. We both ordered the same thing, but they didn't have the soup :-( so I got chips. The staff was there to take an order and then they were gone. The food was brought out by (maybe?) one of the cooks, his order was wrong and mine had no chips. He talked to her and within, maybe, 10 minutes the right order was brought out by the server who apologized. My tuscan sandwich was different this time around. I consulted the menu and there was no change from the last time, but there was some inexplicable orangish-red spread on it, which kinda tasted like it had pimento and sun dried tomatoes in it. I HATE sun dried tomatoes. However, the wait staff was no where to be seen for several minutes and we were on a time limit since it was lunch during a work day. I scrapped it off and ate the sandwich anyway, which was dry and piled with turkey. The chips were bagged which was nothing to write home about. My friend was perfectly happy with his meal. It also took *forever* to flag down the server so we could  finally get our check. . I am giving an additional star because we tried to use scoutmob- first and last time i'm using that app because it didn't work- and the server was kind enough to give us the discount even though we didn't have the correct "code". . I'm not writing SIMB off because there are so many reasons why I should love this place- consistency not being one of them. I will go again, but with different expectations and a whole lot of time on my hands.
