ReviewID: G80IXmeEp87h6lKVkHYUEw
ReviewerID: Eo98pMPN_hlfhc8g-e56Bg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
The décor is crisp and fresh with white being in abundance.  Despite this the restaurant does not look stark or plain and this is due to the excellent lighting, enough to let you see what you are eating with just the slight amount of dimness, just enough to make you feel like you're someplace special.  The design has been thought down to the flatware and glasses which all feature kitschy mid-century reminiscent designs.  Ciudad also offers some of the only, and best, outdoor dining in downtown.  The outdoor area has great views of the neighboring office towers and is walled off so you're not out on the sidewalk with people walking by.. . They have an extensive wine list if that's your thing, but as for me . . . well you know.  I had the Brazilian Margarita which featured brazilin liquor called cachaca which is made of fermented sugar cane juice.  It was different but tasty, light and refreshing.  Cocktails start at $9.50 and go up to $15 for the premium liquors, not too bad. . . Onto the food:  I've been here numerous times and I am never disappointed by the fish.  The menu changes seasonally so it's hard for me to recommend something that isn't on the menu anymore or won't be for much longer but it's a good bet that whatever fish is offered is going to be great.  Last night I had the chile rubbed Mahi Mahi which comes with cilantro sauce and saffron mashed potatoes.  It was fresh and cooked perfectly with just the slightest amount of spice, delicious. I started the meal off with the spinach empanadas which are filled with well, spinach, and manchego cheese.  You would think this is standard fare but the empanada is set off with the inclusion of pine nuts and raisons.  I was surprisingly pleased and was left wanting more. . . I had the chocolate cake for dessert and although it wasn't bad I can't recommend it, it just wasn't that flavorful or special.  Next time I'm going to try the torta de tres leches.. . Good to know:. . Don't expect to come here for a cheap or "reasonably priced" meal.  The dinner entrees start at $26 and go up from there.  The restaurant has recently started offering a Prix Fixe menu for $38 with 3 courses and 3 choices for each.  Considering most entrees were around $28 this was an excellent deal.  I shared one and it was fine for a later meal, though you'll probably need to get one each if you're really hungry since portions are on the smaller side.  Ciudad also offers reduced prices for lunch with prices around $20 and "small plates" throughout the day for cheaper.  Ciudad also has one of the best happy hours in downtown with a tapas menu and bar specials.. . Bathrooms are of course clean and well stocked.  Valet parking is available on Figueroa and the restaurant does offer validated parking in the adjacent lot for $5 during happy hour and dinner.  I just wanted to say though, that even though it's only $5 I feel like I'm being screwed by paying it, there is NO businesses open at that time and the lot is virtually empty.  If it wasn't for the restaurant there would be no one parked at all.  Unfortunately there is no street parking nearby, oh well.
