ReviewID: g9s6yghx-iu9wfEKwQBMwQ
ReviewerID: GnmkToqwCjWwi_cRGkL7ug
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
First off before I begin my rant and rave, the food was really good and fresh, and our waitress Jen was excellent and made up for the bad impression we had before being seated. Actually I'd rate it 3 1/2 stars, but can't seem to get the half star to roll over! lol.. . Before you even lay a foot into this place, make sure  your reservation is confirmed! OMG! When we arrived tonight for our reservations at 5:45 pm for 3 people that I phoned in 2 weeks ago and left my name and number and showing up at the restaurant a little before our reservation time, thinking that we have a reservation, only to find out that their reservation system says that we don't. The host and hostess, who were rather rude to us and didn't greet us nicely at the door, said that if I didn't get a call from the restaurant to confirm the reservation, then that means we don't have a reservation. No one told me about that policy and the hostess said they don't tell anyone who calls in about that, they just do that as their policy. The host, who speaks with a thick accent and I barely understood him did not offer a sympathetic ear or help or even offer to seat us without a reservation, til luckily a younger guy, dressed in a nice suit, who I assume is the manager, came up and said maybe the name was put in wrong or something and he gave helpful suggestions, and then from there, he was able to get us seated.. . We sat in the covered patio area, under the heat lamps and it was actually nice to sit there and we were glad we  weren't stuck in the lowly lit part inside. And our waitress Jen and her servers were the best! They made a bad situation more comfortable for us to enjoy this birthday celebration for my brother. I'm not much of a wine drinker, so I had a mojito instead and that was really good. The fresh bread with the olive tapenade was delicious!  . . We had the baby beet salad with the fresh homemade ricotta and hazelnuts, and actually I'm not a beet person, but it tasted really good. It had a slight sweetness to it and I seldom taste that when I eat beets! The ricotta was so smooth and yummy. Next we each ordered different pasta dishes, the lamb with gnocchi, lamb with rigatoni in a bolognese sauce, and I ordered what basically was a homemade chicken soup with bread crumb pasta noodles and those were really good. At first glance, the noodles look like the chinese crunchy noodles that are dropped in soup, but thank goodness they weren't! The broth was tasty too. I don't like lamb much, and not a big fan of pork and beef either and I wasn't in the fish mood, so I was limited on some dishes. Our waitress was very helpful in giving us suggestions on the menu items.. . And then comes the scrumptious desserts. I read so much about the Ricotta Fritters with fresh strawberries and balsamic reduction, that I had to get it. We also had the Rhubarb pastry with a lemon sorbet swirl. The sorbet swirl was so fresh. The pastry was light and flaky, a tad on the buttery side, so if you like butter, then that's good for you. The ricotta fritters smelled so good when they put the plate down on the table, and it tasted heavenly! I enjoyed that dish very much along with my coffee.. . Now would I go back? Yes, I do want to try the bar menu because it has the cheese fondue and the chocolate fondue on there and the appetizers look good on that menu. . . We heard about the rave review the NY Times gave this restaurant, and yeah the food is really good. I just wish the greeters/ host/hostesses were nicer. They gave an attitude that isn't pleasant and that's not a good first impression when you walk through the door. But I will tell people that the food is good and at least worth a try.
