ReviewID: G_6wXN9faewVheAt3N88-Q
ReviewerID: zjWhzUWLLrZTnTbTl5mGhQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Real Food Daily
Category: Vegetarian
*I incorrectly and previously posted this for Santa Monica, whereas it's for West Hollywood.. . If anything, the idiosyncrasy of the surrounding area and the temperament of this apparent 'progressive' restaurant is hilarious. A visage that displays one attitude, yet possesses another under the veil; an attribute that is evident in some members of the staff, a manager, and the place in general. . . I never thought I'd level a scathing review here, but I, and friends, have been nothing but insulted by Real Food Daily, especially Hollywood which is where we once frequented most.. . Let's start with the basics of a restaurant: the food. I've been Vegan for years, have had an avid interest in the culinary arts for longer, and worked for a Michelin star rated chef as an apprentice cook (not claiming any great experience of course!). The food is dull, flavourless and without any real direction. I've visited Vegan restaurants all over the world, and being that most are provide a supermundane dining experience (a Vegan is easily satisfied), this is the most mundane, which is a kick in the teeth when you look at the prices. Vegans must not get carried away, and now thanks to great choice in cosmopolitan cities, shouldn't be so easily satisfied.. . It seems like the restaurant is operated by a Kitchen Manager most probably. There is no way there is an operating 'chef' or 'cook' who has any considerable play in the Menu. This is not how a kitchen should work. There needs to be intrigue and excitement for the cooking from a kitchen, lead by the so called visionary, head, or executive. This looks like a word for word play from a set menu. There are dishes that completely lack flavour, it's absurd! The Nachos are great though... big deal. My Gran lived on a farm and could make Vegan nachos.. . The staff is a big problem too, mostly to do with being spearheaded by a manager I consider to be ruthlessly mechanical. Sadly, I have observed this, and this one in particular seems to be void of any real love or attachment. She came to my table, and delivered the wrong food, then false apologized (ugh the smile), after I waited forever whilst my colleague ate. Not cool at all. There's quite obviously a complete lack of a nexus between management and staff, which is known to be necessary to breed an enjoyable and happy work environment, which we all know is most important in a restaurant. If I noticed that, the staff probably notice it, no chance off the blocks.. . Being that some of these staff have problems off the bat, this is also a problem. The ones that are quite clearly the actors of the pack, well they are the ones with the problems. Honestly, if you don't like that person at the table over there, don't pretend to, I'm sure they'd rather just have you not even look them in the eye and just provide them with their food. They don't like you either, and with that kind of 'false acting', you're probably going to never get a good gig, so stop trying to network at a restaurant. This bad food is being further spoiled by your attitude. You're ridiculous, go away. Again, this does not apply to all of them, and most importantly with the wrong management, you're not going to get the right kind of people employed, and those already there with potential probably have a stale taste based on their relationship with superiors, which is not inspiring to create good character. Employing people on looks and not books is wrong and lacking any business sensibility. This would only happen somewhere as perverted as West Hollywood.. . To clarify, I've been going on and off for years. I'm Vegan, and when you get offered a meeting and you're round the corner, this is the place you're going to no doubt need to arrange it at, it is well known. It's taken me a long time before I could give this place no more chances, subsequently writing this review. I will not be going here again until I hear things have massively changed.. . There's plenty more that is terrible, I am continually questioning myself over writing this, as I do it, yet it is more and more convincing that it is worthwhile. The décor and artwork is unintuitive, uninspiring and ugly. There are many more ways the place could operate with good profit, yet better prices. Hello? Sustainability, Veganism, Agricultural Progression, Recession? Is this restaurant in a parallel Universe, where everyone in the world is as affluent as they are in West Hollywood, thus making the food so terrible, yet so expensive? Oh it isn't, but it is in West Hollywood, home of so called 'liberals' and 'progressives' who wave wands, claim a coherent understanding of Eastern philosophy (you don't, and the Nineties are over you imbecile), and buy Green Credits on their homes, without wondering what exactly is the purpose of that. Why is this relevant? Because if you despise such shallowness and ignorance, you'll be surrounded by said customers ranting loudly about such rubbish whilst you try to enjoy your meal.
