ReviewID: gA5vwWoOF6j_gOB4VTQzGA
ReviewerID: lQUjm1uyNYf--qlqjXfD-A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
Tried The Hungry Cat on Saturday night (August 29).  We made same day reservations for 8PM. .   . Restaurant is next to Borders on Vine &amp; Sunset (down corridor).  Thank goodness for Borders because restaurant is not visible from street.  We scored street parking on Vine but realized it was only for an hour so we moved to the parking structure.  Even with validation, its going to come out to $8 to park - I am not a fan of paying to park anywhere.  On the plus side, the parking structure elevator did drop us off right at the door of the restaurant - so that was cool. .   . We were early by 15 minutes but were still seated.  We had a choice of inside or outside &amp; chose outside.  My first mistake.  This happened to be one of the HOTTEST weekend's in LA (and smokiest with the fires).  Tables are simply set with candle light so it was romantic - it was pretty dark.  I ordered a mint lemonade w/ soda water ($5 non-alcoholic).  It was good - not too sweet, semi-tart &amp; hitting the spot since it was about 90 degrees outside with absolutely no breeze (since outside is still surrounded by tall concrete walls).  Tables are closely set to each other so do not expect to have any private conversations..   . My second (&amp; biggest mistake) was I ordered one of the specials for the night - crab stew.  It was delicious!  But it was definitely NOT a good pick for a hot summer night.  It was basically a soup &amp; hot so I was literally sweating while eating it (sorry, I know that is gross).  It was not the appropriate dish to order on such a hot night &amp; it was no one's fault but my own.  Maybe if we were sitting inside in the air conditioning... but truly the kitchen did not put any thought into the weather when creating the specials for that day. .   . The crab stew was $24 dollars.  Not sure if that was a good deal since it only came with one crab claw, some very few tiny crab pieces and fresh vegetables like leek in stew along with two pieces of delicious toast (for dipping).  No matter the night &amp; no matter how tasty it was - I do not think it was a good value.  Especially when I saw others enjoying a heck of a lot more seafood for about the same price. .   . But I am ahead of myself...  For starters, we shared their appetizer special (fried clams with homemade potato salad, arugula in light vinaigrette dressing &amp; the most scrumptious aioli sauce! $14) &amp; the asparagus salad (grilled asparagus, house-made pancetta, walnuts, arugula &amp; a crispy egg $12).  Both were fantastic... I could have eaten fried clams all night!!  I would consider these small plates (obviously since they are just starters) but it was enough for the two of us to share &amp; to get the jest..   . We also ordered the pug burger.  Everyone raves about it &amp; we like burgers plus we have pugs so why not :)  It is the ONLY non-seafood item on the menu.  This is not a burger you can hold in your hand &amp; realistically bite into - it is HUGE!  We got it with a fried egg on top ($18).  It was a good burger.  They were very generous with the fries &amp; we asked for all sorts of additional dipping sauces..   . Dessert was limited to 4 choices.  We got the tres leche ($6).  BUT it was not like any tres leche I've ever tasted nor seen.  It was sliced like a cheesecake (triangle shape &amp; had an odd texture - not creamy nor rich - I could not get pass the curd like bits &amp; pieces.  I could have skipped on the whole dessert thing all together but my husband loves dessert (i.e. anything sweet) so he liked the tres leche..   . If I could re-do the night, I would still have sat outside (it was much louder inside with a lot more hustle &amp; bustle with the bar, tables &amp; staff running back &amp; forth) but I would not have ordered the crab stew.  We should have enjoyed one of their seafood tiers - it would have been light &amp; refreshing. .   . Something I noticed that we did NOT get was the oyster cracker bowl in lieu of bread... for some reason we did not get the bowl of pre-packaged oyster crackers.  Not a big deal because we did not need... but I always like to have the opportunity to get the full experience &amp; I feel we got shorted on that part.  I'm not crying about it though ;) .   . Reservations - make them!!  even if its last minute... nothing is worst than trying to just walk in a place in LA . Parking - parking structure - expect to pay $8. Dress - LA casual. Hostess - friendly, helpful &amp; let us pick the table we wanted (usually they can be pretty snobby about things like that) . Server - Todd was nice &amp; friendly . Food Quality - very fresh . Food Taste - flavorful &amp; tasty . Price - above reasonable - all entrees are in the $20's (except pug burger), that you have to expect to at least spend $30 per person (that's if you only order one entree, tax + tip) but that's unlikely since you'll have drinks &amp; maybe appetizers &amp; dessert. .   . Would I go back?  Yes - for LUNCH.  I would love to try their lobster roll.  As for dinner, there are many more restaurants on my list of want-to-try before I go back to The Hungry Cat.
