ReviewID: GAcgS_uZVqeZx4YzulPC-Q
ReviewerID: CsLsfpHlHrInwBfJmjR-zg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
With (finally) a bit of chill in the air and Daikokuya's wait was a bit longer than some slightly inebriated people can bear on a cool autumn evening, the allure of a nice, hot bowl of ramen was irresistible, and it was no better time than any to have some hot ramen from Orochon.  . . I've been waiting to give this place a try practically for as long as I've called myself a Yelper.  Whether I'd want to take their infamous #2 challenge, I like soup and noodles and spicy, and  this place serves the stuff.  I'm just glad that prior to my going here, I was told by a very reliable source that aside from the challenge they pose on customers, their ramen doesn't have much of a draw. . . Hot ramen is exactly what you get here.  The bowls are numbered and ranked by spiciness, with three types of soup bases (miso, shoyu, shio) and added extras (with standard fare such as eggs, and more interesting adds like butter) as options. . . I ordered a standard shoyu #3 with no extras, as I wanted the spice without much of a challenge, and a side order of gyoza to share.  As I was pretty hungry (and maybe just a little drunk), I dove right in, but was still presented with a challenge: the thing was too damn hot (temperature-wise) to actually consume.  Even when taking them out and blowing on them for a while, their stringy al dente (read: HARD) noodles were still on fire.  The broth itself had a nice kick to it, but the jalapeno flavor was a little too overpowering for my tastes.  Fortunately, I discovered the little well of garlic at the bottom of the bowl, which helped balance the flavor a bit.  Either way, I did miss the flavor of the shoyu and the little hints of sesame/chili oil that I managed to taste.  I'm not much a fan of meat in my soup, but the tiny slivers of pork was okay for a spoonful or two, but most of them were tossed over to the bowl next to me. . . Their "gyoza" are juicy, full of filling and tasty, but when you get down to brass tacks, they're actually large pieces of shumai. The essential difference between gyoza and shumai is that gyoza wrapper seals the contents within, and shumai is like a little open pouch of filling, of which Orochon's dumpling offering is definitely the (very tasty) latter.. . I have to give it up to the ladies working here, for they're really on top of their game.  Your finger may not be off the button to call them, and they're already at your side to fulfill whatever request you may have.  The space itself reminds me a lot of Curry House that's one level down with it's clean, white interior. . . Though I'm tempted to see how their miso would fare (for I hear that one has mushrooms, and the earthiness of the two flavors may calm the broth flavor a bit), such a combo may be WAY too filling when I couldn't even finish a plain shoyu serving.  I'm not signing this place off just yet - for the place may be a good place to go in a pinch, and if they'd consider putting spinach as an extra, I'd definitely consider coming back, but I'm pretty sure that I'd not punish myself to even try for the #2 challenge.
