ReviewID: galM8Ec8Mk11YtO1_enU_A
ReviewerID: mteJOlja359dj7XYQnKzCg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Been here a few times already, but keep forgetting to post about it.   . I'm sure that this place has had enough reviews, but here goes my addition to the long long list.  . . A trendy bar with good burgers and a ton of beer :)  They do things a tad bit different here than at most places you'd go grab a bite and a drink.  First you order your food from the bar and then go to your seat where they bring it back to you, kinda like at Panera or Corner Bakery.  . . Food - The office burger is what i have everytime I go, cuz it's easy and it's good.  It's a gourmet burger, served w/ spinach and gorgonzola and it's pretty good.  I don't really have to add any other condiments to the burger, considering what an incredible ketchup lover I am(trust me, ask my friends, he he he).  . . Price - I said it was a trendy spot to start, so be prepared to pay for your burger, your beer, and your sides.  Had 2 beers, a burger and an order of fries and my part of the bill came roughly to about $30.  The beers aren't ridiculously expensive, but they're not usually served in 16oz glasses, like at most bars.  But it's what I expected to pay at a place like this, so no ding on the $$$ from me.  . . On a busy night this place can get crazy, esp on the weekends.  I try to come during the week if the boys are callin out an FO stop.  . . Service - Ain't the greatest.  The bartenders can get a little short w/ you, and because you're ordering from the bar and your food gets dropped off at the table...not much comes your way as far as service is concerned.  However, I was there w/ a few friends a while back on a cold night sitting way out from the warmth of the heaters when a table opened up.  One of the staff members told us there were openings there and it was warmer, which was nice and unnecessary and totally made our day.  But don't expect much service...it's still a bar afterall =p. . Parking - Again, great on the weekdays, pretty bad on the weekends.  Luckily my folks live nearby and we can all meet there and park cars and cp if ever necessary, but private lots all fill up when this place is rockin.  Plus you have the Jazz Cafe and all the other places around that compete for spots.  . . I've yelped before about this, but the resto on the corner, Beacon, has GREAT burgers too, and far less people crowding it up! :)
