ReviewID: GAQ-M840aw0cbDmg94LRew
ReviewerID: U-ixYU58xaCSLdBTQ_tLYQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: De Cero Taqueria
Category: Mexican
De Cero....De Cero.....how I can count many taxi rides to my home 6 blocks away because of you.  This place is super yummy....I am a huge Mexican food fan and this place is good by many accounts.  Not many other places in the city are going to offer you as many different varieties of tacos and also allow you the ability to order a variety of them within a set price - meaning X number of tacos for X number of dollars.  Here are some more insider tips that will def help your pocket and belly feel good (can't promise your head the next day!):. . (01)  Please order the DUCK NACHOS!!!!  Seriously - I love these bad boys.  Every time I recommend this place to a friend or business client I tell them to have these guys and there is never a letdown.  FYI - they are greasy, cheesy, and NACHO-Y so don't get them if you are a health nut.. . (02)  I crave....CRAVE their hibiscus margaritas but at $9.25 a glass I can't get more than a couple.  ENTER THE PITCHER!!!!  Ok - so you get about 4.5 glasses a pitcher (make sure to order it with light ice) which saves you 10 bucks give or take.  You do the math...... . (03) Ok....time for the downer portion of the review.  No matter how many times I ask (even asked the owner who knows me by name) they will NOT reserve an outside seat during the summer.  So show up earlier and plant yourself at the bar and wait.. . (04)  Servers are usually really sweet and helpful, but I have been there on more than one occasion where I have had to check someone on their attitude.  I'm not the type to feel special or like I deserve more, but if the server is having a bad day it's not my fault.  I had to go "Jersey" one day just to get water.  Just a warning....... . I would recommend (and have recommended) this place to business associates, and  anyone that asks.  Just be weary of your server.  If it is bad - let the hostess or on-site manager know - because this place does try to rectify the situation.
