ReviewID: GAtIfdFPUs92eXeNNoN0AA
ReviewerID: 3Fof3CHYNQDgAplOUNWurg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
Seeking Burger Vindication at the Hungry Cat  on Friday (2/12) or also titled:. . "How to Make a Baby Elephant Float" ??? (Yo La Tengo ref # 10). . Upon entering the Hungry Cat--that is after finding it... Tucked into the back corner of a little finger-shaped opening, Hungry Cat takes refuge behind little potted trees where a sign hardly proclaims you have found your eatery. . . The Hungry cat was dark and dressy. It was date night. Hungry Cat also had a modern and minimalist feel like a Mark Singer place. . . It took little time to order (it is burger night, after all) so I put in my request for the Pug Burger with egg, bacon, avocado but hold the cheese (variety: Blue). This burger with egg totals at $18--rather expensive. My friend did the same save for the egg. . . Our waiter told us two things, the first: that the burger would take 25 minutes ( are you listening Q-cina), secondly: this was a seafood house so it would be wise to place an order for some sort of appetizer for them to flex that muscle. We did so, putting an order in for the the shrimp ($19). . . They arrived tossed in olive oil, parsley and chili flakes. They were large about 10 filled the plate--made for perfect sharing. Mild flavors. They are served with a wedge of lemon and some cocktail sauce. . . The Burger Breakdown:. . The Pug burger arrives open faced prominently displaying a patty of meat that is an inch thick buried under a raw slice of red onion and red leaf lettuce. The other half shows an over-easy egg. The burger is served on a light and non-invasive take of an english muffin (attn: Bowery). Surrounded by a semicircle of thin fries. A tray has been provided with ketchup, dijon and aioli. Also in mid-meal the waiter will bring a bowl of water and extra towels to make for an easier clean-up. . . The patty was charred and cooked perfectly to a medium. It was a nice grind, a lot of fat was released with each bite. The bacon and the egg were a little heavy on the sodium. Each bite became a little over-seasoned. The avocado worked tirelessly to neutralize the salinity of the burger but it proved futile. The balance was not there.. . That burger will definitely be tried again... it seemed like it could have just been a salty night in the kitchen. It is a shame because that grind was savory and generous. It was an improvement from my miss the week before but a little too expensive to be trying every week. . . On the Side: The service was friendly... not the host but our waiter. Great communication and full of recommendations. . . So to make that baby elephant float we add a little salt... well a lot. The burger was a 3 1/2 star burger that warrants another try when another payday rolls around. The elements of an amazing burger are there but it was probably just an off night.
