ReviewID: gcrQl4tu251Zfu-LnGgZQw
ReviewerID: 1F0o_vgecqTcvT0yxzYJTA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
I went to Fraiche on Halloween for a business dinner.  I was toying with the idea of crashing the Yelpoween with a borrowed  tiny pocahontas costume from my daughter (which I would have had to squeeze into since she's two sizes smaller than me)...which would have made me a sorry PorkahonTatas! . Ok, so the biz dinner prevented me from becoming the butt of yelp jokes (no pun intended).. Fraiche was dead...(of course, everybody was at Yelpoween!) and decorated with a lot of cute jack-o-lanterns. A confession is that I am not at all familiar with Culver City and I was surprised that there was NO valet parking.  Did you know that valet is a L.A. invention?? I'm so dependent on it that I get dizzy and lightheaded when I have to search for street parking or a parking structure.  Ok, fast forward... I scored a metered parking right out front.  Frazzled, I ordered my usual boring appletini and am told they don't make that. I ordered a blood orange-tini that the waiter recommended.  I was with a serious bunch of folks so there was no interesting conversation....let me just list what I ordered and tasted:. Pumpkin puree soup with cinnamon and marshmallow - original and surprisingly good.  It could have made a good dessert though! Avoid the marshmallows floating on top if you don't want a sweet appetizer. $6. Delicious french bread with olive spread.. Burratini with heirloom tomatoes - excellent with a generous blob of burratini (creamy mozzarella) with balsamico. Dozen oysters ($25) - great!. Kurobuta porkchops (in japanese -kuro=black, buta= pig) - also excellent...THICK, tender, and moist with the right ratio of fat. Came with polenta which was thick and gummy...a consistency not common in Italian polenta, but good.. . Some trivia about Kurobuta (black pork) - it has 10 times Vitamin B1 (ease chronic pain and treat chronic alcoholics) than beef, and high B12 (decrease dementia). Lower caloric content than you'd expect. All of us yelpers could use it, no?. . My colleagues got the branzina with bell peppers ($26)  and french monkfish over potato puree. Branzina came in parchment paper that the waiter cuts open at the table.  I had just had the best branzina at La Terza, and Fraiche's version was much smaller and dry.  Monkfish was huge and triple the size of the branzina, and overwhelmed by the potato puree it was placed on top of.  . I think I made the best choice (porkchop) .. . All three entrees were in the mid 20s, with pasta well under 20. After all the hype I had heard about this place, I was surprised of the low price.  I was expecting Craft/Cut prices.. I had a clear view of  the owner /chef working hard in the open kitchen and unfortunately a better view of a couple who displayed too much PDA. Would have been fine except for the fact that it was a 65 plus middle eastern guy with a 20 something asian boy toy.  The boytoy would dangle his pasta seductively and reenact 9 1/2 weeks with all his food. Old man was very amused. I was grossed out and had a hard time diverting my gaze elsewhere.. I had to taste some desserts that the owner's Japanese pastry chef wife prepares so I ordered: apple strudel, and a pear tart. $8 each. (yeah 2 desserts...didn't know I was a pig??) .  Beautifully presented but I must have ordered two desserts that were too similar. Both had  beautiful, light, buttery crust....and came with delicious icecream.  Only difference was that one had apple and the other pear.. Must take 1 and a half stars off for super slow service.  Dinner stretched out to more than 3 hours and the place was not at all busy.  You know who you are...I'm still up for an impromptu UYE here, since I would love to give this place another try with better company ....and  Fraiche did show some promise.
