ReviewID: gcSpKTACQRU3jCSwhia_hw
ReviewerID: 8fRzy-hF3YkIGQHKp6vabw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Let me start by saying that I never eat hot dogs. I probably have eaten maybe 3 hot dogs in the past decade. I think they're insanely unhealthy and just not delicious enough to warrant the decrease in life expectancy. But Pink's, I'll say it holds a membership in the  "best meals I've ever had" group.. . Pink's is probably better known as an attraction than a restaurant. I had heard about it for so long from people all around me, and I knew I had to try it. Finally one weekend, three buddies and I went to see if Pink's could live up to the hype. We got there and ordered our dogs. The only word that could describe my dog was...EPIC. I pretty much just asked for every single ingredient they had. Seriously I didn't eat the whole day that day so I was freaking starving. Waiting in line for about an hour didn't help...especially when the final half hour of that line showcased all the different dogs along their walls. . . I'm still amazed by how good the memory of the employees are. I literally ordered 10 toppings (my friends about the same) and he recited it perfectly right after. The next 10 minutes of waiting were grueling.... . Finally, after getting my dog, we sat down at one of the tables and proceeded to chow down. . . OH MY GOD. That was all I could think when I took a bite. I don't know if I was just extra hungry but this was seriously one of the best meals of my life....and I've been to some great restaurants.  It was also one of my messiest. I reverted back to caveman status in that meal. I took big, globby, sloppy bites, chewed with my mouth open, picked up strips of bacon and lowered them in my mouth, licked my fingers, scooped up the fallen toppings from the plate and stuffed em in my mouth. I looked like an animal, I looked like a beast. I felt like the center attraction in one of those Carls Jr commercials....it was glorious.. . I've only been to Pink's once but I can definitely say it HIT THE SPOT.
