ReviewID: gCykRyd2M4OMNPyVhszYzg
ReviewerID: ZYZNcugF3xUEGyLOVGiZ0Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cafe Selmarie
Category: American (Traditional)
I had been trying to get to this restaurant for over a year- for a friend mentioned it to me last Summer and it sounded like the perfect spot for a nice casual dinner. . . On a recent Summer's night- I finally made my way up to Cafe Selmarie and was wondering what I was thinking to have moved this little gem so far down my list? It was exactly what we were looking for. . . On Wednesday nights- wine is half priced, so my friend went on line to see what kind of wines they had. One of them struck his fancy, but he likes it cold, ice cold, so he called the restaurant and asked them to ice it down. What a great idea for a hot night! They were very accommodating and we were happy . .and all for a very reasonable price. . . The food was terrific as well. I started with the marinated goat cheese and greens and he had the lobster filled crepe. Both were delicious! . . For our entrees, I went with the herb roasted chicken with mashed potatoes and my friend just told the server to surprise him and bring out her favorite dish. A great idea as the roasted pork with bacon and tomato compote was a great combination of flavors. . . I loved that the front of the restaurant is a small bakery, so for dessert we wandered around looking at the display cases finally deciding on a cupcake for me, and a piece of pistachio cheesecake for him. The perfect sweet ending to our perfect meal. . . Service was great- friendly and welcoming, offering up wonderful suggestions and taking care of us in the best way possible. At the end of our dinner, I felt as if I had almost found a new friend! . . You can enjoy your meal outside overlooking Giddings Plaza or indoors in their simply furnished dining room. And if you drive- there is plenty of metered parking right out front or a pay lot right around the corner. . . A terrific restaurant with great service and wonderful food. Don't do as I did and wait to go. Go now. You'll thank me later!
