ReviewID: gd0NoKcIeq8hLlBgtDg9KA
ReviewerID: CBYVZ2Kn_2_oq7_a33pBYA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Fogo is only the 2nd Brazilian BBQ joint I've been to and I'd say it was pretty solid, but didn't blow me away like I anticipated.. . Thumbs up:. -The service was spot on. Waters are served upon seating and once you're ready to flip the card to green, you will literally have BBQ guys forming a line by your table waiting to slice off a piece of meat for you. I think they've developed a hawk-eye for seeing green at a table. Well that happened to us at least because we were the 2nd table from the kitchen so most of the meats we got were piping fresh :). . -I was impressed with the salad bar and the quality of it, they have a variety of olive oils/balsamic vinegars for u to choose and use! Also, their tuna salad was yummy and so were the SUNDRIED TOMATOES! I had a whole plate of them.. and we're talkin huge pieces of sundried tomatoes. yummm.. . -We ordered a pitcher of sangria (SO MUCH even for 2!) and it was nice and refreshing with fresh cut pieces of apple and strawberries. I was warming up after 3 semi large glasses... not too sure but I think the more popular drink to order is their mojito? Saw a lot of them going around, but our pitcher was plenty. . -The FLAN!!!! normally I wouldn't order dessert, but it was the bf's bday and we chose to share a flan which was absolutely ah-ma-zing! I know I said Taleo's flan was good and didn't think anything could beat it but I have now found my new best flan... it was the PERFECT combination of sweetness and consistency. The caramel that is on the plate isn't overly sweet and there is a bottom brown sugar layer which reminded me of creme brulee crust, only not crunchy :) REALLY REALLY yummy, and won't make you feel like you just gained 5lbs. Plus, they comp any dessert of choice for bdays!. . Thumbs down:. -A lot of the meat was cooked Medium/Medium well, even when I asked for a Medium rare piece, for the exception of ONE.. I forgot which cause they talk so damn fast and are rushing but literally, only one of my pieces was cooked MR.. the rest were a little too cooked. The bf also got a WELL DONE piece when we asked for MR, so it seems they either don't keep track or don't care about what temp you request.. . -DO NOT EAT THE PORK RIBS! okay, maybe a center cut might be fine, but I had the first cut on the end and had bone particles going down and scratching my throat. I know, it sounds real weird, but it was pretty bad. Skip the sausage and chicken too, not a fan here.. . Also, limit yourself to the the plantains, mashed potatoes, fried polenta and bread they serve. It may be tempting, but one bite of each should be good enough otherwise u will fill up much quicker.. As you can see, I can't say too much about the meats because I honestly was served so many slices at once I couldn't tell which was which.. All in all a good solid restaurant, but I think Agora in Irvine will satisfy my Brazilian BBQ craving anytime it strikes rather than venturing up to Fogo, and it won't hurt my wallet as much (our check: nearly $200 for 2 including tip!)
