ReviewID: GD2YgHpSHEF8zblkVmNeVg
ReviewerID: FgwrgJhwtzLOFy4lsfHsqw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
When you walk-in to Bottega Louie, you don't expect it to be a sit-down-have-a-nice-dinner type of place.  It's loud.  The energy level is merely a reflection of the everyday hustle and bustle of Downtown LA.  The glass door swings so effortlessly, you'd think it was nearly unnecessary.   Don't worry, walk in a few extra steps and there are tables for a more intimate dining experience... . . When you enter, you're greeted by a rainbow of macaroons.  Yes. we wanted to stop and order a few, but we were 3-drinks in, and let's face it, we needed some solids.  Let's take a look at the menu, shall we? . . I am the type of person that one would think has food-envy.  I am the one who will persuade everyone else to get something that I 'might' want - JUST so I can have a bite and say "yeah, I tried it" without having to risk being stuck with a sucky plate.  Well, this was the one time I wish I was "stuck" with all the plates.  . . Put 2 little round tables together, pull up 4 chairs.  We ordered. A pork sandwich. A Chicken carcioffi.   A Penne pomodoro.  A clam pizza.  The pork sandwich (had broccoli-rabe) was amazingly flavorful.  The pork wasn't dry (which I totally expected).  The chicken was infused with garlic, herbs, and white wine sauce, just like the menu promised. Penne pomodoro was pleasantly al dente - the grooves on the pasta were protected by a sheer layer of garlic - just enough to keep one from saying "bland."  The pizza:  big enough to split between 2 or 3.  There were enough clams on there that for a split second, I was concerned for the clam population.  Get the arugula on the side, as I can only imagine it may be a little overpowering sitting on top of the claims. . . It's definitely a great place to get together with friends for a some casual conversation with an occasional chuckle.  Hover over the little candle-light in the middle of tables and hold your drinks in one hand, because you'll want to reach across the table for a bite of the other person's food. . . I shall be back to try their breakfast......
