ReviewID: gDjog_gP1wCtWZQF4yY2wA
ReviewerID: cmFRU02_iF8qlppSfxVhNQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
My best friend decided to treat me to Mastro's on my birthday (I know, I'm lucky haha), which just happens to fall on the day before Valentine's Day. He had difficulty making reservations at an earlier time because of the day, so we ended up having dinner there at 10pm.. . A little back story before I get to the actual restaurant part.. If you want the actual restaurant review skip this paragraph (: My girlfriends &amp; I went clubbing on the eve of the 12th to celebrate my birthday. Fast forward to when we get out of the club, and my friend locks her key in her trunk due to some random guys getting out of their car and chasing us and freaking us out. Gotta love creepers. Luckily I didn't lock the door when I left (well not so luckily if someone had stolen the car.. but nobody did so luckily still) so we ducked in and called AAA to come get the trunk open. Unfortunately they can't, and fast forward to 2 locksmiths and the creepers taking us to get the spare key later, we each arrive home at about 7am. I sleep for 4 hours, wake up, shower, and head to the airport to pick up a friend. Sit in traffic for 2 hours, take him to his work then head home and back to his place then home again, I'm finally home around 8pm. I hastily get ready, my best friend comes, and we head to Beverly Hills for dinner at Mastro's. At this point I'm starving, and having a not exactly spectacular bday.. . So we get there and didn't have to wait because he had made the reservation (horray . http://opentable.com. !). The hostess showed us to an intimate table upstairs. The restaurant was quite busy, almost every table was full. There were people sitting at the bar, and some were having drinks right by the piano. They used the piano as a table, pretty genius I think (:. . My best friend and I look at the menu, and it only took us about 5 minutes to decide what to get. He said we absolutely had to try the lobster mashed potatoes, which wasn't on the menu but supposedly was some secret thing you could get it anyway. Our waitress came and took our order, and she mentioned the lobster mashed potatoes as one of the items not on the menu but could be ordered (we knew that). Of course we decided to get it (: When I ordered my steak, I ordered for a medium rare (what I normally get) and my best friend said he wanted it "as rare as possible." That man would probably pull meat off a cow and just eat it if he could. The waitress told us that would be super rare, as they tend to cook on the rare side. So he got rare-medium, and I changed mine to medium-well.. . Our order:. Cranberry &amp; Grey Goose. French Onion Soup. Lobster Mashed Potatoes. Sweet Potato Fries. Bone in Filet 12 oz (mine). Chef's Cut New York Strip 20 oz (I think this is what he got.. not sure). . The cranberry &amp; Goose was quite strong, which is the way we like it. It was more like Grey Goose vodka with a hint of cranberry (: The French Onion Soup came shortly after, and it actually wasn't what I expected. Maybe I'm wrong but I always thought French Onion Soup was supposed to be a little thick? It was lighter than I'm used to, but none the less good. . . Next came the Sweet Potato Fries &amp; Lobster Mashed Potatoes and our steaks. Oh man, I love sweet potatoes so anything sweet potatoes is good to me (: The Lobster Mashed Potatoes on the other hand.. WOW. Amazing. There were HUGE chunks of lobster meat in the mashed potatoes, which made the flavor of something as simple as mashed potatoes taste absolutely mouthwatering. The waitress scooped some Lobster Mashed Potatoes into each of our steak plates, which were SUPER hot. She warned us not to touch it at first because we'd burn ourselves. Me being the genius, decided to touch the plate soon after she walked away, Definitely a bad idea =[ Anyway, after I got over the burn I cut a piece of the steak and popped it into my mouth. Wow, again. I'm not a steak girl (unless it's carne asada on a soft taco haha), but this was definitely really, really, REALLY good. The flavor was amazing, the meat was tender.. I only wish I had gotten a medium, as medium-well was a little overcooked for me. My best friend's steak was super rare, I mean more rare than I'd ever get, the very center had a piece that still looked cold. But that was the way he liked it, and he definitely liked the steak that night. Because we ordered so much food, we really couldn't finish it all. We ended up with leftovers of everything but the drink &amp; soup.  Heated it up the next day for lunch, and all were still delicious (:. . The bill came out to be $210 including tips. Valet was $7. We figured the Lobster Mashed Potatoes couldn't be cheap, and it wasn't. About $30, no wonder it wasn't on the menu haha. But it was well worth it, I mean if you only come to places like Mastro's once in a long while, you might as well try whatever's good that they have to offer right?. . Overall, I had a pretty okay birthday before Mastro's. After, it became the best birthday I've ever had. Ah, the power of a great meal
