ReviewID: gdJwlClJvtWqlvN6Jv0YXA
ReviewerID: DpkerLJAGCwAFhTFVFP3rA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
3.5 stars.. . A couple of friends headed on over to get a bite of history at Philippe's after a long afternoon trekking downtown for a law school project of mine. I love everything about the feel of Philippe's. The old school cafeteria service on paper plates on plastic trays, the very kind elderly "Leave it to Beaver" looking cafeteria ladies in their old-fashioned cafeteria-lady outfits that haven't changed at all from the looks of the black-and-whites on the back wall, the cute elderly people who come with all of their friends and somehow all get the beef stew and laugh over good conversation, the five or six telephone booths on the side walls, the ridiculous amount of space it has both upstairs and downstairs, that gives you an idea of precisely how many people must have frequented this place back in the day, the candy counter selling old school candy like Bit O' Honey and Rocky Road in the back, their delicious signature mustard, and the 9-cent coffee. Open since 1908. 100 years old. If you live in Los Angeles and you haven't been, you're really missing out on something fantastic in terms of an experience.. . The food itself isn't phenomenal. I'm a vegetarian, so it was majorly terrible. I got a cheese sandwich, in which the cheese was not melted. It was basically a soft roll with slices of cold American cheese in it. Despite the coldness of the sandwich, the mustard saved the day. Philippe's spicy mustard is phenomenal. That horseradish really does it. And for $3.50 you can take a jar home!  I also had a side of potato salad, which was odd. The potatoes were mashed into oblivion, and there was relish folded into it. I love potato salad, more than life, and I really didn't know how to feel about this. I just kept mixing in their delicious mustard to mask that sweet-tart pickle-flavor.. . My friends, the meatitarians, had what Philippe's is famous for, their french-dipped subs. Please note, that they are "french-dipped" (past tense) and not "french-dip" (to be dipped) subs. Despite being a vegetarian, I have come across many a french dip sub with my meat lovin' companions, and have never seen a pre-dipped sub. Hence my confusion, when I saw a somewhat frumpy sandwich (because of the sogginess) on a cafeteria tray. It took me a minute to connect the "dipped" to the past tense. Despite frumpiness, however, apparently, the sandwiches were good. One of my friends had a classic beef french-dipped sub, while the other had a lamb french-dipped sub. The verdict? Good. The beef was more tender, although the lamb was better flavored. The purchaser of the lamb, also enjoyed that the meat was freshly shaved off of a leg of lamb and inserted directly into her sandwich.. . We finished off our meal with some 70-cent lemonades and a slice of banana cream pie. Plus for the pie, it had chunks of real banana in the custard portion, and the custard was well, very custardy. Minus for the pie, the whipped cream on top tasted vaguely of candle wax. Candle wax cream. So bad, but so good because it was so bad and we were surrounded by cute old people who obviously thought this place was the bees knees.. . A huge high five to Philippe's though, because it's incredibly cheap. My meal pre-banana cream pie and with lemonade was $5.14. My friends' sandwiches were $5-$6 dollars. The banana cream pie was a whoppin' $3.25. And you already heard how cheap the coffee and the lemonades were. The ridiculously cheap prices, plus the absolute blast to the past this joint is, the clear love that goes into this establishment that's kept it 100 years strong, and the lines of cute old people who've probably been coming here since they were teenagers makes Philippe's a place I'll definitely come back to on a cloudy day, even if I have to resort to a cold cheese sandwich and that candle wax cream pie. That mustard will save my palate; and the history around me will feed my mind, if not my stomach.
