ReviewID: gDPnZpDtPEtaLzeY67Z7UQ
ReviewerID: CBYVZ2Kn_2_oq7_a33pBYA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
MMM MMmm the famous Roscoe's Chicken and Waffles. Def had to stop by while we were in town, and of course with a humongous appetite :). . The person who greeted us made us feel right at home! Super friendly, despite the fact that we were the only Asians in the restaurants, from what we could tell. haha. But once we sat down, it took about 5 minutes until we got to order. Guess they were busy, understandable.. but he couldn't even get us something to drink? Geez. Well once our server came, we were ready to order our food even though it was our first time in there, so IMAGINE how long that took. I got the Carol C. Special (1 breast and waffle, TRIED to make my meal a teensy bit healthier with white meat) with a lemonade, and babe got the 1/2 Smothered Chicken with 2 waffles (ya he was huuuuungry) with a lemonade/fruit punch mix which was also very refreshing :). . Food came out shortly, with our drinks afterward (that's a no no) but goodness gracious was it DELICIOUS. Waffles+butter+syrup + fried chicken+gravy/hot sauce/ketchup (ya had to try em all) = orgasm in your mouth. The waffle wasn't crispy at all, more of like a gridded pancake, but it was okay since it was easy to rip off a piece, fold it, and dip it into the syrup. Yuuuuuum. I ordered a biscuit just to taste what "homemade" biscuits really tasted like but it was a waste of 60 cents. Didn't even split apart easy when I cut into it, and it was pretty tasteless. Gotta try the cornbread next time.. . Server kind of made up for himself at the end of the meal by ripping us open some wetnaps, which was exactly what we needed.. A bit pricey for a heart attack on a plate, but I'd do it again :) We ended up falling into a food coma an hour later.. Oh, also, apparently they say they're open until midnight, but when we called and asked, he said 2am so that's a definite plus!
