ReviewID: GeIBY8MvzENR1uvMxUd0yg
ReviewerID: GdawZ1FdT-fvZ0BP1PZV9A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
Hmm, I just ain't feelin' it for Gloria's.  I had high expectations because of all the glowing Yelp reviews, but Gloria's just wasn't that life changing for me. Perhaps I was a victim of my own expectations? . . Came here for Cinco de Mayo with fellow Yelpers Anthony N and Daniel L to check out the infamous Salvadorean joint that was garnering rave 4&amp;5 star reviews.  . . Lo and behold, I didn't think to make reservations on a Mexican Holiday (at a Salvadorian joint!), but thankfully, Gloria's was able to squeeze us in. Had we arrived a minute later, we, too, would have been like the throngs of people standing next to the bar for hours helicoptering for the next avail open booth.  . . THE ORDER:. - Carne Adobada ($12.00) - Mine                                     3 out of 5 stars. - House Special Pescado ($11.00) - Anthony's             3 out of 5 stars. - Plato Tipico ($11.00) - Daniel's                                      2 out of 5 stars. - Extra Pupusas  ($4.50 for 2QTY) 2 orders                    2 out of 5 stars. . THE NOT SO YUMMY:. . CHIPS AND SALSA - I could swear people were raving about the chips and salsa here. But I thought the chips were stale and had a very funny aftertaste.   Some places (Amigo's in Pasadena and a few select El Torritos) have chips that just really stand on their own - perfectly crispy and flavorful with a touch of salt.  Not quite so here at Gloria's.   Salsa?  I was compelled to salt it for more flavor, and it definitely lacked heat. I was really looking forward to "drinking" salsa like I normally do.  When it's good, it gets poured on EVERYTHING. Alas...no bueno este vez.  No me gusto! . . CARNE ADOBADA - Ok, this is maybe where I'm a victim of my own expectations.  I seriously was expecting "life changing" dayum-my-leg-is-tingling-delicious! The sauce was very tasty albeit too salty, but unfortunately the pork meat was very dry, like carnitas.  I don't usually order carnitas for this very reason. Pork should have been juicy ridiculous sumptuous no?  Instead, I just dunked my flour tortillas in the refried beans to fill up.. . HOUSE SPECIAL PESCADO - I got to taste Anthony's dish.  Upon my first bite, it was very tasty, but soon was overwhelmed with the garlickiness of it.  Unfortunately, this was the only flavor of this fish.  Good thing I'm a garlic lover so I would have happily finished this fish dish, but not something I'd move heaven and earth to return to have. Now, talk about the lemon garlic chicken at Versailles? Yah, I'm like Pavlov's dog and will jump through any hoops to have that again! See the difference? . . PLATO TIPICO - I also got to taste Daniel's potpourri dinner plate that had fried plantains and yucca, pupusa and refried beans/rice.  I hadn't had yucca in a while so those were tasty.  The plantains were rather standard.  The pupusa on the other hand was completely underwhelming.  See next paragraph. . . PUPUSAS - We ordered a few extra sides of pupusas to share since we all wanted to try their pupusas.  They were out of the (Revuelta) pork and cheese, so we got a few of the others that were so unmemorable that I really didn't make an effort to take mental notes for my review.  Sigh.  The curtido (pickled cabbage) that accompanied the pupusas tasted metallic to both Anthony and Daniel but medicinal to me.  The small serving of salsa that came along with it looked/tasted like it came from a can/bottle. Not really homemade.  Now the salsas at King Taco? Yes, even though mass produced, that stuff is the shit! But, I know, we're talking different animals here. Sorry I digress. Either way, definitely no bueno indeed! We barely helped ourselves to another serving after our initial tasting so the side orders left untouched the rest of the evening.  . . THE OVERALL:. I'm back to my original opinion that there truly is no good Mexican or Latin food on the Westside.  (Puhleeze, don't even talk to me about Tito's!) It just simply doesn't exist.   Sorry Gloria's, I really wanted to like you, but I left unmoved and still hungry.   Overated and overhyped for just A-Ok food.  Therefore, just a solid 3 stars from me.  I live on the East Side in the SGV where all the Vatos live, so yah, I'll go get me some really good authentic stuff out there!  . . However, I absolutely enjoyed my dining companions.  The highlight of our evening was being entertained by Anthony's adorableness and then taste sampling the cupcakes Daniel and I smuggled into the restaurant for dessert.  Daniel brought 7-Eleven cupcakes to share and I contributed cupcakes from Hotcakes Bakes located on Centinela @ Venice.  Always fun fooding with fellow Yelpers even if the meal was lackluster. . . NOTE: We would have gladly ordered desserts from Gloria's had we been impressed from the get go and STILL have shared our cupcakes. :)
