ReviewID: Gf4OTUZOCNWPyOq55YsCsA
ReviewerID: tygXrTsC4H0wDwnWLEHl4A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
Lunch on a weekday.. Place was packed with seats inside and out just about filled right before noon, but we were still able to get a table right away. This ramen house is different because you can choose how spicy you want your broth. Level 7 is the least spicy, then it goes to level 1 which is very spicy... which is followed by Special #1 and then the dreaded #2. You get your picture on the wall if you finish the Special #2 (including all soup broth), but it's definitly better to watch other people try than to suffer through that pain yourself.. . Choice of 3 broths: $7.45 for Miso, $6.95 for Soy Sauce or Salt. Typical choice of toppings and prices:. $1.50 Cha-Shu Pork Slice; $0.99 Egg; $0.99 Corn; $1.25 Green Onion; $1.25 Bamboo Shoot; $1.50 Extra Noodles; $0.50 Bean Sprouts; $0.50 Garlic; $0.50 Butter. . I thought the Soy Sauce soup broth had really good flavor with the tiny pieces of garlic floating in the bottom. Also very good were the toppings(a little seaweed, bamboo shoots, green onions, pork, bell peppers)... well, maybe not with bell peppers. With your choice of spice, you're able to enjoy your meal the way you want it. I also like how they give you big cups of water since your gulping it down. It's a small dining area, but I figure that is typical. It's enjoyable to watch people suffer and try to finish the Special #2, but once you get down to about level 2, you already notice people starting to sweat.. . Cons: Inconsistance amount of noodles in the bowl (I got less than someone who got miso broth). Need to flag down a waiter for water since they're very busy (then, sometimes there is no ice in the pitcher... feels like your drinking it straight from the tap, but when your lips are going numb, who cares.) I think I'll try the level 4 next time to enjoy the broth flavor a little more... I might lower my rating if I realize that the spicy flavor tricked me into thinking it was better.. . Note: I think there is a min for CC (V &amp; MC accepted). I'll edit once I go again.
