ReviewID: Gf9-fXfgNhP7PlT3TvlZ2A
ReviewerID: zRRZW1XsVD434URJOVOqaw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Sun In My Belly
Category: Caterers
SERVICE is POORTASTIC: someone needs to have a defribilator installed  in the place, and sparky sparky up the servers! Waky Waky, . To the servers I say: "You are now on "work mode". Do not hide in corner  and ponder about your possible evolution. Do not mingle within yourselves in the corner, You, come  here and tend to my order. Please, I beg of you, I am paying for this food! You need to come within 2 minutes of patron been sat, don't you know this? Did you know your table was sat? do you even have tables assigned? No, Why the fucking FUCK no!!!!!!!!??". . Anyway, yes, I returned almost a week later with my roommate's  boyfriend to grab B-fast. I was playing it safe so I wanted to get the regular stuff: eggs, some meat and a carb. We sat and A server got our hot chocolate for me (love it), coffee for buddy.. . We waited more than 10 minutes and NOT A SINGLE FUCKING SOUL stopped by our table to take the B-fast order. We were sat basically in everyone's pathway, and we waved at hostess to no avail. Eye contact was nearly non-existent....another five minutes went by and I actually raised my hand, someone different that our first server looked over and we told him that we were ready. I don't think they use a table section chart because dude did not know who was supposed to take our order. He took our order. It would be nice if the staff was not so zombie-like. It lloks like they are all hungover and not really interested in working worth a shit,. and whoever does the hiring is got to take a step up on this because this place can have a better running and atmosphere if you get some live waiters.. . My buddy had an omelet with cheese and other items, and I had one egg, 2 sausage patties and a biscuit. Biscuit was yummy! eggs were eggs, sausage patties were a bit dry but I guess that spells "healthier". I would go back for the hot cocoa, but service is kind of shitty.
