ReviewID: Gfk8p-EireqnWe_T5QN4eg
ReviewerID: ZoLDVY1mlbIqJ-LFtDBLAQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
Some may not be too familiar with Tapas cuisine, but for those that are you know how delicious sitting around the table can be. Tapas is the name of a variety of appetizers or small snacks, mostly in Spanish cuisine. Tapas has come around to most Mediterranean cuisine mixing different ideas together such as Spanish-Italian. These dishes can range from olives or cheeses to small portions of fish or vegetables. Eating small snacks throughout your day is best for the metabolism, carrying these tactics into your dinner can not only boost your energy through the night but can be quite tasty too !. . Cobras &amp; Matadors has a few locations and living near the one on Beverly, I've visited several times. Small and simple inside, with wooden tables and chairs, you feel at home when walking through the doors. One of my favorite aspects of this tapas place is bringing your desired wine or beer. The quaint deli next door, Potato Chips, is where you can choose your spirit and as long. . as the server sees the receipt the $5 corkage fee is waved! However, another way to get around the corkage fee, and I discovered this accidentally, is having a bottle with a twist off cap. A Buil &amp; Gine Pinot Noir will have just this and only priced between $16 to $25 a bottle. As your sitting amongst couples and groups of 5 to 6 everyone is excitedly popping their bottles of beer open and pouring wine for each another. Making a reservation, especially after 8, would be a good idea as to not have to wait outside on the side walk.. . With 25 Tapas to choose from, plus extra specials each night, it will be hard to make a decision. Having had close to everything on the menu any decision made will be a tasty one! The Roasted Eggplant Crostini is by far my favorite! Seasoned eggplant, pureed with fresh basil sitting on top of a Woodoven cooked crostini, comes 3 to an order and presented on a mini slab of wood. Complimented with a drizzle of Balsamic Syrup, a spoon full of a spicy red pepper mix and thinly sliced radishes, this $7 dish is anything but simple. I find myself running my finger down the plate to lap up any remaining balsamic syrup. Not your average potato croquettes the chef goes a step further and whips up a bowl of Salt Cod Croquettes with a creamy aioli served in a mini mason jar and spoon to match. Don't let the title 'Wood-fired Flatbread' trick you, this is a mini pizza cut into 4 slices with thinly sliced Sopressata, Mushroom and Onion pieces with Marscapone cheese on top. If you happen to a veggie lover, which I definitely am, the Wood-fired Asparagus is a must ! My second favorite dish here,the asparagus is cooked with crumbles of peanuts, walnut oil and sprinkles of Grana Padano (Grana Padana is a fabulous cheese from Italy and has been around since 1135 making it the first hard cheese ever !). Having grown up on lentils with pasta I had to have the staple dish that was always in my house. However these weren't your average lentils. Instead of being soft they remained in there uncooked form, only being sauteed in a pan and retained this crunchy feeling. Mixed with green onions and a sherry reduction, these had my taste buds hooked with a touch of salty, sweet and crunchy. The Pan Roasted Lake Superior Whitefish is one of the best prepared dishes. A small but meaty piece of white fish served piping hot is the center of attention while Canolini white beans swim around with fresh watercress and capers in a tomato broth. Try to get all components of the dish in one bite and experience the light broth mixed with tart capers soft white beans and sauteed cod. Delizioso!. . When your looking for great food at a low price with a simple dining atmosphere Cobras &amp; Matadors awaits!. . Helpful Hints. . * $5 corkage fee. . * $5 corkage fee waved if you buy next door at Potato Chips or if you have a twist off cap. . * Small inside so make a reservation. . * Wine glasses are short, waterglass look-a-likes, so don't expect a glass with a stem
