ReviewID: GFrkGUPR7PxMdIKVRoUaRA
ReviewerID: ML0rNXpMFZhz4EuEAw5NwA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
In defense of tea.. . Why is coffee so much sexier?  Tea also comes in infinite varieties, combination of flavors, levels of caffeinatedness. It's the most widely consumed beverage in the world, next to water, and precedes coffee by thousands years. I'm a tea aficionado and proud of it. It's not stuffy. It's darn cool.. . And LA Mill's menu consists of pages and pages dedicated to teas! My first love is bourbon roobios. I'm not sure how it was named because it doesn't taste like bourbon at all. It's full bodied and has an intense warm vanilla flavor that makes you want to curl up on the couch with a blanket and good book. Roobios was a hit last time, so this time I got the roobios with lemongrass and orange peel. The orange gave the tea a beautiful color but I couldn't taste it over the fragrant lemongrass. It was very zesty/refreshing.. . Finally, a place I can go to with my coffee guzzling, espresso shooting friends because they have an impressive selection of gourmet coffee beans as well. My friend was a little overwhelmed by the selections and chose the house favorite. One sip and her eyes glazed over. She looked like she was in blissful oblivion. She drank it straight, claiming it was smooth and not bitter in the least. We differ in opinions here though I can't discern between coffees. I like mine with lots of milk and sugar.... . The food is excellent. The portions aren't large but they're not tiny either, it's baby bear sized. We shared:. Cranberry creme fraiche scone: light, flakey and huge for a scone. Could have used a few more cranberries.. Potato and leek soup with bacon. What a great take on this time-honored soup. A bowl is brought out with lots of crispy bacon bits, sliced sauteed leeks, clams and a clam fritter sitting all alone on the bottom of the bowl. Then the server pours in an incredible smooth vichyssoise over all the leeks etc. It's sweet and savory all at once. I LOVED this.. Caramel Polenta. I'd never had sweet polenta before and it's delicious! Polenta has the consistency of fine grits but it's corn based so has much more flavor. With the brown sugar, candied walnuts and mascarpone, it felt like having a dressed up version of oatmeal for brunch.. Brioche grilled cheese with tomato and salted butter. This tasted really good but was a bit too greasy for our tastes. But then again, we were warned by the description alone. Served with house made potato chips that tasted like salted kettle chips.. . I also loved the chic interior. Different walls were painted pale blue, black and red. A giant brass chandelier hangs in the main room, two of the walls are covered entirely by murals, the wall overlooking the street is entirely of tempered glass, and the chairs are made of teal green crocodile embossed leather. It felt like lunching inside a museum. . . They're pet friendly too. Next to the outdoor tables there are a few bowls of water for man's best friend to lap up- a very thoughtful touch.. . Parking is in the rear. Street parking is also available.
