ReviewID: GftUkgcgbY3A3h9eGsmY2g
ReviewerID: 9UrfwRxMcT_7iwUaw-tIiw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Beware the "quartino". . Okay, there's no denying the food at Mozza is delicious. But Mozza has managed to annoy me more than any new restaurant nonetheless. It's how they deal with wine. You see, most places have pretty simple service conventions: wines by the glass, wines by the bottle. Sometimes, wine by the half-bottle, as many wineries produce half-sized bottles. But Mozza has unnecessarily complicated the scene: they serve wine by the bottle and by the "quartino". You see, somewhere between a glass of wine and a bottle, Mozza has decided there's some wildly unfilled market niche, so a "quartino" is a third of a bottle -- even though the word in Italian translates to "quarter", making things even more confusing. I finally decided that one-third of a 750ml bottle, being 250ml, is a quarter liter -- oh! the metric system! How very cutesy. [fume]. The really annoying thing is how they hustle wine here, though. The night I was there, the waitron fliply announced: "we have a special wine tonight -- a quartino Macchiole, for $25." I thought she said, "a Cortina Macchiole, $25" -- as in Cortina D'Abruzzo etc. I said, "Yes. We'll have that, thankyou." I'd already scanned the wine list, and found lots of things between $20 and $50 a bottle, so I figured it was on the low end. Well, she brought a bottle. She poured for everybody. We had a nice meal. Check comes. $75 for wine. Oops! -- not Cortina, "quartino". So that means, $25 times three! Man, I felt badly done-by. Interestingly, another reviewer on Citysearch reported that they were poured a much more expensive wine than they ordered, with no adjustment in price, even though it was their mistake. Okay, full disclosure: Mozza refunded me $50, but only after I made a serious fuss -- and told them I was reviewing the practice on . http://yelp.com. , which suggests The Power of Yelp (rock on, guys and gals). The larger point here is that wait staff a) doesn't communicate very well, b) seems to be making "mistakes" wildly in favor of the house (and their tips), and c) there's no reason for this "quartina" service convention. It's seriously annoying. I don't care if that's how they do it in Italy. This is LA. Knock it off, Mario.. . Oh, and by the way, Citysearch wouldn't post this review. They suck.
