ReviewID: GgencH71mkkj7VXLvC-zLw
ReviewerID: 15nD50SrNJN8E5DYDa0GWQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
I am really torn about this place.. . On one hand- I have always adored their doughy, speckle-char-marked, some spots puffy and airy, other parts thick and chewy crust that makes it a delight in itself.  . . On the other hand- I have had some toppings some-what ruin the experience altogether.  Charred/Burnt porcetta (I love my pork, preferably without lipstick- you got that Gov. Palin?!?!?) that was so flawed- but could have been so good if exectued properly, overly bitter brocolini, and the aforementioned by many canned mushrooms (as I experienced very recently).. . The service has varied from very friendly, to a bit cold, to a somewhat-creepy dude who was giving me the eye and made me feel like I needed to hurry up, eat, and get the hell out of Dodge............ . Decor- decent dining room size but it gets packed quickly- especially on a weekend evening.  They have a decent outdoor area that during the summer or on warm evenings in the Spring and Fall are coveted (only problem is the trains coming by).  Inside the only thing worth mentioning are the two portraits hanging on the wall of the west-side dining area.  It reminds me of  paintings by someone who became famous for making up paintings for the cover of romance novels.. . From what I can tell- aps seem like standard-fare, and wine/beer list is pretty basic as well.  I did also notice recently after going very early for dinner that the pizza was ready in an alarmingly quick period of time.  I realize the pizza oven is set at some ungodly high temperature- but 5 minutes brought to our table from the time we ordered?  Maybe it is my flawed background as an ex-pizza maker of a different style of pie.. . I guess another reason I am torn is because I believe with Neapolitan pizza- the more basic, the better.  There really shouldn't be more than just 2 or 3 toppings on the pizza (and Spacca Napoli follows this formula).  Neapolitan pizza should not be over-loaded with sauce, or even cheese for that matter.  The crust- if done right is what should really shine and should be the main part of the experience.  That is why every time I come here I tend to leave very happy.  Only after looking back on the pizza itself do I realize that I am ultimately just very pleased with how the crust is done.  I am torn though because is it really worth $15 for beautifully cooked dough?. . Is it too much to ask to have some interesting topping combinations, or at least the classics done with completely fresh and perfectly executed ingredients?  For example- Is it too much to ask to actually get fresh porcini mushrooms instead of the briny canned variety they gave me recently?. . Last thing to note- this place is recognized by the Associazione Verace Pizze Napoletana, which is basically an organization based out of Naples that verifies whether a particular pizza is done in the Neapolitan style.  I think they do their inspection process with some quality control, but maybe all you need is to follow a check-list of things in order to make it Neapolitan.  Not sure.......... . Maybe by following this process you are able to get crust that is so golden and delicious.  . . Maybe that should be all that I need to keep me coming back and be happy....... . Maybe, but I think there is a bit of room for improvement with this place.
