ReviewID: gGlXqFW0QbgmnC6pVB-CfQ
ReviewerID: Xq-fN7JMQcdCmoY2sokQYQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Giordano&#39;s
Category: Pizza
I grew up on Giordano's. We bought their pizza parbaked and had it on special occasions, including Christmas. This was our tradition through my bone-skinny, bike racing, calorie-inferno years, when I was only happy with a barely scaleable mountain of calories obliterating my place setting.. . Since then some things have changed. Significantly, I've moved to New York and become the kind of food fanatic that reasonable people avoid. Consuming food by the metric ton is no longer an obsession. Pizza, however, has become a major one: seeking the holy grail at local brick ovens and in my own kitchen. You know people like me. We agree with no one, least of all each other. We come to blows over issues like dough retardation; we routinely clear rooms in Brooklyn, East Harlem, and Naples.. . Some things I've learned: it's a hell of a stretch calling my beloved Giordano's stuffed pizza a pizza. God knows what it is. Tastes to me like some kind of Italian-esque casserole in a pastry crust. Don't get me wrong: it's delicious. But compared with the genuine article, the wood-fired, Neapolitan, minimalist work of art, Giordano's looks more like a meat pie factory.. . I'm not trying to be a snob or to get caught up in taxonomy. Just looking back on my culinary past, with new eyes. Every culture has some version of flatbread with stuff on it. The Italians and Italian Americans call their tradition pizza. Giordano's comes from some other tradition. Maybe it's a new one altogether, unique to Chicago (like that weird, ham-sized pillow that you guys hit with a bat and call a softball). But I can't compare it to the giants of the pizza tradition. . . Anyway, only one person in a hundred will care about all that. Back to my review. These guys have become a chain since i lived nearby, but as far as I can tell the quality is still consistently good. And it's pretty unique ... the closest I've had was at some knockoff years ago in Providence.. . I really don't think it's in the same league of sophistication as the best pizzas from the Neapolitan tradition. It's also way, way easier to make the deep dish / stuffed stuff than to make a good neapolitan pie. But in its own way Giordano's is delicious. And if you want a slice of vaguely Italian glory that weighs as much as your head, or if you're just nostalgic for the essence of Chicago, I think Giordano's is still the place.
