ReviewID: GGyzr1Ni1ogeAVNYEl4HJw
ReviewerID: C9WHeAxjoR9Nxo7l-Y-F0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Something that never fails to amaze me whenever I come downtown is how much of a big city vibe it contains, and especially how I can close my eyes briefly and imagine I'm walking around in a trendy midtown district of NYC.  The east coast vibe is undeniable as one walks past the older historic buildings taking you back to LA in the 50s and 60s, before being obscured by the towering glass skyscrapers that define LA's skyline today.. . When it comes to dining, to me, nothing embodies that feeling better than a night out at Botega Louie.  In a county like LA where room comes at a premium, and some of the finest restaurants have to make do with creative use of the smallest of interior spaces, you step into Bottega and the first thing that strikes you is the enormity and obscene excess of it all.  I'm not sure what the building used to be prior to it's restaurant/bar incarnation, but I'm guessing either a hotel, dept store or bank.  Perhaps it's the regal vaulted ceilings, marble floors, or massive pillars that are the tip off.. . I've been here a few times now for dinner and the most memorable was dining with a large group of 15-20 where they did the seemingly impossible and sat us all together in a group of conglomerated cafe tables, rather than the traditional dining area in the back.  In a way I preferred this as the actual dining room is dimly lit, meant for more intimate dining, althought you wouldn't know this as the noise levels can be deafening due to the high ceilings and echo-y acoustics, forcing you to shout at your date how nice her dress looks.  Up front by the bar and cafe tables, things are a little less of an assault on the senses.  . . We had the luck of dining around St Patty's day which meant in addition to food, there was free Jameson whisky tasting...as often as we liked.  A good start to dinner.  Most of the menu is broken down into different categories like small, med and large plate items, entrees and pizzas.  As a large group we ordered an array of small and medium plates and a few different pizzas the split amongst everyone.  Appetizers were started with the asparagus &amp; fried egg which made for an interesting combo, the roasted beets &amp; goat cheese and my fave the oft-mentioend portabello fries.  Various pastas were sampled including the penne's with jumbo rock shrimp, Trenné with braised prime rib (tender succelent cuts of beef), eggplant and chicken parmasean.. . I save special mention for the pizza which is one of my favorites, and a specialty of BL, and seeing the pizza chefs toil away at the brick oven fire in the back of the dining area, makes the pies even more special when they come to your table. Among the ones we tried included the fennel sausage and clam pizza topped with romano, roaster peppers and thyme.  I'm thinking about pizza again as I'm typing this, guess what i'll have for lunch.. . The bustling high energy atmosphere of Louie may not suit everyone's dining needs, esp those looking for a quiet, relaxed night out, but those look for fun with a touch of old school elegance with a modern hip italian menu must give it a try.
