ReviewID: GjDQ0yJAWJfrrZhB3X9glQ
ReviewerID: mmV58tKOzdRfahYR5j0b-Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
My friends dragged me here from UCLA 2 hours before my Latin American history lecture on a Tuesday afternoon.  On the way there, my friend described "Shabu Shabu House etiquette:". (1.) No walking around the plaza despite the 1 hour wait to be seated.  You must be there to answer at their random checks on the waitlist.  Your name will be crossed off the list if you are not present.. (2.) No talking/texting on cellphones.  The owner will call you out on it and accuse you of wasting their restaurant space.  If behavior is repeated, you will be asked to leave.  They are not there to retain customers.  They are in high demand; they do not need you.. (3.) No chitchatting after you finish your meal.  They will do anything short of lifting you out of your chair.. . What the ...?  Why the hell would I want to support a restaurant of that sort?  I waited rather impatiently for 1 hour before being seated.  Mind you, this was Tuesday noon.. Finally, we were lead to our seats in front of the steaming shabu shabu pot.  Immediately upon seating, our Kobe beef, bowl of rice, and side dish of tofu and other veggies were served.  (Only two options: Regular $11, Large $13.  You may specify, lean or marbled.)  They are quick to refill your bowl of rice if they see it is empty.  The ponzu sauce was REALLY good.  I drowned every morsel in it.  Once the first person in your group finishes their plate of beef, the check will magically appear out of thin air ... even if the others are half finished. _____. Once you understand that this place is all about efficiency, it's easier to understand their seemingly unpleasant service.  On the contrary, the servers are always as nice as they can afford to be while pushing out a quick, efficient service. Eating is quick, service is quick, payment is quick.  Only thing not quick about this place is the wait to get in!. . The beef is really high quality, nothing you can complain about.. . I'd say this place is worth the wait if you have the time to spare.  If not, I'd suggest coming some time in the middle of the week for lunch (as I did), and don't come in a group of more than 4.  Or else, good luck waiting for all that space to open up.. . Oh, and there always seems to be one guy who decides to bear the wait time alone and then eats by himself.  It's really weird, but I guess it says something about this place.  Definitely an experience worth trying!!. . Needless to say, I never made it to my history lecture.. . [Validates for parking structure.]
