ReviewID: gK4jvSXUa6hgbDyhqqQoFw
ReviewerID: m6UzDYOp_7jtkZNv2gyYuQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: No Mas Cantina
Category: Mexican
It shore is purty. But No Mas, didn't your mama tell you that true beauty is on the INSIDE? *sigh*. . It would be unfair of me not to state one major caveat regarding my No Mas experience. The one time I went was following the Castleberry Hill Art Stroll. The restaurant had been especially busy that night and our group of six showed up just prior to closing. They weren't even going to seat us, but then they decided to invite us in, so we were essentially one of the last tables before the kitchen closed.. . Honestly, they should have just called it a night.. . Someone immediately brought chips and salsa, which I saw as a good sign. Until I picked up my first chip (super thin with visible grease, very little flavor, needed salt) and dipped it into the, um, "salsa." My dining companions did the same, and as we chewed, we all looked at each other quizzically, until someone blurted out, "it tastes like KETCHUP!"  What it really tasted like was canned crushed tomatoes. An inquiry to our server informed us that they had run out of their normal salsa. The fact that they tried to pass canned tomatoes off as salsa put them at an immediate disadvantage in the credibility/authenticity department. Any restaurant owner/manager who cared about its customers and reputation would not have tried to pull that off.. . My margarita was $7.50, it came in a pint glass. It was fine, but not memorable. Better than sour-mix-heavy swill from the "cheap mexican" places but nowhere near, say, Agave quality. My friend ordered guacamole. It was quite good (though it did seem like they used chopped lettuce or something to "stretch" it), and I'm a guac snob...it earned them the extra star. A couple of us ordered chicken quesadillas. The ingredients tasted fresh and the quesadilla is huge (good thing, since it ends up being almost $11 when you add the meat). But, it wasn't actually GRILLED like a quesadilla should be. The tortillas were soft, and I think they may have actually microwaved them. Another person at my table said his food was room temperature.. . Service was fine, efficient. But it definitely had that, I-took-this-last-table-just-to-make-sure-I-made-mo ney-tonight feeling. And he added an 18% grat to our table...he's got to make money, that's why he's there, and nothing that was wrong was his fault. But I felt a little violated for paying over $20, when all was said and done, for a mediocre-to-crappy experience.. . If you're going to seat a table, even at the end of the night, then that table should get nothing less than the quality you provide earlier in the night. I get that it was busy and the kitchen was probably complete over it - but if that's the case, don't take my money if you're going to give me fake salsa.. . We should have complained at the time, but I didn't get the feeling anyone would care - I had the feeling that they felt they did us a favor by seating us late, that we signed up for a lackluster experience. For that reason, I can't imagine I would go back when I know I can get consistently good Mexican food elsewhere at a price where I don't feel ripped off. Sorry, No Mas.
