ReviewID: Gk9fFRYLtET4VF5uHS4IKQ
ReviewerID: 5DFshFQlbQiQTvtzH7qwlA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I'd read about Father's Office quite a bit before mustering up the courage to finally go there. Courage for what, you might ask? My answer: courage to brave the mythical crowds that seemed to make finding a seat a monumental feat. Fact of the matter is that I hate crowds and the thought of having to be a table vulture (you know, those folks who hang around tables waiting for people to leave so they can swoop in) gives me utter anxiety. I spend enough time on crowded freeways feeling like a herded sheep. I don't need that when feeding time comes around. . . Anyway, my friends and I decided to try the Culver City location on a Sunday between lunch and dinner- we're talking as off peak as we could manage. There were quite a few people but we found a booth inside almost instantly so, as usual, my anxiety was for nothing. . . I think I'll address the rest of the aspects of this place based on all the conclusions my reading led me to believe:. . Conlusion #1: Best Burger in LA.. I gueeeeessss. It's really a good burger. The bread is good, the cheese is good, the meat is good. It's one of those burgers that has so many good ingredients in it that is has to be good (otherwise someone would have to punch the chef for messing up such a no-brainer). However, calling it the "best" in LA leaves my stomach a little unsettled. Perhaps it's the "best" in its class or the "best" considering the quality of its ingredients but I can't say it's the "best" overall. Personally, it's a good burger that's worth the price and pairs well with the beer selection but, to me, nothing takes the place of a good greaseball of a burger aka In-N-Out FO LYFE! . . Conclusion #2: Really good food.. We ordered the steak, sweet potato fries, and roasted bone marrow. Let's just say: YUM. I'm already committed to go back because I have to try the pork belly. I think the rest of the food is more of a draw than the burger.. . Conclusion #3: Horrible service.. It actually wasn't so bad but maybe that's because it wasn't so packed. Our bartender was very patient considering the massive wave of indecision that came over our group. The wall of taps can be daunting. The "bouncer" was really chatty and made us feel welcomed. The only questionable moment was when one of the servers tried to cop a 'tude our way (but maybe that's just because he's naturally 'tudey, I couldn't decide).. . Conclusion #4: Good beer. . ... and LOTS of it. You can have a lot of fun there trying all of their offerings. However, they also have some good wine and a selection of FOrgetting cocktails (I love wordplay like this).. . Conclusion #5: No ketchup.. I didn't see any and was too scared to ask for it but, honestly, who needs it? Their aoili is dangerously addictive- so addictive we tried to slather it on anything we could shove in our mouths!. . Conclusion #6: No table service. . It's "half-half". You have to order at the bar, but you don't have to hang around drooling waiting for your food to pop up into the service window. Once you order, you get a number and the food's delivered to your table (hopefully not by 'tudey server guy).. . Sadly, I don't know when I'll find myself there next. The life of an office slave isn't conducive to regular visits here since the prices- although reasonable for the quality- are a little high for entry-level me. However, I can see myself getting comfortable here. . . Good spot.
