ReviewID: gKmVT8rIfjBnqb3YWEJAFQ
ReviewerID: FVy-7rp1GlPkwEiyBn2dhg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Before I went to Father's Office in Los Angeles (not Santa Monica) I read almost every Yelp review and read through all the bickering, etc. I also read all the reviews from the LA Times Food section, so I can say that I was informed. . . For all of you that bickered and whined here is what I have to say to you: suck it up and don't come back so the rest of us can have a good time.. . I had a lovely time and good company to boot. Yes there is a bouncer but he is nice and chatty. Yes, it is insanely crowded but not unbearable...there is a good vibe going throughout the place. It is definitely the place to be and fine by me. They keep the lights really low if not off so beware if you don't like that. It wasn't hard to order a beer we were able to within minutes of arriving. I recommend getting a menu and reading through the beer selection first. I had a Great White Ale and my date had a Unibroue Terrible; both were quite good. . . Yes, you should find a table before you order food. Don't be afraid to share a table with someone you don't know, they usually don't mind. Once you find a table then go to the bar and order food. When you look through the menu for beers check out the food section at the same time, efficiency is amazing huh?? . . The food is good...we had burgers and a duck confit salad. The salad was good as were the burgers. For all of you lactose intolerant folks the cheese is mixed into the burger from what I could tell. But there are other dishes on the menu so no whining about not being able to eat.. . Now I don't know what the hell you are all complaining about re: ketchup but our fries that came with the burger came with a garlic aioli which was GOOD. So again suck it up.. . Someone in a previous mentioned that it was beer joint first and a restaurant second...duh. It really is and you should appreciate it and understand before going there. . . So good job Father's Office...we will be returning.
