ReviewID: GLN0hhUMYB7TSuniz8Kjzg
ReviewerID: kFZxyR1tpNqKBkqV_aHygA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Shed at Glenwood
Category: American (New)
Sunday night, I attended a celebration in honor of the anniversary of my best friend's wife going into labor.  We debated a number of different places for dinner, but we ended up at The Shed, and I'm especially glad we did.  . . When we entered, I was struck by the coziness of the space--the dining area doesn't appear especially large, and there's a certain intimacy to it.  There were only a handful of people there, aside from our party of eight, so I can see where it would get a bit loud--unfortunately, I think that *we* were the loud table that night. . . Our waiter, Paul, took conscientious time with each member of our party, to answer questions about each menu item and wine choice.  When I perused the menu, I found they had a prix fixe menu consisting of choices for salad, entree, and dessert for a good 30 percent under what you'd expect to pay for each item a la carte.  I had the wedge salad, the fish &amp; chips, and the cream cheese brownie with the cherry ice cream--all told, an excellent value for the price, but I was still mildly envious of my fellow diner's meals.  . . Two members of our party ordered a ribeye covered with crab meat sitting atop sunchokes.  One of them offered a bite of the steak with the crabmeat, and it was excellent--well-presented, cooked perfectly, and flavorful.  . . Throughout the meal, Paul was very attentive and forthcoming--we had brief discussions of the oyster appetizer that two people had ordered, and he brought some small samples of different wines when one of my friends couldn't decide what would go best with his meal.  He would later bring a special dessert for the lady of the hour, and join us in a chorus of "Happy Birthing Day" to her. . . Our party of eight ended up a good illustration of how disparate the checks could be.  Paul had separated each check without complaint, and I had spent a mere twenty dollars (before tip).  Following three bottles of wine, some absinthe, and some scotch, the other members of the party had checks upward of 100 dollars.  None of us, however, felt that the meal was not worth what we paid--in fact, I'd venture to say that all of us were quite pleased with the value.
