ReviewID: gm82yjnfMT9TWUyqwFYbKw
ReviewerID: qaefCW7au9kQOWvq6lLKGg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kevin Rathbun Steak
Category: Steakhouses
I returned to Kevin Rathbun Steak for about the 10th time this year and, again, it was absolutely flawless. Before this week I was saying that Rathbun Steak could be the best steak in the country, but, unfortunately, after spending the first part of the week in LA which included a meal at Cut Steakhouse, it cannot be, but I still feel that it is the best steakhouse in Atlanta. . . Every time I have been I always do a four course meal including appetizer, salad, steak with sides and dessert. Every time I go I am never disappointed with anything. One thing that one must get if it is available is the five spiced seared foie gras - as our server George (who I would highly recommend requesting) put it - it is absolutely divine. No argument here. But the real reason to go to Rathbun Steak is the steak itself. I have tried everything on the left side of the menu as far as meats go and I have to say that the way to go is the dry aged for three (if party size calls for it), dry aged cowboy ribeye or the NY Strip. This week was the 22 oz. Cowboy Ribeye which did not disappoint. Perfect temperature, tenderness, crust and fat content. A beautiful piece of meat of which I savored every last bite. Couple that perfectly cooked steak with some of Rathbun's inventive side dishes and you have a fabulous meal. If one had to critique anything at this restaurant it would be size of the sides - they barely have two servings. If you remember that and order properly, you will have no problems at all. . . Yes, Atlanta has Bones, Chops, McKendricks, BLT Steak, etc. and they are all good. But, for me, Rathbun is just doing something so right starting with the space (dark and unassuming with a nouveau industrial feel) and ending with perfectly presented and delectable food. The most important thing of all, he is doing it consistently. I expect this place to be around for a while and I am sure I will be a frequent diner at this restaurant as long as it exists.
