ReviewID: gMMXgqC5hnRSkVOOWK-gXg
ReviewerID: s2sWgiOVupnuLYrpIWk5FA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
I sent this letter to Crustacean twice with no response obviiously they do not care about their food or customers: "My friend and I ate at your Beverly Hills restaurant last night for the first time.  We had recently watched an episode of "The Best Thing I Ever Ate," which feature one of your dishes so we decided to go in and try your garlic noodles.  We were greeted with no smiles and a man saying not hello but, "we will be with you in one moment..."  Our waiter was very thorough with the menu, which was very nice.  We ordered our meal and a Martini to start.  We reviewed the wine list and narrowed it down to 2 wines and asked for the Sommelier.  He was very nice but the another waiter who interrupted during one of my questions I found rude.  Your Sommelier did apologize for the waiters interruption, which was very nice of him to acknowledge the other waiter's rudeness.  We enjoyed only one taste of our Martinis when our appetizer  was put down.  My friend and I agreed to enjoy our Martini first before we began with our appetizer.  I sat in a position where I found myself ducking out of the way of the staff as they rushed by.  There were no other tables to move to so I did not say anything, I just kept on my toes and hoped not to get hit in the head by a plate.  Our compliments to your bartender, the Martinis were perfect.  The ponzu sauce that comes with the yellowtail sashimi was very tasty, we wanted a little more but there wasn't anyone to ask.  Everyone was moving so fast around us and we did not see our waiter anywhere.  We ask a busser.  Two bites into our appetizer the waiter told us our dinner was ready and asked us if we wanted him to bring it out, or he can keep it warm for us in the back.  We asked him not to bring it out yet and I said I would like them to do a "re-fire" not to bring us something that sat in the back for a while. We ordered the Sea bass special, the Tiger Prawns and an extra side of the garlic noodles.  He brought the food out and nothing was hot not even warm!  I believe he brought us our same en trees from earlier.  I asked another waiter for a manager.  He asked if he could do anything, I explained the situation and asked him to take it back and have them make fresh entrees.  The Sea bass came out first it was warmer but I think they steamed the same one because we only tried a small bite out of one corner, I found it curious that this piece didn't have a fine edge....  The prawns came out next and I may be wrong but aren't they grilled and should be hot?  The Noodles were warmer but not hot.  I know noodles maintain heat when cooked fresh, do you cook them in a big batch?  Needless to say we were both very dissatisfied with our experience.  I had such high hopes to find a new place for us to enjoy.  Our Bill totaled $391.10!!!!  We have no problem spending money on a fine dining experience but this was way below a good dining experience.  By the way my friend still tipped 20%.  Hopefully the our waiter tipped the bartender, sommelier, the helpful bussers and the kind waiter at the end.  In a time where restaurant competition is tuff I would think that you would try to uphold your reputation as a fine dining establishment.  Very disappointed"
