ReviewID: gnOfOP96IoqPoEpIe3_vNw
ReviewerID: LyrAjv8V6HWkceuTB4Xtkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Geez this place is good.. . We came here on a Saturday night for a birthday celebration for about 14 people.  They provided with with the section right next to the entrance.  It wasn't bad but since all the tables are bolted down our party got split in two but at least we had part of the restaurant to ourselves.. . We order a combo A and combo B for everybody.  I absolutely loved everything.  When all the protein was brought out, everything was a beautiful hue of red which meant it was a fresh.  Everything was good but I loved the kalbi and the pork belly.  It definitely makes you want to order additional items off the menu.  The seafood pancake was awesome as well.  A slight crunch on the pancake and loaded with lots of seafood makes my stomach happy :]. . Like everybody said, they are generous about their banchan.  There's a few banchan I rarely see at other Korean restaurants so it was fun trying everything out.  I especially loved the salad, which is refillable as well.  We must've asked our waiter to refilled it over 6 times.  Of course, it comes with unlimited rice paper and thin-sliced radishes to go with the meats as well.. . Another great thing about Soowon?  Their A+ service.  Our waiter for the night was very helpful with all our requests, not to mention he pretty much helped cooked our meat.  A lot of places they'll come by, put it on the grill for you and leave, but not him.  He was hovering around our area, helping us out for pretty much the whole night so we can have more time to drink and celebrate haha.. . As for drinks, they have the usual Korean beer and soju selections, but something that made me like this place even more was that even though they didn't serve flavored soju, the girl up front was nice enough to go out, buy yogurt/calpis and make yogurt soju for my friend since it was his birthday.  I don't know if it was just cause we were spending bank or they do it for everyone, but to me, that's going beyond and just made our whole dining experience even better.. . Overall, a great KBBQ spot with great service and delicious food.  It can be hard to find street parking and some people might rather not park on the street but they do have valet which makes life a little easier on the weekends.
