ReviewID: GOL_i81vZ4Rx2nWL_3c66Q
ReviewerID: SYHnpTkJJcLVnAwtxagcow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Baoguette
Category: Vietnamese
We, the people of American have been devoid of a meal made with real food for so long that we no longer exactly know what we should be looking for when eating out.. . Colors of the lamp, how many steps on the stairs. Why would that affect what you're actually tasting? The kinds of questions you ask when reviewing a restaurant are so far off from the food, that one would think they're reading about a real estate open house night.. . Sure, I've took out a star or two from some of my reviews in instances when the restaurant's atmosphere was proving to be unbearable.. . But when the food is good, and nothing else is taking away that simple pleasure, why would one take away the points? I simply do not understand such mindsets. I could only suspect that the person has a very negative view on life, . . When a place has done well to step up their atmosphere, that is commendable, and should add a point. Then let's say you goto another restaurant where it had no extra frills but just a few tables and a plate of food on a clean dish. Should this place get a negative rating because it doesn't have all the extra anemeties of the other place?. . Break out of your own shells and embrace something different than what you're used to. This is new york city, a celebration of diversity and divergence. Surely one wouldn't expect the same exact thing over and over in every different restaurants.. . I see that a lot of people lowering their review scores, thinking it's not as big, not as pretty or simply because it's not as cheap as something somewhere only because this place is in middle of Murray Hill Manhattan and not in Chinatown or the outer boroughs.. . Ask yourselves if you've been asking the right kinds of questions. Again and again you will end up with the same conclusion. What's good is good, there's the answer written out for you.. . p.s. One of the co-owners of the restaurant sometimes drops by this location to help out. I happened to see her during summer time, and boys, let me tell you, when it is a hot hot day, and she is manning the register, your eyes will be in for a special treat.
