ReviewID: gpfiHQ4fkLqSIGdh8NdpJw
ReviewerID: n476X_ao9k88aW6bZzk03A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Big Star
Category: Mexican
Sandwiched between shooting pool at Bob Inn and shooting blanks at a Wicker-Park-dance-club-that-shall-not-be-named, Jenny R and I rolled up in here on a recent Friday night. We knew a little sumtin sumtin was goin' down in this heezey when Jenny spotted some goats chained to a dumpster behind this dig. Jenny was all, "Oh, they're so adorable! Can we pet them?" and I was all, "I ain't pettin' no goats, they'll eat my Ed Hardy shirt." Jenny immediately wreckanized how important my Ed Hardy shirt was to me, so we walked in.. . It was fairly crowded, and we were fortunate enough to just barely snag a booth. I was all, "Look! Those booth-sitting patrons are leaving!" and Jenny was all, "Ohmigosh, those other two people not wearing Ed Hardy shirts are making a mad dash for it." So we took several minutes to devise a plan on how we could get to the table before them. Unfortunately, the time it took to plan our move created a problem: those two people not wearing Ed Hardy shirts had already sat down. They were that fast. But screw that. We went ahead with our plan anyway. Palms up, I locked my fingers together and bent my knees. Jenny planted her boot into my hands and I sprung up with all my might. Jenny did at least three 360s, two-and-a-half twists, and a double fakie ollie before landing squarely in the seat at the booth we wished to claim. Seriously, this was some mad trapeze-artist sh!t. Those two people not wearing Ed Hardy shirts were in such awe of Jenny's skillz, that they immediately offered us the table. Then they saw me walk over wearing an Ed Hardy shirt and they changed their minds. But Jenny begged them to let us sit there and they finally caved...thirty minutes later. After they finished their food, drank their beer, and belched in my face because they were jealous of my Ed Hardy shirt.. . At this point, you can only imagine how starved we were. The waitress ran through the menu quickly, since she was obviously eager to serve people not wearing Ed Hardy shirts, and mentioned "goat." Uh, yeah, she said "goat." As you might guess, right about then, the flash light in my brain went off, and I was all, "Holy crap. I totally forgot that today was Passover." Then the waitress looked at me like I was an idiot or something just because I know my Canadian holidays. But whatevs. I ordered the goat tacos to honor our country's upstairs neighbors, and Jenny went with the some-kind-of-fancy-chicken tacos. I can't quite figure out just exactly how they managed to make the goat meat taste so fresh and tender, but diggity dawg damn it was delish. It was the first time I'd ever eaten goat before and I must admit, these alone are enough to bring me back here.. . Outside of putting that juicy meat in my chops, I was otherwise somewhat indifferent to Big Star. I liked the setup, especially since the high ceilings allowed me to vault Jenny through the air, but it was too damn loud. I couldn't hear a thing Jenny was saying, and not just because I was admiring my Ed Hardy shirt most of the time. Also, the loud music made ordering a beer very challenging. I tried ordering a LaBatt's to go with my Canadian holiday meat treat, but I was brought a Blatz instead. Probably because "I'll have LaBatts" sounds a hell of a lot like "I'll have a Blatz" when you can't hear someone from three feet away. Who knows though. It might also be because the waitress appreciated my Ed Hardy shirt and figured I was a real classy guy, so she hooked me up with a Blatz in a can. Which subsequently nearly made me vomit.. . After finishing what might have been the nastiest tasting beer I've ever consumed in my life, I went pee. (In the bathroom.) Then Jenny and I rolled out of this bar like we was Autobots. And wouldn't you know it, one of the goats we noticed when we first arrived had escaped. Jenny, the kind-hearted person she is, nearly wept, hoping the goat didn't get hit by one of those big red tour buses with really obnoxious drunk people in them. So I had to wait while she pet the goats that hadn't escaped. But I didn't get anywhere near them because I didn't want them eating my Ed Hardy shirt. . . *Please note, my mind was a bit hazy this night, so some details may have been invented in this review. Also, please read this asterisked statement as if it was in a really, really tiny font. (It will make it more authentic if you could squint while reading it. No, seriously, squint.)
