ReviewID: GpQR5Hgoxv2o9sZmBFivgQ
ReviewerID: z8LpTMDTO2s5fFwcMT8RBg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Veggie Grill
Category: Vegetarian
Located in the "Edge" strip mall next to the newish El Segundo shopping area north of Rosecrans and Sepulveda. The parking may be tough during lunch or during peak hours. . . Saw this place here for a while and always wanted to check it out but other dining places always came up higher on the priority list. As people I knew started to try this place out the more positive reviews I received about the Veggie Grill. Even hard core carnivores who were convinced to give it a shot gave thumbs up to this place. So, the Veggie Grill jumped up to the top of my "to try" list. . . The Veggie Grill did not disappoint. The posters out front claim it to be "cheap" fast food. I guess if one is living in Manhattan Beach, El Segundo, this can be considered cheap, however; if one comes from Hawthorne or Lawndale, this is expensive fast food. . . Pricing aside, everything else was pretty good. Service was quick and fast, and the veggie burgers were delicious. As many people have already claimed, their fries are something to try. Wife enjoyed the slaw that had no mayo. Son loved their kiddie chicken strips. I had the stack and wifey enjoyed the portobello burger.  All were filling (for those who are concerned with veggie dinner not being filling enough) and each entree came with a slaw side that can be upgrade at a cost to fries and other goodies. We tried all the teas and 'ade available and they were all pretty good. They even offer calorie info on the drinks.. . One orders up at the counter like any typical fast food. They bring the food to you via a number card (similar to Carl's Jr.). They also clean up the plates after one is done. My experience at the Veggie Grill is that they are very good at cleaning up, even when we were seated outside in the patio.. . Great place for lunch or dinner. Highly recommend for those who don't want this pure vegan stuff but wants to go healthy with taste but wants meaty flavors. . . Reminds me of the western style version of those asian vegetarian places that make all sorts of veggie foods but mimic tastes and looks of meat dishes.
