ReviewID: gR1hE5Y7WQq4h3JncXSQNw
ReviewerID: fDJKUkh327-rMirb1vZoGA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Hubby, Ma and J picked me up after work and we headed for this place that Hubby has been hearing about that served great sausages with even greater german beer! The front door of the place is a little hard to find but not hard to miss if there is a line of people waiting outside (which I learned is common). I walked in and was concerned that they wouldn't allow our 6 year old as it looked like most people were on dates or doing the DT pub crawl that is popular nowadays. Plus the place has a club vibe instead of a casual sausage restaurant feel that I was expecting. But the owner was really nice and said they were "all ages" so 1 star immediately for being open to kids! Another star for having that nice guy standing by the door and taking beer orders-sipping on a great glass of brew (the Duvel Special $8 a glass) helps pass the time while you're standing in line to order. J and Ma had the bottled orange soda and sarsaparilla (3.50 ea). No regular hot dogs or links for kids but the cashier recommended the Chicken w Apples for J, and though the kid is  a regular hot dog kind of guy (plain at Pinks and Carneys), J actually liked it. Ma got the Louisiana Hot Link which was appropriately spicy. I had the Duck and Bacon w/ Jalepenos and found it very flavorful. and despite Hubby's numerous attempts at mentioning this place and that it had Rattlesnake he actually settled for the Buffalo, Beef and Pork. Prices were $5.75-$7.50 much more than you pay for that yummy bacon-wrapped dog that you get after clubbing but it was definitely worth the different flavors. One disappointing note was the fries- we had the larger fries ($5.50) and had added white truffle oil (extra $1.50) and though it was ok, came out kind of on the burned side. I'll try it without the truffle oil next time and see how it is. After ordering you're given a number and you walk down this long dark corridor that opens up into a room that does resemble a club and have to find a table to sit. Only took a few minutes to find a table though- plus you have a choice to sit outside in the patio area. Everyone was super friendly (staff &amp; customers) and looked like they were enjoying themselves, except for this 1 guy I noticed sitting by himself and waiting...guess he had to save the table and didn't get to order a beer in line!
