ReviewID: gsD1iz_XHsksXQwoKMkUYQ
ReviewerID: QgOc3ZpEXfC-SdPyzOfhCA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
I suppose there's really no reason to add yet another review to Wurstkuche's page, but when the food's this good, I kinda can't help it.... . I was lured here on a first date and since then, I've been dragging droves of friends back to this easy-to-find downtown sausage haven.  now, because of the hardcore downtown Yelpers, I feel like I have to declare: I'm a Highland Park-er, but I spend at least 3 nights a week in the 90013/12, so I'm certainly no new-comer.... . alright, back to the good stuff...the first time I visited, I studied the online menu (thumbs up for a well-designed, yet simple website!) and decided I'd give the alligator and andouille sausage a go...it was AMAZING.  the casing was a bit thick (as noted on the menu), so it was a bit awkward for a first date, having to gnaw at a wiener in front of someone that you barely know...but in the end, that didn't seem to matter.. . my second visit, I opted for the rattlesanke &amp; rabbit.  OHMIGOD.  really...really?!  it was sooooo good.  I can't think of any description other than what they list on the menu, cause it's so dead on...it's buttery and mild and delicious.  rabbit is usually very chicken-y and rattlesnake can be kinda rubbery, but the ratio is perfect and when pared with a light Belgian ale, I can imagine no better meal.  . . third visit!  I always have to change things up, so I ventured into the Gourmet Sausage section and gave the mango gingers a try.  they are little buddies, so they tuck two sausages into one bun...mmmmm.  you could definitely pick out big flavors of both mango and ginger and it was on the "less heavy" side of the menu.  always a good choice for girls who "eat like girls" (and I can say that, cause I'm a girl!).  . .  fourth, and most recent visit, I ordered the rabbit, veal &amp; pork sausage and was toooootally blown away.  this may not register correctly with some readers, but my friends who tasted it said that it reminded them of "the most amazing breakfast sausage" they've ever tasted.  and its TRUE!  it's like eating a breakfast sausage, but one that's been tailored for a dinner menu...it's strong and seasoned, but very familiar at the same time.  it married perfectly with the caramelized onions (which I always order) and the mustard.  YUM.. . now the big question...WHAT SHOULD I TRY NEXT?!. . oh, right, the fries....um, I have nothing bad to say about them.  I've not had "proper Belgian frittes", so all of you well-traveled poo-pooers can spout your poor reviews to someone else.  the fries at Wurstkuche are some of the BEST fries I have ever had in my life.  and if you fork over the 1.5 to add truffle oil, it's quite possible you'll die right there in that well-designed back room.  they are TO DIE FOR.  my favorite dipping sauces: thai peanut, BBQ, curry ketchup, chipotle ketchup.  I must say the bleu cheese walnut thing is kinda overwhelming.  . . finally: beers, beers, beers...you can never go wrong with beers.  they have some of my favorites on the menu, but in these budget-minded times, I'm so thrilled that I can spend my hard-earned dollars on fancy sausages and beer and still get a PBR for $2.  how rad is that?!  PBR at the "new Little Joy" is more expensive,  so it was a welcome surprise to say the least.  . . oh!  and the interior!  PERFECT!  love communal tables (from IKEA!  i don't even mind it!), love the exposed brick-work, love the concrete floor, love the simple bar, the exposed ducts, the simple lay-out.  I would LOVE if they nixed those obnoxious metal tables-- you know, the ones found outside of EVERY cheap cafe in LA-- the ones that are always wobbly and reflect the sun directly into your eye-- but I'll give 'em some slack there.  as an interior designer, I commend them on the use of the Eames DKR chair, but good lord, do they not realize how uncomfortable they are without the cushions?  ow.  . . but, uncomfortable chairs aside, NOTHING will stop me from me from giving them a 20 star review...but since that's not an option, 5 stars will have to suffice. hooray for sausage and beer!!
