ReviewID: gsoW5OQQO9Jq_94YDRJ82g
ReviewerID: fiAIkO371It7iR-BdOHPGQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
Ugh-o. . . Don't get me wrong, I love Italian food but that's just the problem. Ugo is nice but for someone that goes to a lot of Italian restaurants...Ugo is neither spectacular nor terrible. On a warm Sunday afternoon Ugo is a fine place to have lunch outdoors while watching all the people out and about in Culver City. When I went, it was "poppin" as those with street cred would say. It seemed to be the restaurant where everyone was eating so there had to be something to it. Plus, Camellia C. pointed out their delightful display of desserts and that'll get me every time.. . It's just not very good Italian food. I had the Rigatoni Bolognese at around 11 dollars which was pretty bad...it was "nast" as my sister and an old friend Sally* used to say...so nasty it doesn't even merit the "y". . . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . I couldn't even eat half of it and I normally inhale Italian food...especially anything with marinara sauce..ugh-o indeed. . . Fortunately, the Panino special of the day was fine and like Forrest Gump once said, "that's all I have to say about that.". . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  . . But it was the gelato bar that was a highlight on this day. The people working the gelato bar were extremely patient as Camellia C. decided to try almost every flavor until we decided on Amadeus Dream and Pistachio which the server was kind enough to put half/half of each in a small size at $4.25. Camellia C. told me that the server  "hooked it up" ...which is a phrase they say in the 'hood apparently (even though I'm pretty sure Camellia hails from Fremont). . With a name like "Amadeus Dream," you better be a great flavor and it was. It was a chocolatey treat with almonds and hazelnuts and pistachio. The Pistachio flavor itself was o.k. but had full bits of pistachio in it so that was nice. Overall, not the best gelato but pretty good.. . After we finished, I looked around and realized that not many people were actually there for the food, rather, they had opted to have beverages or the gelato. If I ever come back, it'll be for the locale..in the middle of downtown Culver City, while keeping cool with a frosty treat. I just don't know if that's enough.
