ReviewID: Gu64HG85AadqcxS-vxazHw
ReviewerID: 7JtvOGkv58q2k0BhaSImjA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
I'm under the firm belief that the strongest stand alone.  With that said, I decided to treat myself to a dinner and a movie.  This place was recommended and b/c it's close location to the arclight I was all about it.. . I should point out that I'm not extremly fond of seafood.  It's not that I do not like it... I just haven't eaten enough of it to get past the fact that I think it tastes hideous.  So... this probably wasn't the wisest choice for my naive pallet.  The good news came in the form of 3 things on the menu not being of the sea... salad, burgers and alcohol.  I decided to try all three (look at me go!). . The cocktail of the evening was a blackberry lemonade.  I asked for light blackberry (a horrible college memory involving blackhaus causes me to be weary around blackberry flavored drinks) and because of that I believe the bartender added more vodka.  One drink was enough that I chatted up the woman next to me at the bar but I still had my wits about me and thank god b/c I bit my tounge while overhearing the men next to me chat... it could've gotten ugly.. . B/c I was alone I opted to sit at the "chef's counter"  which is really their way of saying the handicapped seating at the bar (my love hate relations w/ ADA).  This seat put me in perfect shot of bartender booty and the chefs that were a)super cute b)singing to themselves c)super cute and d)caused me to have a revelation that it would be fun to date a chef that was indeed, super cute.. . The food was delicious.  Kudos to anyone who actually attempts to eat the burger like a burger.  There is a reason that the 3" piece of meat comes with a steak knife; well another reason besides something to thow at the girl across the way giving you steely eyes for goodness know what reason.. . allow yourself an hour and this is a great place to crash before or after a film at the arclight, it sure beats jack in the box.
