ReviewID: gUiNBJR44qlFKffEYzv1lg
ReviewerID: pBXZn3RnUcvFipPZn1vyXw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
First, a disclaimer.  Breakfast is easily my favorite meal of the day. Eggs: good, pancakes: good, bacon: good.  . . L.A. can be a weird, confusing and entertaining place to find a meal.  Recommendations should be taken with caution.  We've gone to places that we've been told are "must visits" and been really disappointed.  We were told that this place "okay"  with a "be and be seen" vibe.  I think the only people who wanted to be seen that day were the servers.  They were all definitly in show business.  Good looking, muscled, couldn't be bothered.  Not rude, just wanted to make sure we knew who the boss was.  Or maybe it's because we were the only people in there with a 3 year old who was throwing the sugars around.. . The menu was great with a lot of selection.  We could see by the tables around us that the portions were ginormous so we kept it simple.  Scrambled eggs (perfectly cooked) bacon (applewood smoked) potatoes (kind of soft and mashed then cooked flat on the griddle so they form a delicious, buttery/bacon grease flavored crisp crust) and wheat toast ( unusually good and actually hot-big pet peeve when I order breakfast out is toast that is usually pre-toasted and so cold the butter doesn't melt) and coffee and oj. . . The coffee came in a french press, my favorite and even though it was decaf it was super flavorful.  Everything  was really great and piping hot.  The one disappointment was trying to get a pancake.  The menu has a ton to offer and they are the size of the plate.  I understand places do this because well, they can.  Pancakes are cheap to make and if you get a really big portion they can charge you a lot of money and it looks decadent and yummy.  But when we ask them if they'll just pour a small one for our daughter and they say "we can't" it just annoys me.  Sure you can, just pour a little on the griddle instead of a lot.  Believe me, our daughter had more then enough to eat with sharing our meal, it just would have been nice to tear into one of those pancakes to complete the meal.. . All in all, as long as we go early like we did on this trip I would go again.  We got the very last table and as we were leaving there were people waiting.  . . I also noticed on the way to the restrooms they have a couple of small rooms in the back for larger parties.  Although they were down a dark hallway with no natural light and looked like little closets, at least if you go with a group or a few 3 year olds throwing sugar they have a place to put you.  . . Highly recommend it on your next trip to Los Angeles.
