ReviewID: GvggiZFkHqW9ITw5EPxqsw
ReviewerID: eeO2tkfEtIrRVmD4TnVpFw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
Kill a fellow w/ lemoncello.. . The interior is  modern w/ black and white interior, there are framed photos hanging on the walls and bags of pasta used as decoration on the shelves.  I am disgusted by the outdoor tables though, they are covered in purple flowers that have fallen directly from the trees near by. The workers didn't bother cleaning it, they'd just seat the guest down and serve the food right on top of it like it's decoration. I'm not talking about a sprinkle of flowers, I'm talking about  a whole table covered in flowers, leaves and whatever particles or bugs it has accumulated. I know for a fact I would not want to have to look out for bugs crawling out of the flowers and onto my meal or drink as an extra topping.. . My friend and I placed ourselves at the bar, w/ out looking at the menu he decides to order us lemoncellos. I've never tried one before and figured it would be best if we just order one to try. If it's good we can always order another one. I'm very cautious when it comes to trying new drinks at a new place. Thankfully he takes my advice while I ask for the drinks menu and start scanning for something I know I would like. . . Just as I decide on a glass of Rosa Regale Banfi, a sparkling wine, the lemoncello arrives. It looks extra girly sitting right in front of my guy friend. I can't help but giggle. It's served in a fancy stemmed tall shot glass. The color is a vivid near-glowing yellow and can possibly be mistaken for the cleaning agent, Mr. Clean. O__O I sit impatiently for the feedback as he eyes this drink w/ caution and takes the first sip, he tries to hide his disgust but fails miserably. "Not bad you have to try this, here."  Oh yea right.. like I would fall for that, but I decide to try the drink anyways because I have a curious mind. How bad can a this refreshing looking yellow drink be? I slowly take a sip and #%&amp;!@$#%!!!! When I exhaled, I felt as if I was breathing fire. I can only imagine that it burned off all of friend's nose hairs when he sniffed it. It was very potent that's for sure. Good thing, I had my glass of wine to help get rid of that putrid taste. More or less it was like sugar dissolved in pure vodka. It makes me shudder just thinking about it. The wine on the other hand was delicious, earning this place two stars. It was sweet and fruity and came in a cute 375ml bottle. . . Lemoncello huh? That definitely scarred me for life.
