ReviewID: gvJw7p8MnvFTf2eq3JE_6g
ReviewerID: oSY2YtgG_6J221LWGKn9nA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Twisted Spoke
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
There is a reason why they need to use porn to get you in on a Saturday night. . We walked in for lunch on a Saturday afternoon and no one was by the door and they didn't have a sign as to whether you wait or seat yourselves. The bartender seemed to ignore us as did the other workers. It seemed apparent that is it wasn't their job then they weren't going to assist the patrons. A woman came from the back up front and literally looked around us to look outside and look for someone. She completely behaved like we were invisible. So we decided to seat ourselves. The picnic tables on the roof are uncomfortable and hard to eat at. I'm sure they are fine since for boozing. We get our menus and I'm pretty excited about the selection. After deciding between a few selections and waiting a long time the waitress comes and apologizes  that she was sorry and she didn't know anyone was at her table. Which I guess is understandable since we sat ourselves. She then tells us that the items we want to order off the menus (which were given to us just 10 minutes wrong) were not available. We could only get the brunch/breakfast items. It was 1:10 in the afternoon! She said we could also get the fat boy hamburger (thought the menu says it is only available M-F and it is Saturday) or the BBQ or grilled cheese. The kicker is that the menu is a series of pages printed off a printer and put in a clip board--not a laminated professional made one. Why not pull the 6 pages of the menu out that we can't order from? Or why not have the person who gives the menus say to wait for the waitress to explain or that we can only get brunch? It seemed again like no one waned to do anything that wasn't their specific job title. Since I had to look at my menu longer she took my husband's order and then came back for mine. Instead of waiting for my order she put in his and so his food came super fast and to be polite he waited for my meal. The waitress again apologized that she had instructed them to wait for order. During this time a group sat down next to us. I could overhear them talking about how slow the service was and after they all decided which appetizers they wanted the waitress informed them they could not order them. The group (rightly so) was confused as to why they couldn't order appetizers in the afternoon. . My food came and I ended up ordering something I wasn't excited about because I didn't want eggs and don't like breakfast food so my choices were slim. I didn't finish my burger or fries. The food was better than average but not worth any special effort to go out of my way for--especially considering everything else. I have no interest to see what else they have to offer. . If you want to waste your money on waitresses with pink or overly blonde hair and tattoos and a skeleton spinning on a motorcycle out front then go ahead. But that's all you're paying for.  . P.S. This is the 1st time in a long time I went to a sit down restaurant where I was neither greeted or said bye to.
