ReviewID: gyBaIqxCqZQJuMq6FohNKA
ReviewerID: OvOFFVrYmVuj12FRlFjoPw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
We must go back IMMEDIATELY!!!!!!!!!. . A friend wanted to dine here for a working dinner. I was not impressed and would not be swayed by the hype. I had been here before and was not allured by the pizzas because they came to the table burned and overcooked.. . Much to my surprise,this time was truly a charm! I can only assume that this place had garnered more experience and understanding of thier pizza product and the manipulation of the woodfire pizza oven. The bar service, where we had been seated, was fantastic. Servers were very friendly, attentive and knowledgable. Although this establishment is of casual setting, I couldnt help but laugh to myself. The service at the pizzaria totally disembowels the osteria!!!. . We ordered:. Tricolore with Parmigiano Reggiano &amp; anchovy dressing- This salad was plucked baby frisee, with red endive hearts, and baby arugula tossed with an anchovy dressing with finely grated parmesian cheese-- very similiar to a broken ceasar.. . Similiar to a meat lovers pizza, we then ordered a Tomato, mozzarella, sausage, salami, bacon &amp; guanciale pizza. This pizza was amazing. There were notes of a mild harissa and fennel. the crackerlike crust was perfect to the tooth. The texture was truly impeccable. If Italy had a BBQ sauce, this is what it would totally taste like. I saw Hunter dragging a slice of pizza on the plate to catch the pizza drippings. SEXY!!!!!!!!!!. . Also, we ordered a potato pizza which had bacon, chevre, and a soft egg in the center. When the pizza arrived we broke the egg and drizzled the egg yolk all over the pizza. This reminded me of breakfast for dinner. The potatoes had a rich flavor which was perfectly matched with the smoked pork product.. . Our third pizza was a  wild spinach pizza. Each bite was crispy with such intense flavor..  Finally, for dessert we ordered Butterscotch budino served with pinenut cookies with fresh rosemary. This came in a glass and looked like a layered pudding topped with a salted browned butter carmel. I scooped the cookie with the pudding goodness, shoved it into my mouth and entered the gates of dolce heaven!!!. 3 gelatos: olive oil, blueberry yogurt and espresso. . Be prepared to speak in a higher decible. The acoustics in this space are amplified by the tall ceilings. It is a wonderful spot to casually dine with friends and family. . . The food last night created a lifetime memory!!!
