ReviewID: gyEnJv-m_rKaFThTqVLELg
ReviewerID: ioBSmW5CAm0BnUMGr0GiIw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Les Deux
Category: Lounges
Considering this is a "Hollywood" club, I really expected more out of Les Deux.  I've certainly been to enough Hollywood, Vegas, and Orange County clubs to know what to expect when I get to a place...and Les Deux just didn't live up to it. . . The wait was average: a lot of people trying to talk to the promoters with the list, who refuse to let anyone in but personal friends, small groups of girls (some who they even said "only 4 girls" when they clearly had a group of 8 girls and NO guys.  Big no, no and what WERE you thinking?), and bottle service people.  Did the whole let's pretend the club is cracking and make it seem like a long wait, but no one's really in there sort of deal.  Guestlist basically did not exist because they didn't really start moving people in until 10:15 and it ended at 10:30, so EVERYONE had to pay $20.. . The interior was okay.  Nothing to write about.  Two bars.  A small fountain on the outside.  Small dancing room.  Looked more like someone's townhouse than a fancy Hollywood club where all the A-listers are supposed to go to.   Go-go dancers also were okay.  They actually looked really young too...I kind of felt like a pedophile when I saw how short they were (probably around 5 feet?  I'm about 5'3" without heels).  Music was decent, can't remember much.  I guess all in all it was pretty nondescript.  Drinks were okay -- read the review where they warned about how expensive drinks were, so my friends and I decided to stick to beer that night.  It also was kind of annoying that we had to show our ids AGAIN at the bar when it's supposed to be a 21+ club in the first place; I've never experience that before at ANY club I've been to.. . PS: It was Asian night.  Expected a more mixed crowd, but oh well... BTW this is neither a negative or a positive, just an observation of the night.. . Look at Carlo's review -- he went on the same night as me.  Maybe it WAS that night, but I kind of have my doubts...  Would give this a 2.5
