ReviewID: gYFrhuHlY9DhbOcryKN5Uw
ReviewerID: B70lw7rm9Gj73fqQ-wvhTQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
The short: The appetizers were more inspired than the main dishes.  The food was very good but I guess I was hoping for more interpretation and innovation - especially the main courses.  The service was spotty but I give kudos to our waitress for her patience (she had to come around 3x before we were ready to order and didn't once give us attitude) although her recommendation... well, just close your eyes and pick something.. . The Long: With almost 200 reviews this one isn't necessary but the 50lbs of food we ate would have been in vain if I didn't write one.  We ordered 3 drinks, 4 appetizers, 4 main courses, 3 desserts and 3 coffees - for 4 people (I'm getting full just thinking about it).  I couldn't find the menu online and my French and Italian are a bit rusty (okay I don't speak Italian), so here's my attempt to describe what we had.. . Appetizers:  Lamb liver with fig on crostini, Blood sausage with lentils, Artic char tartare with avocado and potato chips, Salumi charcuterie plate - we opted for the Chef's Choice and got salami, hot salami, head cheese, prosciutto and something other prosciutto like meat.. Main course: Kurobuta pork chops, Monkfish "Francaise", and Steak frite. Dessert: Almond praline mousse, Chocolate mousse doughnut with strawberries, Peach cobbler. . The Artic Char was awesome.  So fresh and just the right amount of citrus enhanced with passion fruit - my friend raved about this.  The avocado added a creaminess like a nicer version of mayo.  The lamb liver was good but didn't seem seasoned and the fig didn't blend particularly well with it.  My guy friends liked the blood sausage.  The charcuterie meats were excellent but we were disappointed the Chef didn't select the pate.  We got the rather bland head cheese.. . The monkfish was the best of the 3 entress.  I would have preferred it just seared instead of breaded but it was well seasoned, flaky and moist.  The potatoes that came with it were so creamy and the spinach was good.  2 of my friends ordered the pork chops and both commented that it was more done than they would have liked.  I have to agree.  It was fully cooked and maybe that stripped it of some flavor. The spicy aoilli helped but I feel the meat should stand on it's own.  The steak wasn't overcooked but it seemed lacking in intensity.. . Of the desserts, my favorite was the peach cobbler.  It came with a scoop of greek frozen yogurt and carmelized bread crumbs.  It's peach season so they were exceptionally good and I tasted hints of ginger and maybe cinnamon that reminded me of the cobblers of my youth in Central New York.  The tartness of yogurt cut the sweetness nicely.  The almond praline was very good and beautifully constructed.  The mousse was just okay.. . We each paid $70 and rolled out of there 3 hours later completely satiated.
