ReviewID: GyY_TLgDMMcWhL1Aw0OQdw
ReviewerID: 7KCN7pMqbQzIvfMuwSBj0g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
After my first dinner at Alinea, I wrote the following in my dining notes: "I just got back from the longest meal I think I've ever eaten.". . Alinea is another hot new Chicago restaurant offering immersion in post-modern cuisine. There's a (no longer) recent review that actually highlights a lot of the cuisine that I sampled that night -- and sampling it was, as we went for the "tour," which that night was a 26-course tasting menu that lasted five hours. It was worth the hype and every penny, however; it's simply a phenomenal place. Many courses were "really good" or better; the consistency was unexpectedly high throughout the entire meal. Perhaps my favorite course was squab in mushroom soup with foie gras foam, the extra details of which I could not recall at this moment I wrote the review up (it was simply too difficult to keep in my head; unlike moto, there are no printed menus from which to pull notes, and I didn't keep a notebook with me through dinner). I've been a fan of Grant Achatz's since his tour at Trio in Evanston; as seems to be the pattern (set perhaps by Rick Tramonto and Gale Gand when they went off to start Tru), a fair number of the highly-skilled waitstaff there were from the old days of Trio. Service was precise and elaborate; the room was modern and gorgeous -- the entryway is simply amazing in and of itself! Although the food did not peak at the levels that moto peaked at, I felt it was more consistent (though not due to a lack of experimentation and risk) and still ended up placing Alinea as one of the five best restaurants in Chicago today. (If you're looking for the other four in my highly-subjective, highly-opinionated, ephemeral list: Moto, the Dining Room at the Ritz-Carleton, Charlie Trotter's, and Les Nomades.). . Yes, $175 is a hefty price for a tasting menu -- but what a tasting menu! It's also perfectly in line with the other new stellar greats in the US, such as per se in New York, and is in fact perhaps "a deal" when compared to Alain Ducasse's restaurant at the Essex House or many of the stunning French restaurants or Michelin three star restaurants out there.. . The bottom line? If you are a lover of exciting, dynamic, and post-modern cuisine (and live in the Chicagoland area) -- make a reservation (which you'll need to do well in advance) and go.. . The next spring, on April 5 (my little personal historical marker of terrestrial position with respect to the sun), we went back. That time was notable in two extra ways: first, I did the wine flight along with the tour; second, I got a copy of the menu to take home as a keepsake (a little thing I like to do sometimes -- call me sentimental, I guess). So I figured I'd just share the menu and review it as best as I could remember (bearing in mind that I was already up past my bedtime and was barely staying awake even as I type this), before too much time passed and I lost the thread of it entirely. I was far too tired that night to attempt such a herculean feat. Even with memory fading, it took all the free time I had over the course of two four days.. . [Yelp has a 5000 character limit, so I had to erase the dish-by-dish review from here.]. . In short, was this the best meal I had ever had? Absolutely not. I have had meals of pure perfection at Charlie Trotter's and Daniel's. Was this in the next level down? Absolutely. It's a great experience, with some stellar, amazing, wonderful, exceptional food, and some incredibly good dishes. (And one stinker that second time.) Was it worth the $175 tour price? Absolutely, if you're into the finest kind of dining adventure. Was the wine flight worth it? Yes, but only on special occasions (but then, I don't drink much any more anyway). In this case: absolutely. A memorable meal, a nice evening, a gorgeous room and building. Oh, and as opposed to last time: this one only took four hours. Record time!. . I could have written more, or found more links for the wines, or any number of things, but it had already taken a week, and I felt like if I take any more time, it might never get out. So: I'd love to hear specific questions or feedback; leave comments, and I'll respond in kind.. . (This is a hybrid of two reviews I originally posted on 16 September 2005 and 12 April 2006.)
