ReviewID: H0u0VTVAOw-13zVZiFQJ-Q
ReviewerID: tFOuweOhKpapqHVmzTWq5A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yolk
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I'm tentatively giving Yolk 3 stars.. . I read somewhere online that Yolk has an egg-stuffed crepe dish with hollandaise sauce and I thought that sounded really good. I mean, I like crepes and I like hollanadaise sauce, so put them together and you have a hit! Well, not really.. . The dish is called ZAMBONI CREPES: scrambled eggs, ham, and spinach folded into two crepes (separately) and topped with hollandaise sauce. It's served with red diced potatoes or fresh fruit and toast, pancakes, or an english muffin for about 10 bucks. I got potatoes and english muffins. (A LOT of food for one person. Should be shared, although I didn't.). . Hmmm... how can I put this? OK, I know I could have complained about the following things or asked for them to be changed around a bit, but I didn't. I'm complaining now, right? (Passive-aggressive, I know.) To begin, there's nothing really that special about eggs with ham and spinach. Again, although I didn't ask to replace any of the ingredients, I think this combination is a bit lame.. . Another not great thing about my dish was that there wasn't enough hollandaise sauce on it, at least not enough for me! Like, that's the whole reason I went out for breakfast, so could you please not be so skimpy with the hollandaise? I'll pay for extra if I have to, although I don't think I should have to pay extra for a few extra spoonfuls of hollandaise.. . Anyway, the hollandaise sauce that WAS on the dish was delish. The crepes were fluffy and well made. But the dish as a whole was weighed down by the unimaginative ham-spinach-egg combination, and the lack of Hollandaise sauce. For a place that seems to be aiming for frou-frou with their dishes, this dish is more like a boo-boo.. . The space is nice. I was at a table because I asked not to be seated at the counter (party of one) and really liked the spot I got in the rear of the place, where it was quieter. The hostess was pleasant and polite, but the old man (who looked like he might be the manager) who took me to my seat just slapped my menu on the table and walked away. Apparently he slaps the menus on the table for everyone, or at least I saw him do the same to a few other patrons.. . Seriously. Are you trying to lose customers? Hand them their menus. At least, hand ME mine.. . Luckily, the old man manager-or-whatever's behavior was quickly nullified by my server's extremely pleasant, unfussy, polite manner. She was attentive, but not overbearing, and very efficient. She got me everything I needed, except a water refill, which I did have to ask her for, but I let that slide because it WAS quite busy. I was surprised it was that busy so early. Otherwise, my coffee cup was refilled with fresh coffee several times (the coffee is great here) and I was left alone to enjoy what I could enjoy of my breakfast and read the New York Times.. . I'll probably come back and try to get them to dress up the eggs in my Zamboni Crepes with something a little more fun. If they won't do that, I'll try something else. I'll also try to get them to spoon a little more hols sauce on my dish. If they don't do that, then I probably won't come back. The nicest server doesn't make up for a mediocre breakfast, twice.
