ReviewID: H14hOJ4iIFj1QstMxZDDfA
ReviewerID: IHFVljMsPhMc2-lW3UMNuw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
For the big 2-1, my parents kindly offered to take me to dinner and buy me the first alcoholic drink of my life. I was originally thinking Longman and Eagle, but they don't take resos and the L. family doesn't like to wait when it comes to food. I figured we could keep Lula as a backup plan in case the wait was excessive, but the P's aren't fans of poor Lula. So I tried calling Blackbird, but with only 30 hours notice we couldn't get in for an early Saturday dinner. What was a birthday boy to do? . . Sepia could only offer us a 5:15 seating, but it was high on my list of places to try, and I knew I'd get an ROTD out of it, so we took it. Yes, 5:15 pm dinner, aka "I forgot to put in my dentures" or "I broke my hip" time. Oddly, we weren't the only whippersnappers to arrive then. The place was pretty much full by 6:15 and entirely packed by the time we left around 7:15. . . I think the name describes the restaurant more perfectly than almost any other restaurant in Chicago, save for places like Taco and Burrito Palace (Do they have tacos? Check. Burritos? Check. Is it a palace? Check.) Sepia gives color to ordinarily boring black and white photos. The restaurant seems to do something similar with food. . . We enjoyed all of our dishes. I won't list them individually because this review already exceeds my self-imposed 8 word limit. Portion sizes were larger than expected and we couldn't even finish all the pate they gave us. Everything was well-prepared and flavorful, but nothing was too far "out there". The bone marrow beignets that came with the flat iron steak were probably the only real trendyish food item on the menu except for maybe the pork belly and skate wing, depending on how futuristic you are about eating. . . The cocktail list here deviates from the more tried-and-true food items, but I suppose hearkens back to a time before they had convenient mixers and had to rely on other spirits to flavor drinks. It was also considered unsafe to put too much of one alcohol in any given drink back in the day. due to lack of safety standards. Many cases of blindness were attributed to overconsumption of poor quality hooch. To combat this, people diversified their portfolios by getting drunk on various alcohols at one time. . . Just kidding. I totally made that whole last paragraph up. It sounded good though, right? Sepia has to have one of the best cocktail lists and mixologists in the city. They even made my mom's French Martini perfectly, which up until now was considered physically impossible by leading scientists. Then again, I have nothing to compare it to, since I'm only 21 and stuff. Happy birthday, Matt!. . [Due to unusually high compliment volume, please allow 48 hours for a response from me]
