ReviewID: h1iBgZlg78GReaUY_F9PTg
ReviewerID: 53-0CIUo-pd5ysfvHXb2yQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mr. Pizza
Category: Pizza
AMAZING SERVICE!!!!! Seriously, major props to the manager, Mahnee! Here's why:. . We celebrated TWO of our friends' birthdays here last night and we had a really large group of 20 people! However, we DIDN'T make reservations because when we called, they said for a party of 15 or more, we had to book the private room upstairs which was a minimum of $20 per person... a little pricey for Mr. Pizza so we decided to just go in a little early and attempt to get seating.. . When we got inside, the place was PACKED!! Eek! The hostess and the other workers started panicking when we told them how large our party was and rebuked us for not making reservations. When we explained to them that we did attempt to but didn't want the private room, all she said was, "well, you should have still called." -_- She then told us we had to maybe wait until 9 PM if we wanted to sit even in 2 separate groups (it was only 7 PM at the time)! And she said the best thing they could do was seat us in 4-5 separate groups all over the restaurant. Double EEK!!. . So while we were debating on what to do, the manager, Mahnee came to save the day! He told us not to worry and just put together a bunch of tables IMMEDIATELY and seated ALL of us! We sat in 2 separate groups but we were right next to each other so it was great! He then even took our orders and served us for the rest of the night! He was really friendly and extremely attentive the whole time. . . My friend asked for more pickles and he said there's an extra charge if we want another plate of them. To this, my friend replied, "But it's his birthday!" And whaddya know? Mahnee gave us a free plate OVERFLOWING with pickles! Amazing! . . But that's not all. 2 of our friends came late and there were no chairs for them. But before we could even raise our hands to ask for some chairs, Mahnee came swooping in with a chair for my friend! WOW! At this point, I was really BLOWN AWAY! This guy is seriously the best restaurant manager EVER! I made sure to personally thank him on the way out and to get his name to give him props here on Yelp! :) Thanks Mahnee!!. . This place is good for birthdays because they take polaroid pictures of your group for you and put it in a paper frame for you to take home! They took like 6 for us! They look like this: . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . As for the food, we got several pizzas. Potato Gold was by FAR the best. Everything I wrote in my first review for this place still stands. This place rocks!! :D
