ReviewID: h1Jpf0cgMLtqC9GXGGUDpw
ReviewerID: x6sjZBrrk_j5bI6K5-vPBA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Café Circa
Category: Restaurants
I was really excited to try this place, as it has had good reviews and the menu looked enticing.. We came for dinner on a Thursday night and I was immediately impressed with the decor. It was mostly browns with drapery here and there that created a sophisticated, yet light and airiness.  There is also a small stage where there is often local live music. Sadly, we missed out on the music. It must begin later in the evening.. I was disappointed to be seated at a high top. There were cool tables along the wall that appealed to me more for a nice dinner and being seated at a pub table and in the center of the restaurant made me feel like I was dining in the bar. It definitely took away from the experience. Of course, I didn't request to sit at a different table, so I can't really complain too much.. I think our server was relatively new, as he was not much help with the wine list and was quite confused when I requested the house Cab. At first I didn't understand the puzzled look until he said, "oh, you mean a Cabernet Sauvignon"....Um, yes, that is correct.  I felt kind of bad, because we snickered about it, as he walked away.. The service wasn't horrible, but it did continue to go down hill. We ordered an appetizer and even though we were curious about the Chocolate Chicken Wings we were boring and went with the french fries. We were hungry and very annoyed when the french fries came out with our Entrees. It didn't help that the table was quite crowded with the appetizer, four Entrees, four wine and four water glasses.. I had the Mango Infused Spicy Shrimp. The sweet coconut rice was delicious, but I cannot comment on the black beans, as I never received them. I would have said something, but I had assumed the beans were hidden under my yummy rice. The lack of my second side was not the only disappointment in my meal. The shrimp was far too spicy to enjoy. It burned so much that I did not taste any Mango dark rum sauce. I had to keep shoveling in the rice to fight the fire in my mouth.. As for my friends meals, the Blackened Tilapia was disappointing. Mainly, because my friend was not expecting to get the skin with her fish. Not sure that it was supposed to have the skin and perhaps the skin is why she mentioned that it was very fishy tasting, too. Let's hope that was the reason for the fishy taste, since Tilapia is a very mild tasting fish. The other two had a Jerk Chicken with Pineapple Salsa and one was not happy with her dish, but she did admit that she does not care for Jerk Seasoning, so we thought it was funny that she would order this dish.  She claimed that she ordered it, because she wanted to try the Pineapple Salsa.. When the server cleared our table, I mentioned that I did not get my second side and the server gave me this dumb founded look and then mumbled something unintelligible.. He returned with our separate checks, which was nice, even though we had not requested it. I noticed that the french fries were not on my check and I asked the server to whom he charged the fries, since I had ordered them and didn't want to stick the charge to one of my friends. I guess he forgot to charge us the $2.50 and he grabbed my check and returned with a new check that had the fries on it. I thought it was kind of ridiculous that he did this, considering he did not give me the entire meal that I had ordered. Perhaps, others would think I am being petty, though?. Anyway, the restaurant is pretty and there are still a couple of items on the menu that sound interesting, but I do not see myself returning anytime soon.
