ReviewID: H4kr3zgYVsBdS6N37ZUqDg
ReviewerID: MHpnKXYRsM-iITwe8y2PfA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
though we had a reservation last night, we still had to wait a long time due to restaurant week--which we forgot about.. . standing around in a cramped place can be good: as i squeezed out of some guy's way, i ended up surprising a woman with my presence and we ended up having a back and forth about me trying to snake some of her food.. . when we were seated, thankfully at the window so we didn't have to get jostled, our waiter had a horrendous fake british accent and i suppressed openly making fun of him. the accent's fine on an oxford don, but pretty offensive on a man in his early 30s with a faux hawk.. . three people:. . toast with goat cheese and sauteed grapes - fine, i like the grapes; the girl loves everything; the other guy liked the cheese, especially on the sweet potato fries. . sweet potato fries - pretty standard and gone quickly. . tortilla - i liked it, though thought it should have more potato; the guy didn't like it and thought it had too much potato. . lentils with serrano ham - supremely strange. we started calling them chicharrn due to the bizarre deep-fried crunchy status of the lentils. they were not finished. . lomo embouchado - i liked the caper sauce, the meat and cheese was fine, but i'm not a fan of raisin bread. . galician baby octopus - the tentacles were burnt, i ate one and a half; the guy ate one, then they joined the plate of lentils. . roast root vegetables - everyone else liked them, but i think they had some sort of honey gastrique, which i did not like. . asparagus with manchego - the only dish all of us loved. . i forgot to order the game hen, so the girl and i both ordered the skirt steak - fine, my favorite part was the cucumbers on mine and her plates. . because i ordered the pix fixe, i also had to order a dessert i didn't want, so i chose flan. though i didn't eat it, while in the bathroom, my table mates tried it and said it was terrible.. . the girl ordered the churros, which she loved.. . i've had other things here that were ok.. it's not at all traditional, so if you're looking for that, go elsewhere--but the pervasiveness of "tapas" bars has become so great that anything you find will be quasi-french, quasi-los angeles.. . the music was pretty terrible. i don't want to spend an evening shouting over the killers' album, nor over other star 98.7 bands.. . our second waiter (the first one lost his green card and was deported back to hoboken) was very friendly, though in the transition, the dessert orders were lost.. . i'm not particularly planning on going back.
