ReviewID: h4wHduXWwjMT5zwNsif_zg
ReviewerID: b2XHjSwooOFG74gw4NQtvQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I'm trying to up my LA Yelp street cred so I'm hoping my recent weekend in LA/Hollywood was enough to make my bones.  . . Its not like plenty of people haven't reviewed this place already but several of my friends have gone, some raved, some were underwhelmed, I love pizza and enjoy Mario on TV so I pumped the place up and dragged my wife for a weekend of LA Yelp visits.  I'd give it 3.5 stars if that was an option but I can't see myself giving it 4 or 5 right now.  Maybe if I visit again I'll bump it up but I was let down and over-charged.. . The visit:  No way did I have reservations so I calculated our best chance to land a bar stool would be to get there before it opened on Sunday and be in the first group in.  We left the Bonaventure hotel and got to Mozza by 11:55 am and found parking right across the street.  Right as we walked up, the door opened, people filed in and we landed 2 spots at the side bar.  Let the experience BEGIN!  I will say, the service was great and very friendly.  Our waiter/bartender guy was super nice and helpful and the hostess was also pleasant.  I was expecting to be dealing with a total snobby bitch and got the complete opposite.  Cool.  . . My wife is nowhere near as yelp addicted as me and knew very little of this place outside of what she read at our hotel in the latest Los Angeles magazine (which liked the Pizzeria side and felt the restaurant needed help).  I wanted the squash blossoms, she wasn't that hungry so we passed on ordering an app.  We settled on sharing the fennel and sausage pizza and the goat cheese and bacon pizza.  . . While waiting for the pizzas, with me chomping a breadstick while every other diner was eating a salad or app, the Host guy came over with an order of the Arancine alla Bolognese (basically leftover risotto, in balls, breaded and fried with sauce) and said, I'd swear, "compliments of the house."  We tried them and I probably liked them more than my wife but she also thought they were tasty.  . . Finally the Stars had arrived, out came the pizzas.  Months and months of reading reviews, seeing pictures, dreaming of what it would taste like so I go to break off a slice of the sausage and fennel pizza and it speaks back to me with a very crunchy break.  Uh oh.  I know they are thin crust/Neapolitan but this was like saltine crunchy.  My wife started on the Goat cheese one and it seemed a little less burnt which made me happier.  . . The flavor was good, plenty of fennel seed and even fennel pollen dust.  One thing I can say about Mario is that the man knows his meat.  The sausage was great.  I was a little annoyed that it was basically one giant sausage meatball on each slice.  i would have preferred it be broken up and spread out more evenly (which I attempted to do).  It was very good though and my wife agreed.  . . The goat cheese on that pizza was really mild.  I was expecting a little more bite but it was a really soft flavor.  The bacon was tasty and it paired well with the other toppings.  This crust was more soft so it tasted better and I was able to much on the crust at the end since it wasn't a breadstick.  . . I wanted to get the Butterscotch pudding dessert but I made the mistake of talking up Scoops to my wife so she wanted to hit that instead for dessert but we were stupid and didn't check out Scoops Sunday hours.  (They were closed until 2pm and we got there about 1pm)  =(        This meant, no butterscotch, no scoops.  DAMN!  . . Anyway, we got the bill and were trying to get out quickly so other people could also enjoy a meal so I didn't even look at my bill until I paid it and walked away.  My wife was like, why was it so much, so she looked at and saw that they charged us for the app.  Dang.  Probably just a mistake and not some greater conspiracy but annoying none the least.  I did have one piece of the sausage to go and it actually turned out to be the best piece for some reason.  I popped it in the microwave at home (cardinal sin for pizza - micros destroy them!) but this actually made the crust softer and way better.  . . I think I built it up too much in my mind and would be happy to go back but you guys owe me an app and cook my pizza for 2  minutes less!
