ReviewID: h4ZTygAYLwZ3nwMzz9fRiQ
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: AMC Fork &amp; Screen
Category: American (Traditional)
I remember when this dungeon was called the Butthole Backdoor or something like that... It was filthy, sticky and smelly. And that was just the staff. This place wasn't even fit for District 9 back then. I have seen cleaner hobo huts under the Grady curve. Try sitting through Lord of the Rings like someone dropped an opened can of albacore tuna in oil underneath your seat. Purge.. . But now, after an Extreme Makeover Latrine Edition... It's actually not half bad. The movie part of it... The food, not so much. $6 for a movie Mon-Thurs is a total deal and those high back chairs ain't too shabby either. I like the swivel action, reminds me of my AB Circle Pro at home. . . The food, don't expect anything fancy, even though the menu kinda sound appetizing. Unlimited popcorn is a good deal. The chicken tenders (all flavas) were pre-cooked and dried out. Their trick was to bath it in either sweet or hot sauce... Ah, it might be wet on the outside but it's like plywood in the middle. You ain't fooling no one, tool. You can try to get the kids meal if you put on your best smile for the server... In this case, I bent over to pick up my Chapstick. For around $7, the kids chicken quesadilluh comes with fwies, gummi candy and a dwink... A decent sized portion. And of course, the booze... Beer, mixed dwinks, shots, donkeys, midgets, all can be had while you enjoy your flick. My advice, booze hard.. . Even though, this thing is in Buckhead, I observed an unusual amount of redneck activity whom patron this lair at night. These mythical beasts from Deliverance country, one can assume, only come into town under the cover of darkness. It was a spectacular sight indeed... Until the movie started. 2 words: Pork &amp; Scream.. . BTW- Don't bust my balls but I must admit I went to see Julie &amp; Julia. And I liked it... A little, it was cute. Awww.... . Now, shut up and git me a beer, woman!. . Squeeeeal!
