ReviewID: H7EO_e7WbWbmtzrQoYgUNA
ReviewerID: iJGJogHpwzhMUsFynclEzA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Social
Category: Wine Bars
I bipped into Social to get some take-out dinner while in town for a conference. The menu had a few vegetarian options, a nice change of pace from most of the restaurants in this area, so i was excited. I ordered from the bartender and sat at the bar to wait. They encouraged me to order a glass of wine while i waited, so i selected something from the diverse wine list.. . This is where the fun started. . . First, the bartender had to climb up onto the bar to get the bottle down from a rack way up near the ceiling. It then took her minutes to get the foil off the bottle, which just struck me as odd for the bartender at a self-proclaimed wine bar. She then poured my wine into a rather dusty cup, and disappeared. I waited a minute or two to see if she'd come back, but ended up just drinking the (quite good, actually) wine from the dusty cup.. . While i waited, no fewer than three employees came by to verify that i was the one waiting for take-out, or to verify my order, etc. Odd.. . When my food did arrive, after a slightly long wait, i grabbed the bag and left. Only halfway back to my hotel did i realize how not-heavy the bag was. I worried they'd forgotten an entree or something, but was too tired to deal, and just kept going.. . No, they actually didn't forget an entree. The servings were just tiny. We'd ordered the Roasted Portobello Mushroom appretizer, the vegetarian lasagna, and a pasta special, something like spinach ricotta ravioli in a porcini mushroom cream sauce. Not only tiny, but gross-looking. I get that presentation isn't a priority for take-out food, but when it looks like the food was just splatted into the box, it's unappetizing. The worst, by far, was the Portobello mushroom. Two roadkill-resembling portobello caps, with some random chunks of cheese thrown on top. It looked vile. I'll upload the pictures.. . None of the food was remotely tasty. The lasagna was all dry and hard on top, as if it had been left under a heat lamp since lunch time. The pasta special tasted like it was made with frozen spinach. The mushrooms... ugh.. . I'm a bit astonished, this venue has generally positive reviews. Maybe it was a majorly off night.
