ReviewID: H7giY-Iz716w4UVIk6Zj_w
ReviewerID: thoz9wRQ64N_rt_R7hpTwg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Fasten your seatbelts and unfasten your jean belts...Osteria Mozza is about to get a review as satisfying as the ENTIRE experience in the restaurant: food, service, ambiance...Mozza's got it all!. . One of the best parts of the eating experience was that we got quite a few complimentary food items while we waited.  At some point there was a delay, but you barely notice because the service keeps you so happy!  Throughout the night, they served a plate of proscuitto, a sample of a ricotta cheese w/ black olive tapenade on a crostini, and polenta sprinkled with Parmesan.  BTW, if gritz were made with gold, it would be called Osteria Mozza's polenta dish.  Amazing!. . For a starting appetizer, we ordered from the Mozzarella bar (Burrata w/ asparagus, brown sugar butter and something resembling-but-tasting-way-better-than-regular-bac on)...EXTREMELY recommended! The Burrata cheese tastes like it was harvested on Cloud 9...light, desserty texture floating on top of a crostini with delicate crunch with a spice on top (ie sage) that graces your taste buds with culinary elegance. We ordered two entrees: calf's brain ravioli and rabbit. Trust me when I say that the name calf's brain ravioli should not intimidate you from trying this dish. There is nothing grody-tasting about it. First of all, the pasta is made completely from scratch, and the ravioli filling is very delicate, tasting like a soft cheese (cheese seemed to be the motif of this restaurant; however, this place is like the Cinderella story of cheeses. It turns regular, greasy cheese into elegant, refined princess cheese). The rabbit is cooked to perfection and soaked in the most flavorful of marinades! Add a side of broccolini cooked in vinegar, and you have the perfect fine dining cuisine.. . You must not leave the premises, however, without having a dessert...I mean it.  Especially recommended is the Almond cant-remember-the-second-part dish.  Cool yogurt gelato, warm cherries, and an almond croissant...need i say more?  Bite into all of these, and a symphony of textures and tastes come together in perfect harmony!  Now the reason I didn't cry my tears of joy over the beauty of this dinner was because I got the bill.  Then I cried tears of pain.  But not for long...after all, it was a special occasion (Happy Birthday, Mom!!), and it feels good to indulge and have a luxurious night out at such a fine restaurant.  Five stars this restaurant greatly deserves, nothing less.. . Service was amazing from beginning to end.  The server seated us right away, even though we were a bit early for our reservation (HIGHLY recommended) .  Our waitress was extremely caring and friendly, never hesitating to answer a question about the foreign names of food that gave no hint as to what the dish contained.  Waiters were prompt with clearing dishes and putting down new silverware for each course, and managers were constantly around the premises with a welcoming smile ready to greet guests or to receive feedback.. . Ambiance is sophisticated in color and decor, and for some weird reason the large ceiling made me feel very comfortable in the place.. . Every element of a restaurant is held in highest quality here: food, service, and ambiance.  Osteria Mozza is the perfect restaurant rainbow: everything blends together and creates a vibrant, beautiful spectacle.
