ReviewID: Hb3eaC1AB2WBUBx_F6A7hA
ReviewerID: X52arSbs51EnksYVRzR3VA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Here's the truth, people.  The ambience is pathetic, loud, dark, annoying and worthless.  The sausages are decent, cooked well and reasonably priced.  The double-fried belgian fries are good but not great.   This is yet another LA hotspot that is the cool place to go to because... well, everyone else does.  Fancy that... be a sheep and eat some pig (and rabbit and duck and everything else they put in there.)  . . I waited in line for thirty minutes staring at hot girls in skirts and stubbly aspiring-actor men who wanted to rub up against said hot girls in skirts, then I ordered my sausage and then I got my drink and walked into the smorgasbord dining room and stood for twenty minutes trying to find a place for my group (four of us) to sit...  our food came out just as we found a place to sit down.  If I had still been standing when they brought my food out, i would have told them "Here's an idea.... what say you take your shitass food back to the kitchen so I don't have to wait nearly an hour to eat a sausage while standing up in a loud, dank, nearly-pitch-black room with a DJ spinning subpar electro.". . The hot italian sausage I had was decent.  My right asscheek became sore after a while because it alone was supporting my upper body, because there was only enough room on the edge of the thirty-foot bench for me to position half of my ass onto it while I ate.  I dunno.  I guess you haven't lived until you've eaten a sausage you could easily make at home in a din of yelling people with one asscheek supporting your body (and afterwards you may not want to.)   . . What's that, LA?  You mean you have a response to me that takes absolutely no thought and doesn't offer a unique perspective or possess a shred of originality?  Well...  bugger me, let's hear it!   "Dude... you should just chill, man.  Relax and lower your standards a little.  You know, we're chill.  You should just..  chill.". . Crap, you're right.  I hate to admit it, but the world WOULD be a hell of a lot better if we all lowered our standards more.
