ReviewID: HbTobZHqhWIJ_7iachQZ9g
ReviewerID: eafWEvwyHtbwPMSn8Elimw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tito&#39;s Tacos
Category: Mexican
"I love Tito's Tacos. You'll love Tito's too. The only thing better than a Tito's Taco... is two. The only thing better than a Tito's Taco... is two.". . If you've ever seen this TV commercial that looks like it was a 6th grader's final project in his media class or something that your friend put together while drunk on iMovie, this is that very Tito's Tacos on the corner of Washington and Sepulveda.. . I don't really know what it is about Tito's that keeps me coming back. I love it, but I can't really explain why. Maybe it's the freshly fried hard taco shells, or the delicious homemade chips and salsa. Maybe it's the fact that the tacos are so greasy that you can put finger prints on your cardboard box after you get your hands on your $1.50 taco. Maybe it's just the fact that Tito's feels like anything but a chain restaurant in a city filled with commercialized restaurant-age. Whatever it is, Tito's Tacos has some of the best tacos (hard shell) in the L.A. area and they even come with a complimentary unintended, food coma nap! (you will take a nap if you eat four tacos like I do). . Ok, some things about Tito's aren't so good. . 1) Tostada - No idea why, but the tostadas at Tito's are gross. The tostadas are made of the same delicious shell as the tacos, but in a different shape, but for god knows why, I found it to be completely disgusting.. 2) Guacamole: Like the salsa at Tito's, the guacamole is not thick at all. Instead of being a thick guacamole that your White friends make in their beautiful Cusinart food processor before you have them over for a football party, the Tito's guacamole is kind of like the green avocado salsa at La Salsa or Poquito Mas. It's VERY ok.. 3) Burritos: I know a lot of people love these, especially the people that get the "All Meat" Burrito, but it's just not my thing there. I know a lot of people love it, so I'm not going to get into it too much, but when I've had a burrito there, it was very ok and I've been to a lot of hole in the wall Mexican places and even a handful of those carts that operate on a generator in random alleys in East L.A.. . However, it's called Tito's TACOS for a reason. You go there for the tacos, which are delicious in their own unique way. The tacos are simple - meat, cheese, lettuce, yummy and greasy shell, for $1.95 ($1.50 without cheese, but you should get cheese unless you are a lactard - as in your process lactose slowly). These are not those $1.25 baby tacos in soft shells that you get at Del Taco or at your hole in the wall joint that you make you feel like you know "real Mexican food," these are some good sized hard tacos that are pretty unique in taste. Since they are different than most other tacos, I can see why it's a little hit or miss for people, but it's a hit for me.. . It's definitely not healthy, nor a place that you take a girl to impress her (unless your girlfriend is awesome), as you'll likely order outside and take your boxes of tacos home, but it's just a place with delicious tacos.. . If you're a guy, get 3 or 4 tacos. Four comes with the nap that I mentioned earlier. . If you're a girl, get 1 to 3 tacos. Three comes with the nap as well.. . To give your tacos that extra kick that is lacking because of the mild salsa, ask your nice taco artist if they can hook you up with the jalapeno salsa, which makes them that much better.. . One thing: Order correctly and know what you want. It's a neighborhood-like spot, even though it gets a ton of people, but I saw some guy "return" his burritos and everyone looked at him like they wanted to kill him because you just don't do that at Titos.
