ReviewID: HBUTFZu4Om8WdUSTrGx1-Q
ReviewerID: g0Yeg1VUs0BYvrWL2dQRRw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Sakura Japanese Restaurant
Category: Japanese
After reading everybody's good reviews, I decided to give it a try.. . It was a Thursday evening just before 7:00 and we could luckily be seated at the last available table.  I saw some people had to wait after us.. . The decor was old and not fancy at all which I made me expect that their food might be non-Americanized and very traditional.. . We ordered the mixed sunomono to start off with, my fiance ordered Nabeyaki udon and I ordered sushi - uni, toro, tamago, ikura and shrimp tempura roll and eel-cucumber roll.. . I never thought that a sunomono could get that bad.  I guess it was bad because they leave the sunomono drawn in the vinegar for too long time that the cucumber lost their crunchyiness.  Sunomono is one of the most simplest dish a Japanese restaurant could serve, so we were getting kind of scared of the following dishes.. . Then came my man's nabeyaki udon - his all-time favorite.  It totally looked thin.  There was only one skinny shrimp tempura with some other cheap vegetables.  After he sipped the soup, I tried it too, and we came to an agreement that it's tasteless.. . Then my sushi came.  I tried the ikura first.  They say a sushi place with good ikura serves fresh sushi.  Sakura failed.  The ikura was not fresh at all.  The bubble skin was creasy obviously, and when you eat it, you actually feel that crease.  The tamago used too much sake in it that it lacked sweetness.  Uni did not taste good either.  The only acceptably OK sushi was the toro, but needless to say, not the best compare to the other places.  . The worst of all the sushi was its rice (shari).  They were so sticky that I felk like I was eating rice balls.  The rice used on the rolls even lost their shapes because they were too stickly AND the sushi chefs squeezed too hard when rolling them.  I ended up taking the rice off the sushi and literally eat only the fish itself at last because I just could not eat that stickly shapeless rice.  I wonder how these chefs were trained!!. . The bill was $80 + tip, which is very cheap for a dinner for two at a Japanese restaurant, but it reminded me that I need to expect a big bill for a good quality of Japanese food.  It is all about chef's skills and knowledge.. . It was disappointing  for us as we were hoping it would be a good neighborhood restaurant as we just moved into the area.. . This is not a restarurant for a person who knows Japanese food.
