ReviewID: HCt8oo0eiqpVIjJDbQk1PQ
ReviewerID: fI4mflI8SERhPzzUSIdVKQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
After going to Germany last year, I've been craving a decent Bratwurst from any joint I could find. Upon receiving a recommendation from a friend, I just had to try this place out.. . Trying to find the exact location of this place was an adventure in itself. My friends and I came at night, so we were trying to locate this cleverly hidden place while wandering aimlessly around what seemed to be a shady part of dtown LA. After missing a turn here, making a random turn there, going up and down a street, then retracing our steps for a bit, we finally reached our destination. Lucky for us, there were a few open parking spaces in front of what appeared to be an apartment complex of art studios or the type.. . The line, even around dinner time, was pretty fast. No jk. Once we got in and ordered, the next phase of dinner was a bit more troublesome, seeing as how there weren't really any seats in the back area. But my friends and I did manage to snatch a few, so we plopped down and waited for our food.. . Then it arrived. My large beautiful heavenly bratwurst dog topped with sauerkraut and caramelized onions. I took one bite into it and my mouth just exploded with a swirling immersion of flavor that almost brought me back to that Dresdener Bratwurst I had. But with respect to being a continent and ocean away from Germany, this definitely hit the spot.. . As for the fries, they come in Klein (small) or Groot (large). Nothing too special, in my opinion. Or maybe I just had a bad batch, for other reviews seem to rank the fries a pedestal higher or etwas.. . Unfortunately for my friends and I, we weren't quite of age for the alcoholic drinks. I assume the night would've been that much more exciting if we had been able to sample one of the many drinks offered.. . But $6 for the Bratwurst dog?? Can't beat it. I'll be sure to come back for my Bratwurst craving, not to mention I must try out their exotic dogs as well. (Rabbit? Alligator? Amazing!). . Can't go wrong with Wurstküche.
