ReviewID: HCz8F_1RF7iO9LSvceiJHA
ReviewerID: -k5yFUChotBMGQgHdFZvLQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Strip House Steak House
Category: Steakhouses
There were definitely some ups and downs here, but overall, not bad at all. Solid choice, I'd go back.. . We started off with a giant negative. We walked in, a bunch of 20 somethings, into a place of 30-40-50+ year olds. We had called ahead and asked if there was seating in the dining room, we were told yes, so we went over. Came in, host eyes us warily (we're all dressed fine), and seats us right in front, by the door, in the lounge area. We mentioned we called ahead for dining room seating and that it was available, and in a really asshole-ish type way, he says, "Who told you that?". . He kind of lingers for a moment, deciding to say yes or no, and finally gives us a decent table. Fine, so now we're sitting. Fuck you and your little dog too, host guy. . . The waiter (who was *awesome*) comes over, gives us our menus and wine list, is all smiles. We start off with the seafood platter for four; it's got crab legs, calamari, oysters, tuna, clams, scallops, and is excellent. Alongside that, we had the foie gras app, which was a little different than some of the foie gras I've eaten in the past. It was a generous portion, but I think I'd skip it next time. Caesar salad looked good, and we're onto the main course.. . Oh -- the sommelier came over and recommended us two fantastic bottles of wine which went with the dinner very well. Big ups to him. We all ordered the 14 oz filet; I got mine medium. It was mostly excellent, but there were some parts that were just a tad too overcooked on the outside. On the whole, a good steak. Toss in a side of wild mushrooms and I'm happy as a clam. Dinner was $650ish with the wine included, with 20% tip you do the math. Not terrible for NY, or for a steak house.. . Three stars because the host is a dick, the steak was a little bit off (but definitely good enough to go back for, and probably an anomaly). Probably better options, but if you're in the area, this is a 100% solid choice for a great meal. I'd definitely go back.
