ReviewID: Hczd8-H3GSFLlXht81JuRQ
ReviewerID: 00rIcvqmfci_oJWkOqPqmg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
let me just get to the point with this review right away. WILL NEVER GO BACK TO HUB 51 EVER AGAIN! . My boyfriend made reservations for 8:15 for dinner and drinks for him and I because it was my birthday. Just wanted to check out the place cause I had heard mixed reviews. Figured we'd try something new. We got there at 8:15 promptly and we got sat within 5 seconds....wonderful! and we even got a cute booth amongst all the crowded tables. Was very happy with that! So a guy came by said hello gave us our water and we thought he was our server, unfortunately he wasnt. about 2 minutes later a young girl about 24ish came to the table. "what can i get you to drink" she says with an attitude and a smirk. I was really offended, but just brushed it off. Said I needed a minute and once again she smirked at me.....ok 2nd time i brushed it off. maybe she was having a bad night. she came back and my boyfriend and i ordered a beer and i had the hub punch. she carded us and my boyfriend just said well let the birthday girl go first, kinda just to say to her, you know we're here for a special occasion. she didnt flinch didnt make conversation and say oh btw happy birthday. (i wasnt asking for a song and dance just for her to acknowledge the simple fact) . she checked our ID's and now for the 3rd time smirked @ myself and my boyfriend and walked away. now, my boyfriend and I both have served table for years and he still does, we have NEVER in our lives gone out to eat and had someone make our jaws drop and wonder what in the world we did to upset the waitress. we literally sat there debating on just leaving. and we've never done that. so our drinks came and we ordered sushi for an app. she put some app plates on the table and some orange sauce and walked away. didnt say a word about what the sauce was. my boyfriend was especially pissed about that cause he doesnt eat sushi. sushi came, it was fast and good. she never asked us how it was or anything. we ordered dinner, him the fish tacos and me the salmon. she didnt say thank you, she once again, yep you guessed it!! smirked and just walked away! so now my boyfriend and i have empty drinks. i can see her walking around the restaurant dropping stuff breaking it, didnt look busy at all. so the same guy that dropped off our waters came by, and asked if we wanted more drinks, we said yea and we had been waiting for our server, who was apparently TOO busy roaming around the restaurant doing nothing, to come back cause we wanted to order shots before the food came. at that point my boyfriend asked to talk to a manager. manager came over we told him what was up and we asked for a new server, which we did not get. we told him we felt like we were intruding and obviously asking to much from our waitress just to be served!!! she came back with our drinks we ordered from the other waiter and in the most monotone voice said "i'm sorry guys" cause obviously she was just forced to say that. gave us our drinks and our food came. he loved his fish tacos but my salmon was ok. at this point i wasnt even hungry because i was so upset at how we were treated by our waitress. finished what i could and pushed my plate to the side, she came over asked if i was done said i was full and she once again in the most computer generated monotone voice spited out "was this food not what you thought it would be" i almost said yes but just to get her out of my face i just said i was full. she asked if we wanted dessert and we declined said we were full but we really just wanted to get the hell out of there. she turned to walk away and my boyfriend caught her roll her eyes at us! wonderful!! she came back with the check and once again in her wonderful smirk she said well since you didnt want dessert we bought your shots, have a wonderful birthday (and this time she was just being rude) so we paid, tipped 20% and left. so wish i could tell you her name, but she never told us. basically we had the most rude and condescending waitress in our lives! the thing that really urks me is that we would have stayed for at least 3-4 more rounds of drinks had dessert and tipped 30% if she wouldnt have been so rude. so thanks hub 51 and our wonderful waitress for making our first and last experience so horrible and i really appreciate the fact that my birthday dinner sucked cause she was in a bad mood. will never go there EVER again. and that waitress should try a different job route cause she's obviously not a people person.
