ReviewID: hdOwzpfeR-IotEaAusSwBQ
ReviewerID: yzu_eeRoXYG4DtUGxCPYGQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ping Pong
Category: Chinese
I was first introduced to ping pong last fall by some friends and it has quickly become a standby place to bring friends from out of town and a restaurant I frequent to the point that most of the staff recognizes me.. . Its ambient vibe, incredibly friendly staff, exotic menu and great daily specials at a very reasonable price make it a chic and affordable place to wine and dine [they do have BYOB].. . When you sit down you'll be greeted with a warm towel to wipe off your hands and a complimentary appetizer... typically taro chips, although for a brief time they served boiled peanuts. The wait staff will eventually bring you your own carafe of water and will keep your glass full.. . Their menus is a great mix of classic Thai and Chinese offerings and offers great selections for vegetarians as well as meat eaters. . . The hot and sour soup is incredible and a great way to start your meal, which for me usually is the green curry.. . I realized I hadn't reviewed pingpong and decided to when I visited this past week. Unfortunately it was one of the worst experiences I've ever had in a restaurant to date. . . It was nice outside, so we opted for the outdoor seating which we've done many times before.. . About midway through our appetizers we began to be attacked by a swarm of gnats that were encircling our table. . . At first i wasn't so bad but by the time our food arrived it was beyond tolerable.  We spent nearly 3/4 of our time shooing the gnats away and all without any of the wait staff asking if everything was OK.. . Gnats ended up in our food, water and drinks and our server was nowhere in sight. Another server came to get our dishes and noticed what was happening and even brought it to the attention of other staff members who were more interested in seeing the bugs than the fact that all of our entrees were returned half eaten and that we were miserable.. . It seemed like the gnats were attracted to the grass or flowers that were in the planter around us and there were no candles or citronella on the tables or the periphery of the outdoor seating space to keep them away.. . Our server finally made his way outside and asked if we wanted dessert at which point all we wanted was the check. . . No effort was made by our server or a manager to apologize for the experience -- meanwhile, while we were waiting for our check, the busboys were making a game of swatting at the gnats with their dishtowels. . . And while up until this visit I've been a raving fan, the fact that our server knew we were regulars and didn't make any effort to rectify the situation showed a lack of appreciation for loyal customers, which to me, ruins my entire perception of ping pong.. . I would have given you 5 Stars before, but sadly, the lack of care or concern we were shown was inexcusable, unprofessional and was service we could have received at a Panda Express.. . Moral of the story :: don't expect sincere service and if you sit outside be sure to wear some OFF.
