ReviewID: Heyug0HAhK__h88J58Cc0A
ReviewerID: wRI0DLc_XeksO5Nk1T1LJA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: El Tesoro
Category: Mexican
I'm giving this three stars, but I'd rather give it 2.5.  . . I went with some friends during a belly dance convention on a Friday night.  They were PACKED like sardines, and the hostess quoted 35 minute wait time.  We decided to wait, and being the claustrophobes we are, we opted to huddle around the fire outside instead of join the sardine can.. . About fifty minutes later, we started to wonder if she forgot about us.  To the hostess stand I go... and am told quite abruptly by the spacey teenage staff.. "six minutes."  So back outside I go.  And wait twelve to fifteen minutes.  At this point my party is hungry, cold and irritable so we all go inside.  I swear the hostess looked at me like she'd never seen me before.  "You told us six minutes, quite a while ago?" I try to refresh her memory.  "Oh, no one is leaving" she responds.  Apparently there are now only three people in front of us and we stand near her booth, glowering ominously.. . About ten minutes AFTER that, we were finally seated.  Our initial service was great - the waiter was there every two minutes with drinks, chips, guac.... Even our food came out in less than ten minutes.  . . About the food...The guacamole was a little saltier than other places around town, but I really liked it.  My for entree I had the pork enchiladas with green mole and mexican rice... quite yummy, though the green mole tasted like tomatillo sauce more than anything.  My companions had the chango and carnitas, both received compliments.  . . The dessert menu was calling to me, so I started to spy for our waiter.  Ten minutes and he didn't come back, fifteen minutes and we started trying to flag other staff members down.  It's so loud in here that a polite, "excuse me, miss" didn't attract any attention.  I finally resorted to waving my hand in the air... which worked on the second try.. . Another harried looking waiter stopped by and took my dessert order - hot chocolate and mexican creme brulee.  He apologized and said our waiter had a huge table on the other side of the restaurant.  The dessert came out quickly, and our waiter made a personal appearance to apologize for the delay.  The hot chocolate was not super rich, but quite yummy and definitely homemade (no swiss miss here) and the creme brulee was tasty.. . This is one of those places that I will likely try again, on a week night, to see if the service improves.  Maybe the spacey hostess wasn't on her game, and I'm sure three huge parties in one night can back up seating at a small place like this.  The food was good enough to warrant that.  It was not, however, good enough to return on a regular basis if the service doesn't improve.
