ReviewID: Hg4cCwwmbpLawK5OGTLnJg
ReviewerID: gX0F2oo6m2rRIZkx7m9kUA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
3.5 stars.. . I had the opportunity to vist Flip with some friends while on a breif trip to Atlanta.  The space itself had a great vibe and the staff was very friendly and accomodating.  Though busy, my party of 3 waited no more than 10 minutes for a table.  . . The menu is diverse and interesting enough for a burger place.  Being somewhat of a purist, I ordered the Flip Burger.  It was the perfect size, not too big but not slider sized either, and it was obvious that the chef took his time plating the food.  It was almost too pretty to eat!  I quickly got over that thought and proceeded to cut my burger in half.  As soon as my knife cut into the burger, the condiments were all over my plate.  To say that they over-did it on they ketchup is a mild understatement.  Other than the fact that I looked like a kid fingerpainting with my food, the burger itself was quite satisfactory.. . My dining companions had eaten at Flip before and had great experiences.  They enjoyed their orders - the Corned Beef Burger for David and the Po Boyger for Joel C.  They each had shakes which they really enjoyed.  David had the Krispy Kreme shake and Joel C. had Nutella and Marshmellow. What's not to like about any of those things?. . We all split an order of fries and sweet potato tots.  Normally, I love all things sweet potato.  I am a carb junkie and eating sweet potato lets me delude myself into thinking it is health food.  The fries were excellent.  Crisp but not killed, with the perfect pinch of salt.  And now, the Tot.  How I wanted to love thee!  I took one bite and it was an explosion of grease in my mouth.  Had I not been in public and taught better by my mom - I would have (discreetly of course) spit it out into my napkin and chug water to rid my tongue of the greasy film.  Instead, I forced myself to swallow it.  Bad idea.  I felt gross for the rest of the evening.. . Overall, aside from the Tot, my experience at Flip was a great one.  I got to spend time with two of my favorite people on the planet and enjoy a good meal and some great music.
