ReviewID: hGBjTVeMnbi-a1xbJaGiIg
ReviewerID: nugXfBjSMbPRWukksDNYIg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Uncle Julios Hacienda
Category: Mexican
Julio's is right near my place so I've been there a bunch. THE BAD: First, the hostesses are some of the most irritating people I've seen working that job. They've got that "I'm a cute girl so I don't have to look at you" snobbishness that doesn't work so well for a service job, especially one where communication with the patrons is pretty much the entire point. Second, the Hacienda fills up rather quickly, and waiting for your table is no fun at all. Who wants to sit at a big communal table with a bunch of people who are irritating and drunk? The homemade tortilla chips do make this a little more palatable.. . THE GOOD: Frozen swirl margaritas. Like, OMG, they are so good. It's that perfect drink that tastes tangy and refreshing and nonalcoholic, but just might put you on your ass if you go for three. I start feeling better about the drunk, irritating people I had to wait with after my second swirl, when I become drunk and irritating. Second, I hear there are a lot of good things on the menu, especially the shrimp, but I wouldn't know because I order the same thing all the time. . . First, the nachos. You know how normally when you order nachos, you try to portion out all the good stuff so that each chip has the right mixture of toppings... only to watch one of your tablemates mess up your system and then, (bastards!) steal the last nachos that you've been saving with all the cheese on them? That can't happen here, because they're all made separately with beans and cheese melted over each individual chip. Bonus!. . Finally, the steak fajitas, which are one of the tastiest, most gut-busting, completely inauthentic Mexican meals you can find. The tortillas are soft, hot and homemade. The steak is not burrito-quality, it's an actual medium rare steak slice on a sizzling plate. Here's a tip: as soon as you're so full that you can't see the sides of your chair anymore, pretend like you're still eating, and order another thing of tortillas. That way, you can box them all up and eat them tomorrow-- fajitas make great leftovers.
