ReviewID: hhCbSQBTcHU3uuZGx12DdQ
ReviewerID: gpcHaHjlsRkcgw9modE0PA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: De Cero Taqueria
Category: Mexican
Oh De Cero, I wanted to love you. I've been wanting to dine on your patio for months and finally had the opportunity on a beautiful evening a couple of weeks ago.. . I called the morning of to see if they took reservations for the patio area--they don't, but I was assured that we wouldn't need one because they "don't get very busy on Tuesday nights." Okay, sounds good.. . Upon our arrival, we were told that the wait for a patio table would be 45 minutes. It looked like a couple of tables were near finished, so I thought we would likely be seated more quickly.. . My friend and I took a seat at the bar and ordered margaritas. I asked for a mango on the rocks and she asked for a papaya on the rocks. We were informed by the bartender that those can only be served blended. Really? We asked him to give it a shot anyway and the margaritas were fair enough. Not particularly flavorful, but the bartender was heavy handed with the tequila so naturally, I was satisfied. I thought about ordering a Pacifico as drink #2, but a Pacifico was $6. Marg = way more bang for my drunken buck.. . An hour later we were seated at a table outside. Unfortunately, the table was on an uneven part of the sidewalk so my friend's chair was nearly three inches off the ground on one side. But after our strong margaritas we were amused and didn't mind rearranging.. . We ordered the chips &amp; guacamole to start. The guac was awesome, though the serving was arguably the smallest portion I've ever seen. We then moved on to the platter of eight tacos. I selected the battered shrimp (amazing), chicken mole (mediocre), beef tenderloin (tasted like one of my Mom's dry pot roasts) and skirt steak (bland and tough). We also ordered a side of black beans &amp; rice (average), as well as the Mexican slaw (interesting). . . Our server was slow and not entirely aware of her surroundings, which made us realize that our wait for our table was probably her fault--we waited for a long time for her to take our drink, appetizer and entree orders, as well as for the check. Learn how to turn tables, girl!. . I wouldn't go out of my way to go back to De Cero, but if in the area I'd sit at the bar and enjoy a margarita and a couple of shrimp tacos.
