ReviewID: HHnCXpqkPS2NJDKG0dxlXQ
ReviewerID: 6uQ6wb6OLYCaxrY9g_AQsQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
Papa Rules! He is a gem of a man, if you happen to catch him in the shop say "Hi"! I have a picture of him &amp; I from years ago, I'll have to dig up. He now has his own Lager! I noticed it's brewed at Brewbakers which is in Huntington, my old town!! small world..... you can buy the beer in the shop too.. . You stand in line to order, they bring your food to your table.  You can see all the food and the kitchen. We only have been for lunch but would love to try the Thursday night festivity!  The entire staff is friendly, I love how they have water &amp; take out boxes out for you to help yourself to. I love how you enter from the back through the "store room" it feels like you're going into grandmas house through the "family entrance". They have beautiful murals painted outside and have festive music playing. They offer a $5 per bottle corkage fee. They also sell organic wines, I noticed a Sierra club organic Merlot &amp; Cab 2/$10!. . I love the restaurant food and the market. I've gotten olives, feta, pita and bread from there.  The pita is amazing! It's not like the kind you buy at the store that has a "Pocket", it's more like pizza dough, light and fluffy. They sell it in the refrigerated or frozen section. It seems like everyone buys a loaf of the french bread to go. They started carrying olive oil based skin care products. They were priced around $10 which seemed fair. . . We've been going here for years and one word that I LOVE to associate with restaurants is CONSISTENCY! Papa has that down! We generally order the same things, Chicken pita sandwich &amp; Greek salad. I've also had the octopus, hummus, dolmas &amp; eggplant.  All really good and fresh.  The potatoes are a neat treat, very lemony and garlicy.  I don't know how they make the falafel, but they are not mushy inside, they have a great texture and a bright green color! Super good! I just blot them a little bit to get a bit more oil off. The plate comes with like 6 or 8 pattys and I usually eat 2 or 3 with half a pita and take the rest home, it's 2 meals for sure. . . I've heard the shrimp with feta is really good and I saw yesterday they had added a Feta Pizza which looked really good! Have to go for that next time with the Greek salad. It has iceberg, but it also has romaine and fresh fresh tomatoes, cucumber, olives and amazing feta. The best feta ever! Give it a try, it's fun for birthdays and the outside secret garden is a nice treat in downtown! Thanks papa, we'll see you soon.
