ReviewID: hI3Br9UIj9OKBUhlhEIxxw
ReviewerID: VdVTVn-EUMiq_-Pd_aEP4w
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ria&#39;s Bluebird
Category: Southern
Venturing outside my usual Sunday breakfast spots, I went online to look for something new.  Ria's was listed as one of the top 10 spots in Atlanta,  as I was looking at thier site, I was drawn to the New York Times declaration that they had the "best" pancakes in the nation; a pretty bold statement. . I patronized Ria's on a mid Sunday afternoon,  the place was busy but not too long of a wait (about 20 minutes).  The seating area was spacious and not crowded like some other breaks spots which was nice.  The atmosphere reminded of Seattle, it has that hippy grundge era vibe.  . I ordered the Bluebird special which is two eggs, meat and a bisquit, my counterpart ordered the "angus slow roasted beef with poached egg" and I also ordered the pancakes with carmalized bananas and pecans.  . The total of the bill was about $25, which I thought was kinda pricey for what you got.  I thought my bluebird special was average and the portions were small on all the orders, which although I applaud not having huge portions; on Sundays ,  I kinda expect to stuff myself silly or at least have the choice too.  The price didnt justify the portions or quality of the meal.  I feel I could have gotten the same thing from my local bfast spot or even Mc Donalds for the matter.  The real dissapointment was the pancakes,  I didnt see how they were the "best" in the world.  They only have one pancake option and its plain (or you can add bananas and pecans for extra) but thats it.  They were hot and had a nice texture but I didnt get that homemade taste when I tried it.  The "angus beef" was about two ounces of shredded beef in some broth with a poached egg. . Ria's can justify its offerings by possibly adding some organic ingredients or lowering its prices.  But if you want a cool alternative anti-urban/socialite hip vibe, then its worth a trip.  Dont plan to go there again but nice to try something new!
