ReviewID: HIIEURpUJG-2jl9I886sXg
ReviewerID: z33x0fHD8gutPy5Gv6Hwpw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
There are no words. Well, I'm verbose, so I'll try. First, I'm extraordinarily confused. I thought Tess and I went to Pizzeria Mozza, but she appears to think we went to Osteria Mozza. I'm afraid to arm wrestle her: she's ungodly strong. Nonetheless, I'm going to proceed as if I am correct. . . Oh shoot. I am so wrong. We were at Osteria. No doubt.. . We sat fearlessly at the bar where you can, before 6 p.m., get a tasting menu for a mere $35. You are stoooopid if you do not take advantage of this. We started with wine (the bartender, experienced, kind, lovely and well trained) suggested we might have "half a glass" of the house white and "half a glass" of the house red. These are in quotes because of her generous pours, which made Tess and I quite happy. Of course you may also choose from the extensive wine list. . . Next, you get to choose from approximately 10 house-made burrata and mozzarella. This is cool. It is SO hard to choose from the list of exquisite cheeses. . . NEXT, you choose from pastas. I had goat cheese ravioli, which was the only problematic aspect of the entire experience, and it wasn't even all that problematic. You see, the edges of the ravioli were mildly chewy. Tess' boar ragu was to die for (I'm out of superlative adjectives) and next time, for there will be a next time, I'll get the orecchiette with sausage &amp; Swiss chard, or agnolotti, burro e salvia. Who knows. The lovely menu is so ... inspiring, so ... orgasmic. I want to eat there all the time. . . NEXT, you choose a dessert. We couldn't choose. We just couldn't. It helped a lot that I was craving chocolate hard core, and that I have nut allergies. That narrowed it down, plus we both enjoy savories. . . The service is just right. The sommelier, the bartender, the servers, those who clear the plates - all conducted themselves with kindness, grace, and professionalism that exceeded anything I have ever seen anywhere outside New Orleans. . . The ambiance is high. The ceiling is high, the clientele is classy. The bathroom uses soap (Further brand) that is made of recycled fats from the kitchen. Sounds a bit gross, but it isn't: that fat comes from somewhere, and it might as well be local, socially responsible, and organic. . . I can't praise Osteria Mozza enough; I'm honored to have had the experience of dining there with excellent company (a person curious and adventurous enough to share every dish with me, and an excellent conversationalist). Osteria Mozza has become one of my Top Ten favorite restaurants of all time.
