ReviewID: hiotOikFQ1LCsYXBSakZ1w
ReviewerID: Q8KNTDKCMeBMrbO87oCsPw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Mastro's is exactly what you expect.. . Why are you even reading another review of Mastro's at this point? Seriously. Like the preceding 414 reviews all saying pretty much the same thing weren't enough for you to get the point? OK, well either you're real stubborn or just not too bright so I'll keep this simple so you can keep moving along and read the next 500 5 star reviews that come along after this one.... . Great Food. Great Service. Great Drinks. Great Atmosphere. Fun People watching. All around great dining experience that makes you glad you're wealthy enough to spend $200 a head for dinner on a regular basis (or wish you were).. Oh, yeah, it is kind of pricey. This is somehow news?. . Everything here is top notch, including the price.. . Some specifics:. . Appetizers -- The seafood platter is quite good, but just too much damn food for an appetizer unless you bring an army. Other winners: shrimp cocktail, lobster cocktail, ahi tuna tartare, crab cakes... Oh come on, who are we trying to kid here? Everything's good.. . Steaks -- I have had 3 varieties of steak here, all were excellent. Filet, Porterhouse, Ribeye (porterhouse and ribeye will leave you with a doggy bag).. . Sides -- We always get the creamed spinach, and asparagus, and then some form of mashed potatoes. And if they have the lobster garlic mashed potatoes available when you are there, you MUST get them. It sounds like an exercise in embarrassingly overblown luxury food mixes that make no sense at all, but my Gawd that side dish is one of the best things I have ever eaten in my life. Seriously. I was contemplating going bulimic for the night just so I could jam more of those fantastic mashed potatoes down my gullet. Man, they are good.. . OK, in retrospect, not so short and to the point. Sue me. Although I must say your money would be better spent on a dinner at Mastro's than on a lawsuit (prolly cost the same too).
