ReviewID: hj_ovCnrxXx6ozclOJAdYQ
ReviewerID: K1lkv1Zpnzsl3n08Zv04kg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I planned a trip to LA purely to hunt down this BBQ truck. I got my friends so excited about it and apparently there was an article in the NY Times about this truck too? Not sure, going on rumors alone.. . But get this, the truck posts it's locations via their current locations via twitter, it made my lil web 2.0 heart sing deliriously. I mean seriously they made me want to hunt them down just so I could pay money to eat their food. Not only that, I friggin' planned a trip to LA for the sole purpose of hunting down this truck to eat their food.. . Kogi BBQ takes my OCD self about getting hard to obtain items of technology and designer goods to the next level. . . I get to LA and all day I'm tracking Kogi on my iPhone, finally at night we show up at The Brig location. No truck in sight yet, but already a line of some 50 people. Gezus! My merry band of Kogi seekers refuse to give up, we must try this and we get in line, luckily The Brig has good music spinning outside and it's another warm night in LA.. . 30 mins later the truck shows up and begins setting up. We wait another 30 mins and we're at the front ordering everything that sounds good. Basically one of each of the soft tacos (spicy chicken, pork, bbq rib), then a bbq rib burrito, and a kimchi quesadilla. . . I have to say the kimchi quesadilla was to die for. The flavors of the spicy kimchi cut with the mozzarella cheese is in such perfect harmony that I might go get that again if I was in LA. . . The soft tacos were pretty good, but they were very sour, as was the burrito. My favorite meat was the bbq short ribs.. . In general the experience was top notch, web 2.0 real time location tracking, delicious idea of fusion foods, the food was decent eats in general. I do think though if you were coming out of a club and drunk out of your mind that then this would probably be the most excellent way to help cure a hangover.
