ReviewID: hJdRD6ePcqlEwdo015rbGg
ReviewerID: F_hO7JTjZAs0UX12qpMjGQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pho Cafe
Category: Vietnamese
Fuh, foe, fum.... . I've spoken on the ramen diaspora in other reviews but the Vietnamese cuisine diaspora in the Hollywood-Los Feliz-Silverlake tri-borough is largely a product of socio-economics; i.e., there's no critical mass of ethnically Vietnamese denizens here to have a naturalistic up-cropping of eateries that can be described as "1st generation foods." To put it more plainly, in the absence of Vietnamese folks, non-Vietnamese interpretations ambitious to strike entrepreneurial claims in a diverse urban, food marketplace rise to the occasion. . . I can count one hand the number of Viet-cuisine establishments in this area: Pho Cafe, Gingergrass, Indochine Vien, and KP Deli. Why the lecture on gastro-socio-economics? In part it's necessary to put a review of what I'll call "2nd generation" ethnic foods into some perspective and "reviews" have to be relative and sensitive to the differences and similarities between 1st and 2nd gen foods. . . Primarily in food consideration is the "blind taste." This has to do with whether the food objectively is enjoyable and delicious irregardless of all other considerations like "authenticity," location, ambiance, price, etc.. In the case of Pho Cafe, it merits about 2.5-3 stars for flavor and overall food quality. The beef in their pho is often too fatty and gristly to be edible. The same for their buhn cha (rice noodle salad with meat). . . Secondly and more subjectively (of course it's arguable that the whole damn thing is subjective incl. the "blind taste") there is the issue of integrity or "authenticity." How accurate or faithful is the food in representing its native cuisine? Well, even 1st gen foods can mislead. Just because a cook in a Chinese restaurant is ethnically Chinese does not guarantee representative Chinese food anymore than a Caucasian cook can guarantee the definitive plate of roast chicken and mashed potatoes. Having said that, 2nd gen foods could be judged more critically on this criterion esp. if it doesn't do so well in the "blind taste." However, authenticity shouldn't be harped on to disqualify a 2nd gen restaurant  categorically esp. if it excels in the "blind taste" test. Pho Cafe gets about 3 stars for integrity of ingredients and flavors that seem to use the essential ingredients of Vietnamese cooking. However it's really only 2 stars for overall "soul" in their food. It lacks a certain je ne sais quoi. . . Lastly, there are the peripheral elements of a restaurant that round out your meal: decor, ambiance, cleanliness, other customers, price, service, noise level, parking, etc.  Pho Cafe is situated in a tiny strip mall with limited parking. Spaces are often filled up and street parking is easier but not without some challenges. The decor is minimalist and bare white like a Saigon hospital getting ready for its annual inspection. Prices are moderate. . . Overall, it's not my fav place for Vietnamese food. Their pho broth lacks a certain amount of the "medicinal" herb-y flavs that make pho tai so rich and spiritualizing. Could use a hint more star anise and oxtail allure for my tastes. The ever popular goi cuon (rice paper wrapped shrimp rolls) is non-descript. Not horrendous, not stupendous.
