ReviewID: hLX-WuOJ7olK-NPuh7Ne_w
ReviewerID: SOuJMQnqysSyLDUqj1KNJA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
After putting off this steakhouse for so long, I finally got motivated when it was featured in Entourage.  If Ari Gold can do his power meals here, then surely I can.   . . Let me preface this review by saying, I'm from Texas.  We are groomed at a very young age to appreciate steaks, it runs in our blood and it leaves us with a pretty high standard for red meat.  With that said...let's continue. . . Atmosphere is amazing.  Some of the finest service you'll find in LA (and yes, you will be paying for it).  With Sinatra playing in the background, the dark woods throughout and red velvet highlighting everything in between, it's become an rare jewel amongst all the chic, ultra modern restaurants popping up everywhere.  Though its dim (to the point of almost being too dark), it provides just enough of an intimate environment to allow focus on two things...your company and your meal.   What else do you need? . . Now to the food.  The signature is obviously the steak.  And like any other rightful steakhouse, everything's a la carte.  I'd recommend anything bone-in.  Grilled to perfection and serve on a searing plate in butter.  I went with my go-to, a single porterhouse.  Filet was perfect and the rib-eye was fantastic.  One ambitious soul even went for the double porterhouse, 48oz-er.  We had a group of 10 sampling an array of sides.  From creamed spinach, the mashed potatoes, shoestring potatoes, Gorgonzola macaroni,sauteed onions and sauteed au gratin potatoes.  Not one of them failed to meet my expectations.  . . If you manage to make it to dessert, please e-mail me.  We were in an unusual state of red meat bliss once we were done.  All the more reason to make it a regular in the quiver of fine dining places here in LA.  Price as expected is high, but you get more than your money's worth.  Parking is easy (there's valet and its very easy to find street meters throughout downtown Beverly Hills).  Bring your appetites, its worth the price.
