ReviewID: Hnx-T1o1jy5Vy76LsjjHwg
ReviewerID: FYiHUYRSGn7gciEC7JndXw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Eclipse Di Luna
Category: Tapas Bars
Not only our first visit to Eclipse Di Luna, but also our first taste of tapas. As sushi lovers the concept of several small and flavorful dishes was appealing, so we thought we'd love this ethnic cuisine.  The location was a little off-putting as some of the fringe neighborhoods looked a little rough.  The drive between the long row of closed businesses (after hours) also lent to the eeriness, and the prominent notice on the entrance warning of a crime upsurge did not inspire confidence.  But it was still daylight and we were able to park near the entrance so we weren't truly worried.. . The interior had a vibrancy and the eclectic seating and energetic music (although a bit too loud) put you in a party mood.  We were greeted warmly at the door and by our waitress, who also gave us a knowledgeable rundown of the night's specials.  There is also a large covered patio which would have been very tempting were it not for the stifling summer heat. Later in the evening or in cooler months we will definitely gravitate to that location to escape the conversation killing music.. . For our initiation into tapas we chose Pan Catalan, Hummus de Garbanzos, Pollo ala Parrilla, Calamares Fritos, Gambas al Ajillo, Carne Asada, Carnes Frias, and Peixinhos da Horta.  We found all of the dishes acceptable.  The meats and olives on the Carnes Frias were very mild and included chorizo, (forgive me for using the Italian equivalents as I don't know the Spanish names) salami, and prosciutto. . . The fried green beans (Peixinhos da Horta) were excellent but very salty so you'll want to eat them with blander items.  They were also a large serving which we could not finish.  They would be excellent for sharing with a group of four or more.. . The Pan Catalan was nice and we wanted to have some bread to balance the meal. The shrimp in the Gambas al Ajillo were fresh and not too spicy.  The Carnes Asada was fine, but the Chimi Churri sauce gave it a step up.. . The other three dishes were our very favorites.  The Hummus de Garbanzos had an unexpected sweetness that worked surprisingly in its favor and it came with carrot sticks, cucumbers, and pita triangles for dipping. It was topped with feta cheese and a sauce of roasted bell peppers that contrasted nicely.. . The chicken in the Pollo ala Parrilla was flavorful and the garlic was just right.  The cous cous topping was a visually pleasing and mild garnish.  Our absolute favorite was the Calamares Fritos with tender squid cooked to perfection and dusted with a seasoning that made it delicious.  The pico de gallo on the side of that dish had a surprising kick to it. I normally love spicy foods, but the vinegar bite was quite strong.  I think it was well made, despite that it didn't match our palettes.. . We ended the meal with a shared slice of Key Lime Pie.  It fit the weather and was the perfect final note.  For beverages my wife had water and I had sweet tea.  My tea was good, but refills were very slow in coming despite our being there before the dinner rush.  In contrast the food came to our table quickly. I'd assumed the tapas style was slow and leisurely, so if you're a novice like me just order them at the pace you expect to eat them.  Before tip, our total was $48.44, so considering the number of dishes is very reasonable.. . We definitely plan on returning.  It is a fun and exotic experience (without being too exotic for the taste buds) that would be well enjoyed with friends and visitors.
