ReviewID: hOM5aRYWCyu37rdk5P6ttw
ReviewerID: KLefPDxpiCo_vKrIe6zBIw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Amazing...simply magnificent.  This place knows good italian food.   The hubby and I decided to go there for my birthday dinner after trying out Pizzeria Mozza for the hubby's birthday in late April.  . . I started off with the grilled octopus starter.  Being asian, I eat a lot of octopus.  But I've never had a dish that highlighted the fatty outer layer of the octopus.  It was probably marinated or at least basted with a thick sweet balsamic vinegar to be able to produce the kind of crust it came with.  the hubby started off with the grilled figs.  As good as his dish was, it did not come close to the octopus.  . . The cheese dish came next.  I asked the waiter what she recommends, and she basically said if I am starting with the octopus, which is a very bold dish, I should try something along the same genre.  So she suggested the mozzarella with anchovy, which paired spectacularly with a rose wine the sommolier suggested.  The hubby ordered the burricotti.  So creamy and delicate, it was a waste after eating my anchovy dish.  I couldn't discern the delicate flavors of his dish after eating mine, but even though, we enjoyed it.  . . For the entree, I opted for a pasta dish and suggested the hubbs order the roast duck.  He gets horny when he eats duck and I thought I might get lucky.  The fresh raviolo with egg yolk was rich and satisfying.  It literally swam in a pool of browned butter.  Had I some bread I would have sopped the butter all up.  The duck had a great flavor throughout...it reminded me of a chinese roast duck but with 10 times the flavor.  It came with a jam that tasted like tart orange marmalade with wasabi.  Eaten with the duck the flavors and textures washed over eachother...sweet, tart, salty, and crispy, chewy.  . . After all of that, the dessert sealed it for me.  It was simple...melon sorbet with marscapone and fresh berries on the same plate.  There was a drizzle of spun sugar or honey on the plate.  The dessert wine paired with the dessert was out of the freaking world.  I've never had dessert wine like this.  It was a symphony of sweet flavors bursting in our mouths.   . . All in all, food, ambience, wait staff, everything was impeccable.  The only negative thing is that it's difficult to get a reservation.
