ReviewID: HP-KFtjWh7mFGEbRY6_QlQ
ReviewerID: gqAqJfoSEZTRvyhPj654NQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mana Food Bar
Category: Vegetarian
I (not-veggie) went here last night with my girlfriend (veggie) and we both loved it. Other reviewers have compared it to Green Zebra (favorably or unfavorably) and I will too: simpler, more affordable, not-quite-as-amazing but still really excellent.. . We got there a little before 6 on a Friday night and so had no trouble being seated right away. Obviously, the space is tiny and they'll be a wait at any popular time. The space is decked out in serene grays and interesting, stylized, chunky wood fixtures. The ambiance was great, except the lighting was pretty dim for so early in the evening. Service was friendly and professional, a great balance between caring about our food and experience and not intruding on our dinner.. . We split a selection of cold and hot dishes (how I love small plates). Also helpful that you can choose a small or large portion for the plates. Cold: the 3-dishes sample platter of 5 spice tofu, red quinoa, and pickled veggies (pearl onions, daikon, okra). The red quinoa was the best of the bunch, hearty but balanced lightly with citrus and mint. The sour pickles made a great contrast and the tofu was delicious, if not life-changing.. Hot: The mushroom saute over polenta. Co-sign all the rave reviews already mentioned. I don't like mushrooms but I ate plenty of this dish. A variety of perfectly cooked meaty, saucy mushrooms over creamy polenta with just a little kick of sharp cheese. We also tried the day's special of aspargus and fiddlehead ferns in Chinese black bean sauce over brown rice. The asparagus was lovely (the small ones are perfectly in season at the moment) as were the fiddleheads. The only trouble in this dish was the black bean sauce, which was more soy-sauce salty than fermented-black bean earthy/sour. It was still wonderful.. . We finished with a peach oatmeal smoothie and a banana chocolate smoothie for dessert, which were refreshing and tasty. A total bill of $50 for the two of us was a good value for the yumminess and quantity of food and the enjoyable atmosphere.
