ReviewID: hPA7S77pgYeCDucOnglzbg
ReviewerID: yv60ny6vAK6qDzzsK34Zkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Murphy&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
Murphy's, Murphy's, Murphy's...mmmmmmmm delightful, sinful, exquisite-calorie-packed food, delightful ambiance, GREAT wine selection (and if you're lucky, you might get Murphy himself to ask you to join him in a tasting)...There is only one tiny, but noticeable downside to this magic world: one can barely walk or breath inside on, say, Sunday brunch. . . There is a solution, though. Just get there at 9AM and voila! Set that darn alarm clock for early hours (which is not supposed to be working on weekends, but believe me, it'll be worth it.) You might be lucky, and find plenty of places, while people is still home getting all dressed up to go see and be seen. Every time I have someone visiting in town, I bring them to Murphy's. Months later, they're still dreaming about "that delicious Southern brunch you drag us to at 8:30 AM on a Sunday." . . Everything begins with that delicate, dreamy and spongy basket of pastry and toasted goodies. Mix that with dollops of their delicious  cinnamon butter...oh, my mouth is watering just remembering the warm, puffy and yellowish bites of carbs bathed in melting butter...The "Eggs. T. Murphy" which are the classic eggs Benedict (not exactly Southern, but...) are my favorites, but I also recommend the delicious "Eggs San Francisco,"  if you're a spinach lover, and the "Malted Waffles," if you need sweet, sweet, sweet...ok, I'm going to stop now.. . If you're not driving, and you can spare to spend some money on your palate...have some Mimosas, for God sake's! They're deliciosas. I usually complement my breakfast with a cup of Irish Coffee...mmmmm, that's all what I'm going to say. If I'm in the mood for dessert, I have the "Dessert Trio" along a glass of Moscato D'Asti...it's not only going to make you a joyous human being...it's will help you understand that taste buds also have hearts and the ability to keep memories.... . Yes. I love Murphy's. It's obvious.
