ReviewID: hPE6-TpH6Otv72_cNs1Ecg
ReviewerID: p7mNr2_9BKrJJ4cfgCCJIA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Tank Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
After accounts from many, many friends on how fantastic Tank is, I was super excited to finally give it a try, and totally primed to love it. My experience, however, was a little lacking in the love department. Don't get me wrong, the sushi was definitely not bad, and it was fairly (I repeat, fairly) fresh. But when you think about it (or at least when I do, which, let's face it, is all that really matters here), fresh fish and being "not bad" are kind of like minimum requirements for a sushi place. Or at least they should be. Granted, freshness is sadly not something we frequently enough find in the Chicagoland sushi scene, but it doesn't mean we should stop expecting it, and it certainly doesn't mean that you get an automatic four or five star review just because you have managed to pull off serving me sashimi that isn't limp and giving off questionable odors. It's kind of like agreeing to marry someone just because they hold the door open for you on the first date, and don't show up in socks and sandals. These are minimum requirements here people, that we should expect always. I mean, having moderately fresh fish means that you DON'T get a one-star review, and pushing that revolving door for us and showing taste and decency in footwear means that we DON'T walk out after the first three minutes of the date or employ our "emergency standby friend" phonecall option.... not that you DO get five stars or a stroll down the aisle and a home-cooked meal every night. Am I right here? Yes? Yes.  . . It's possible at this point that I might be over-attempting to validate my opinion here in case any of my Tank-loving friends is reading this review, but still, my statements stand. And some of my friends are scary. You know who you are.. . Anyway, now that I'm finished with that tangent.... yes, so the sushi was just okay, and I wasn't wowed in any sense. Once again I found a plethora of roll options with deep-fried ingredients, fruit, and cream cheese, so if that's your thing (which, if you read my reviews...and god bless you brave souls who do...you know is not mine) you will have plenty of options here. The selection of maki rolls with fresh fish sans orchard/dairy items/tempura was disappointingly meager. The Kyoto Lime cocktail worked for me in a major way, and the service was excellent, but overall I'm not granting more than three stars. I'd return to Tank if a friend wanted to eat here, but it wouldn't be at my suggestion
