ReviewID: hpfoeIS21UTgku2s8XBb3Q
ReviewerID: ZRQ5Ul0sbD2UwQ5mjzlLDA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Before I elaborate on my 1-star rating of this place, let me provide some context for my review.  I was raised by Chinese-born parents who cooked interesting, delicious Chinese food, i.e., stir-fry tofu and bean sprouts with delicate garlic essence; oxtail stew with rich, fragrant soy sauce broth; soy sauce whole chicken that falls off the bone and tastes like real chicken.  Growing up, I heard my parents refer to the food that was served in mainstream Chinese restaurants in the U.S. as food to "fool the Americans," i.e., lemon chicken (nobody in the entire country of China eats chicken suffocating in lemon-flavored cornstarch paste).  At least Americans have since become edu-macated about the fallacy of egg foo young.. . Admittedly, I'm a food snob.  I've lived in NYC and San Francisco, and although those cities have their share of "fake" Chinese restaurants, many New Yorkers and San Franciscans can appreciate the difference between Shanghai-ese and Cantonese food.  In a country as large as China and with a history as long, broccoli beef and kung pao chicken represent only 0.000001% of the universe of complex and tasty food eaten by Chinese people.  In fact, to refer to all food served in China simply as "Chinese food" is like ordering just a "beer" at a specialty beer garden.. . I'm sorry to say that Chicago sadly lacks a variety of Chinese cuisine as well as authenticity... I love living in this city but am embarrassed by the Chinese food scene here.  Even Chinatown has its shortcomings.  . . Though I've made it a rule not to eat Chinese food in Chicago outside of Chinatown, I finally gave Friendship a try.  Unfortunately, I didn't find Friendship any different or higher quality than other Chinese restaurants in this city.  To be fair, if I were to review every mainstream Chinese restaurant in Chicago, they would all likely get 1-star.  Sugar (or corn syrup) seems to be Friendship's favorite condiment.  I ordered the Spicy Garlic Shrimp, which according to the menu was prepared in black bean sauce.  I've had many types of black bean garlic sauce but it turned out to be basically a sweet and sour sauce.  Why didn't they just call it Sweet and Sour Shrimp?  Or does Friendship not know the difference?  The rest of the meal was similarly un-informed and in-authentic.. . I know, I know, you're thinking, "Why don't you just move back to NY or San Fran?".... fair enough.  I'm sure someone out there would be more than happy to set me straight about the nuances and varieties of authentic Irish or Polish food, and I more than welcome it.
