ReviewID: hQ-xh-DvY9B-G910fVXEzw
ReviewerID: m_63TOdLMu3CD5lpopF1Kg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Ambiance:. Deep jade colored walls, a marble topped bar and a row of vases, each containing a different variety of white flowers (hydrangeas were my favorite) created a warm yet sophisticated dining environment. The bar in the center of the room where you can observe Nancy Silverton putting her personal touch on plates of delicious cheeses was fun to watch while we sipped wine and waited for our table (we arrived 30 minutes early but were promptly seated at our reservation time.). . Cheese:. Burrata with asparagus, guanciale, brown butter &amp; almonds. The creaminess of the burratta and the salty, crunchy [bacon-like pork product]  were amazing paired together. The Asparagus kept each bite from being too rich.. Eating everything together was delicious. . . Primi course - . Agnolotti, burro e salvia - small bite size triangles. In a butter sage sauce. The salty cheese filling was addicting and melted in your mouth. Sprinkled with fresh parmesan grated at our table.. Orecchiette with sausage &amp; Swiss chard- hearty "O" shaped pasta with a meaty sausage ragu. Who knew topping pasta with toasted bread crumbs would taste so amazing?. . Secondi-. (Another yelper recommends diners to stick to pastas. I agree. No need to order a protein at this place. The pastas were much more memorable.) All the same we had:. Grilled Leg of Lamb with insalata di fregola sarda, mint &amp; yogurt- the yogurt sauce wasn't something I enjoyed. I preferred the lamb by itself. . Grilled Beef Tagliata, rucola and Parmigiano with aceto balsamico  - the balsamic reduction gave this meat a nice, slight sweetness. It was served with a generous portion of arugula with lemon dressing that was too tart to eat on its own. But combine the arugula with a bite of the sweet meat and it's an enjoyable pairing. . . Price:. To get the most out of your money, I would stick to the pastas and cheese plates. They are the stars of the restaurant IMO. $10 valet as mentioned by others.
