ReviewID: HrlsDH5PvTBye1xt2nDDFA
ReviewerID: h7qNmqTAIc05zNtIpmlDJQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Oh french toast...you little bitch. You had me at "Hello." . . The Griddle Cafe is a bustling, little joint off Sunset that will now forever put any other breakfast I eat, to shame. The place is small, but I liked the feel of it. It's reminiscent of an old time short-order diner, and the eye candy makes for good people watching. . . The menu gave so many appetizing options, but I ultimately settled on the Cobb omelet with grilled chicken breast, blue cheese, green onions and fresh avocado on top. This came with a side of potatoes and your choice of bread. My group decided to share an order of Mom's French Toast, and I am so glad we did. . . My omelet was probably one of the most flavorful and fluffy omelets I've ever had, and the potatoes and wheat toast made my belly frown turn upside down! I'm hoping to try and recreate this omelet at home, but I almost don't want to ruin the memory of something soooo good. . . Then came the object of my hearts desire. I absolutely love french toast and hate when I order it somewhere and they give me floppy toast with almost no egg batter to speak of. . . Well, the Griddle has gotten their recipe so right, I'd venture to say its the best french toast I will ever eat! The slices of bread were the size of the plate, perfectly griddle grilled to be evenly browned with a slight crisp to the edges. Sprinkled with powdered sugar and whipped butter melting on top, my heart skipped a beat. . . We didn't waste any time and dove into the toast, with moans and groans of utter taste happiness going around the table. I can't really remember what we talked about after this, or if we even talked. All I know is if I could have that french toast every day, I would be the happiest person on earth....I'd also weigh a ton, but who cares when you're that happy!!! . . I will be back to LA someday...and the Griddle and I shall meet again, and again, and again.
