ReviewID: HTBfsgQT9-ibuWT4X7hSOA
ReviewerID: wCtf5_zG8EpWiBp_Oi7P0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Love me tender.....green with envy..... . Well this place could maybe put someone in love and will definitely make other counter order fresh food restaurants green with envy, if not due to the food, due to the line outside of this place that makes it one of the most visible spots on Culver Blvd!!! Seriously though, from the street we could already see the line and we hadn't even parked yet!! But we were in it for the long haul so to the line we went! . . The line went pretty quickly for being as long as it was, and the cashier was really friendly, and told me that my two options the chipotle barbeque chicken salad and the flank steak sandwich with side salad were the two best things on the menu--but then didn't really help me choose which one was actually better!! I HATE THAT! I asked you for which was better? Don't tell me both!!! I obviously already am indecisive, don't add to it!! ha ha. . But I went with the grilled flank steak sandwich which was served on ciabatta bread with these delicious red peppers that were a piece of heaven all on their own!!! But I am not gonna lie when I say that I wish I had ordered the steak as part of a plate than a sandwich because I literally felt like a carnivore ripping meat from my prey when trying to bite from my sandwich!! The pieces were so thick and chewy it definitely took some effort! My side salad which was the baby spinach with goat cheese and walnuts was pretty good, but a little light on the goat cheese....MORE GOAT CHEESE PLEASE! ha. . My two friends Amanda and Terra both got the happy vegan salad but Amanda added Ahi on the top of her's (yes yes, defeats the purpose of it being vegan ha ha, we know) and they were both pretty happy with their choices too! Although we all thought the green stuff was guacamole, when really it is hummus! just a little fyi!!. . But for $10 for most things, it is fresh, tasty, and makes me happy. And if you don't want to be too healthy you can get pitchers here too!! . . and p.s. park in the public garage around the corner where you get 2 hours free parking!!! boo-ya!
