ReviewID: htCIVIUGTN5TocXjs66uYA
ReviewerID: K0mFbYeHkpA6MME2lllwgw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Thursday night the the gf threatens me with "You better take me here tomorrow or I am breaking up with you!" . . Being a smart bf, I obliged and waited as she came to my neck of the woods. On the way there, I was hoping this place was worth the hype because after all, the gf seemed to be stuck in traffic coming to LA for what seemed like an eternity. Add a hunger factor, along with a bit of road rage, you get a side of the gf that no one wants to deal with..... . When she finally arrives we are off to Sunset Blvd, a street that I hate dearly due to all those traffic lights that always seem to turn red on you. Not to mention the crazy LA drivers in their leased BMW's and S-Class Benz. . The Griddle Cafe shares a parking lot with Rite-Aid, and if you have gone passed Griddle Cafe on Sunset, turn back around unless you want to pay for street parking. . . We walked in through the back of Griddle Cafe, which starts off with restrooms and a long hallway. As you approach Griddle Cafe and was confused like me, keep walking until your at the front of Griddle Cafe to get seated! We got seated pretty quickly, I looked around and the decor was nice. The place felt really laid back, with a couple of tv's mounted on the walls. . . Our waiter was really laid back, as he brought us a couple of waters and menus to start before asking us what we wanted to drink. . . I ordered a Caballero, which was basically a breakfast burrito. Included was eggs, tomato, chorizo, sour cream, avacado, and tortilla chips. Like the menu said, THIS IS HUGE! . . The gf ordered Blueberry Pancakes which came with sourcream blended with blueberries topping.. . I enjoyed the Caballero as this was one of those burritos you needed a fork to eat with. I think the gf enjoyed it too because she kept poking at my burrito with her own fork. The tortilla chips were VERY FRESH. The sour cream, well it was better than any other sour cream I have ever remembered. Cap that all off with 5 different types of hot sauces: Tabasco, Louisiana Hot Sauce, and 3 others I have never seen before. . . The pancakes, well they were massive. The pictures are not deceiving. The gf ate maybe a fist full of pancakes and she was full. These pancakes are plate size. The maple syrup here is crackalicious! Awesome pancakes but the sour cream topping was not my taste. . . Breakfast is the most important meal of the day, visit Griddle Cafe, and you might even end up leaving with leftovers for lunch and dinner.
