ReviewID: HtnF-iuv4kbqedNVJdjuyg
ReviewerID: 5xRe5wxJ7yrJLFsl_Z_beg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
"Well, I could've been an actor, but I wound up here. I just have to look good, I don't have to be clear." Okay, maybe that's not what the hostess said, but I was pretty surprised that it actually did take the 20 out of the 15-20 minutes she said it would take to seat us at 1:30, though there were empty tables, not sure how they do things though. No biggie, I expected the wait.. . "People love it when you lose. They love dirty laundry" (thanks Don Henley). This is true sometimes and maybe this is why I've been avoiding writing negative reviews for the past couple of months, I haven't wanted to take part in the schadenfreude of writing a bad review. Actually, I take it back, I really don't like writing bad reviews.. . The dirty laundry phenom is why Blu Jam Cafe is lucky that my camera didn't have a memory card in it this morning. When my water came (way late on a really hot afternoon) in a glass with rather large pieces of visible dirt caked on it "Dirty Laundry" started thumping away in my head. Both the server and the guy who seemed to be the manager were very concerned about it and fixed it eventually. So that's fine, I guess. It's even better that the song started playing about two minutes later!. . Our food came, and though room temperature, was presented very attractively. I had hesitated before ordering the French toast with bananas, blackberry jam, and yogurt because I'm a French toast fiend and I cannot stand undercooked FT. With my basic distaste and distrust for the human race, my instinct alarm bell sounded and screamed at me to just get eggs. Sadly, I didn't and wound up with a fluffy sweet mush mess with a side of Mrs. Butterworth syrup. I'm sorry--say what.. . SAY WHAT?. . SAY WHAT?. . Yes, that's right. When I tried to cover up the sickening undercooked mushy egg of the yogurt/blackberry jam smothered French toast (this is the reason I didn't ask them to throw it back on the grill, because they would have to totally remake the dish) with syrup, I realized it was not maple syrup, but imitation maple flavored syrup. Dear god, does anyone have any ipecac? I couldn't even look the waiter in the eye as I left the restaurant. I was eating corn syrup with maple flavoring. Did I fall asleep at the breakfast table in a cafe and wake up in a diner?. . PS. If you read down to the "sides + extras" the very last item is maple syrup. You can order it for an extra $1.50. I didn't realize this until after after the incident, because I didn't read this part of the menu--what's next, charging more to get my food fully cooked? At least they didn't seat me in the pillow pile this time.
