ReviewID: huF1TBBxBvzDyc7W5XljbQ
ReviewerID: 3DZ7q8EPMv2-AnbdYGEtcQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
Easy, free parking, OK food, horrible service.. . Having heard mostly mediocre things about this restaurant from blogs and friends, I went against my better judgement and decided to give it a try for dinela's fixed price lunch and made a reservation with open table. There was no host upon our arrival and a woman eating lunch by the door saw us standing patiently for a couple minutes, got up and explained she was on break but would seat us. I gave her my name and reservation and she looked around worriedly and then sat us outside at a six person table and said we were lucky we got the last table. Uh... thanks? . . We sat without menus for a while chatting when our server finally came over and grabbed the special lunch menus. My parents and I pored over the menu, which offered three choices per course for appetizer, entree, and dessert, and decided to each get a different combination and try everything they were offering. I ordered the beet salad, mushroom with polenta cake, and toblerone ice creams, my mom ordered the clam chowder, porchetta sandwich, and creme brulee, and my dad ordered the butter leaf salad, fried chicken, and apple crumble. And then we waited. And waited.. . Finally I see food arriving, but not before a group who came after us that was seated nearby ordered and asked for cheese and dressing on the side of a salad, that came out dressed with cheese and had to be sent back. Instead of our appetizers being presented, our entrees were set out before us, each put down on the table in front of the wrong person. At this point we were starving and asked if we could simply have our appetizers right away at this time. Good thing we got that six person table- we had room for all that food! Everything was pretty good but pretty bland. Things needed salt, hit one note, etc.. . Dessert came a while later, and in the meantime another table nearby had to ask three times for bread because their food was taking so long. They were again, pretty good, but nothing special. And it was hard to enjoy it when the service was so abysmal. It was bizarre- I have never seen so many things go wrong in one meal out. We will not be going back.
