ReviewID: hv5VG6DZzSCEt1brVfdNwg
ReviewerID: M_0uCU7jljalpFnHrUOr2A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
I went w/ my family to celebrate my dad's B-day. Yes, it's pricey, but I think it's worth every penny.  If you don't want to spend a lot of money, don't go.  I loved the fact that there was a strict dress code - word of advice though - they won't let you in w/out a tie (ties are provided using your DL as collateral). No cameras, which sucked - they held mine at the front desk after I got in a couple of pic's, but I'd imagine that they wouldn't want anyone flashing during the magic shows, which I can understand. So, the magic shows - yes, you have to wait in line, but with a cocktail in hand and good company anything is fun. There's a magician who entertained us during our wait and he was great.  We made it into one of the small room shows (only fit 20 people, but they have a couple so you can make one before dinner if you pay attention to the times) and it was amazing. I may be a sucker for magic, but OMG - I've never been so amazed in my life. Then, we went to the larger magic room and watched a magic/entertainment show that was great. The magic was again, very good - but a more vegas-y feel. Dinner was great - I recommend the mac &amp; cheese. I got the ribeye - cooked exactly how I wanted it (rare) and it tasted great. I tasted my mom's prime rib - YUM. My sister got the chicken - a little dry, but seasoned well. I thought the service was great. The whole place has such a buzz about it (and so did I) that I don't even remember how long everything took - we were enjoying our food, family, cocktails and conversations.  We were there for the whole experience, and didn't focus on the minor details.  The magic in the small rooms was flat out amazing. I must have said, NO WAY" &amp; you've got to be kidding me"! 50 times. It was unreal. I sat in the front row and got to help assist on a magic trick. I have NO idea how the guy made 2 coins appear under my hand, but he did - and I don't care to know the trick - I love the "magic" of it all. I thought I was on an acid trip.  This experience will go down as one of the best nights of my life. Maybe I was just lucky &amp; got the perfect combo of great magicians, waiters and food, but I will recommend this place to everyone I know.  Don't go for the magic, don't go for the food, go for the experience of it all.  You can't pick it apart - it's old Hollywood, outstanding entertainment and a night to remember.
