ReviewID: HVOliGDSipBX0XPpbEx1ww
ReviewerID: u3jxB3gHF8pZK6OCr2ik9g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Suehiro Cafe
Category: Japanese
It was 2 AM in Little Tokyo.  The rain fell heavily as I stumbled down the street in an alcohol and karaoke-induced haze.  Soon, my two friends and I reached 1st street and were greeted by a flashing red hand on the opposite curb.  As we stood on that corner in our rain-soaked jackets, a simultaneous thought entered a our three minds and lay latent for a moment, waiting to be vocalized.. . "I'm hungry," said friend #1.. "I am too. Suey's?" I replied.. "Is it open?" . "Until 3.". "Let's do this.". . Enter: Suehiro Cafe. Hands down, my favorite late night spot in Little Tokyo.  With an extensive menu and great waitstaff, Suehiro is the place to be for Downtown LA post party recovery. . . With such a large variety of foods to choose from, you'd think that everything on the menu is pretty bad.  Not so. Not so!  I've liked almost everything I've tried on the menu.  And I'm most familiar with the dishes in the "Over Rice" portion of the menu.  The over rice dishes are basically a bowl of rice with your choice of meat on top.  You choices range from tamago don, (eggs over rice), to chicken katsu don (chicken katsu with egg), to tanin don (beef with onions and bean sprouts).  They're all a good sized portion, especially for the price.. . Also, if you just want something to nibble on - you know, sobering up food, they've got a great selection of appetizer-type dishes.  Their chicken karaage (fried chicken) is probably the most popular. Also, it's yummy.. . Everyone seems to like the ice creams they offer for desert.  I actually do too... my favorites are the green tea and the red bean. Mmmmmm.. . In terms of pocket damage, too, Suehiro is great.  The over rice dishes start at $5.10 and come with miso soup.  The great majority of the dishes on the menu are sub $10, which works out just great for my actorly budget.. . The waitstaff is very helpful and friendly, especially considering the large groups that tend to come in after 2AM.  Additionally, they are very accommodating of larger groups.  I've gone with a group of 10 or so, and didn't have too much of a problem with it.  Parking is plentiful at that time of night as well.  . . I suppose phrase that comes to mind when I think of Suehiro is: Comfort Food.  Suehiro is a permanent fixture of late night DTLA dining.  It will never leave me.  It will never hurt me.  Or shout at me or get drunk and hit me.  Yup, Suehiro is just like a T-800.  Nice and reliable, while still being kick ass.
