ReviewID: HvQ7_KS768gdFlnIA3JHWw
ReviewerID: XsUHLtb7z8cLA3XnN3V34Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
After eating at Mozza, I drooled uncontrollably for seven days straight.  The drooling only stopped when I ate there again.  But since then, I've once again been a slobbery mess.. . Such is the effect Mozza had on me.  Everything I had here was delicious, and quite a few dishes went above and beyond any expectations I had of this pizzeria.. . From the non-pizza selection, I've had the Mozza Caprese, Fried Squash Blossoms with Ricotta, and Chicken Livers, Capers, Parsley &amp; Guanciale Bruschette.  Hands down, the most delicious of these three is the Mozza Caprese.  The fresh house mozzarella is beyond description and is topped with their delicious pesto and deeply ripened off-the-vine tomatoes.  Make sure to get a whole tomato with each forkful, along with a little of all the other components, and sit back as your first bite explodes (literally) with caprese perfection.  The squash blossoms are also delicious, and I wish I had a huge basket of them to eat while watching TV.  The liver bruschette is also really good, but not the best I've had.. . For pizzas, I've tried the Squash Blossoms, Tomato &amp; Burrata; White Anchovy, Tomato &amp; Hot Chilies; Bianca with Fontina, Mozzarella, Sottocenere &amp; Sage; and Fennel Sausage, Panna, Red Onion &amp; Scallions.  First off, all the pizzas here are at the very least, good, because of their crust.  This is by far the best brick-oven pizza I've ever had.  With some of the pizzas, the crust gets a little soggy in the middle, but other than that, the pizza dough comes out warm and crispy.. . The squash blossom pizza is good, but is heavier on the tomato than I thought it would be.  The white anchovy was also good, but be prepared for their sharp flavor.  The fennel sausage pizza comes out a little soggy, but the flavor is phenomenal.  I love onions, and I love scallions, and the way these two ingredients came together with the house sausage was amazing.  The sottocenere pizza is my personal favorite.  It's basically like a gourmet three cheese pizza topped with lightly fried sage.  This pizza ends up looking like a pretty basic pizza, but flavor-wise, is really something else.  I imagine if the famed three blind mice stumbled upon these three cheeses, they would regain their sight.. . For dessert, I had the budino, which is simply amazing.  Make sure to get it with an extra side of Maldon salt to use it on those parts of the budino that get left without any salt.  In any case, this dessert is heaven with its layered sweet and salty flavor.  They also have a great fig gelato, along with a few other great gelato flavors.. . Mozza changed the way I saw pizza.  And if you don't mind, I'll be excusing myself away from the computer now, as my entire keyboard is covered in drool.. . GET:  Mozza Caprese; Bianca with Fontina, Mozzarella, Sottocenere &amp; Sage; Fennel Sausage, Panna, Red Onion &amp; Scallions; Butterscotch Budino
