ReviewID: HVSLw9JHPx_pxgDOoH2phg
ReviewerID: L9SS5lvM8Htie24x5HCc1A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Highlander
Category: Dive Bars
*******update *************. okay - I've only been in just over 24 hours and I have hit this place up twice. They ran out of the oxtail stew and I am kicking myself for not ordering a second bowl yesterday. Damn social niceties, I didn't want to appear greedy, commit a sin and be glutenous. Evangelicals will never be able to recruit after this mishap. They sold out. The chef makes it when he wants to. I am going to do my best to get it made Sunday before I have to fly out.  Today, I am leaving for Auburn and won't be back until then. Urgh.  I think - I think this is my dream bar. It has almost everything I look for in CA bars, good food, alcohol and wi-fi. Yesterday, I semi-fell in love with some boy at another table he was so pretty. I still can't take the smoking. I tried to sit outside, but now have the mosquito welt marks to show for it. Those nasty mofo's love me. . . I opted for the stroganoff - it's okay. The beef is a little tough, but it appears to be homemade. Anyway, the meat could never be as disintegrate off the bone tender as the oxtail stew yesterday. . . They kill the smoking and I am going to move here, right after hong kong. Awww - who am I kidding, I might have to move here just for the thick white bois - OMG. Corn-fed. blue eyes and dark hair. Damn. It must be the water, must be the water. (sorry another hottie walked in totally stacked in the back). . I am also a little jealous of the Asian guy with this beautiful hair.  It is like in the middle of his back and the last half is all perfectly wavy. urgh, men don't need hair like that. Unless they do drag, then I understand. . . aww - the chef just came by to check on the meal. I explained to him my dilemma, he said he'd hold some for me on Sunday. If that happens, this officially becomes my favorite bar despite the smoking. . . BTW - the blonde female bartender can't make a mixed drink for shit. I just drank the weakest long island in my life. It is a drink that is 90 percent alcohol, how can you fuck up on that? At first, I thought it was skillful mix and very smooth, yeah no such luck. I ordered a Texas margarita after that - okay well after the jager shot,  and asked mister hottie Asian to make it, but it had already been made, so he bumped it up with a shot. He keeps calling me babe, so maybe I am more buzzed than I would like to admit, because I like. it. Haha - nah. . ******************. . Okay - so not only am I a yelper, I am a complete foodie. This place came on my radar when it was featured on dive, drive-ins and dinners with Guy F. Since, I happened to be going to Atlanta anyway, I figured I'd stop by. I am sitting here eating the oxtail brown stew over yellow rice and it is fabulous. Like perfectly spiced, I asked for salt, but haven't added a grain. Spicy and rich and filling. They have free wi-fi which is a total plus, because I need to know where I can go and buy a wig. These ain't no skimpy portions either. The menu is large and I was debating between alfredo, tater tots and other stuff.  . . The specials today are:. steamed green beans. creamy tomato basil soup. blacked tilapia 10.95. fried chicken wrap w/ lettuce, tomato, cheese, and ranch 8.95. herb roasted chicken 10.95. the stew I am eating in 10.95 yum. . It is not exactly easy to find, It is set back away from the road in a strip of restaurants, I did some circling - thank you Garmin. I had to do a few passes to locate it. . . OMG _ I am tearing this stuff up. What is this Jamaican - Caribbean? I don't know. . . Service is cool, the staff has been nice. . Full bar, but not as elaborate as some other places I am used to. . Also - important to note, since I am a Cali girl - people are allowed to smoke in the bar. I am a non-smoker, so I have forgotten that people are allowed to do that in other states. . . The server just walked out burgers from the back. They look okay. So you have some traditional bar fare available as well. . . Okay, I have pretty much drained the bowl of sauce and rice and need to suck the bones, I'll write you all later. . . I will have to hit this up before I head home. Damn. As Guy would say that's money.
