ReviewID: hZg7KBLjVdPEkisP01Wa5g
ReviewerID: B8BT2pR2qtbVhq8tZd5lqQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Cafe Selmarie
Category: American (Traditional)
They told us the wait would be 20 minutes, but it was actually 50 (there were 3 of us on a Sunday morning).  Our server was Traci and things were fine until we were ready to pay the bill.  She had not offered to split the checks at the beginning of our order, and was very quick to get us our food, which was great.  However, when I wanted her to just take my three things and put them on my card, she ripped the bill fold out of my hand and said, "So you just want separate checks, FINE." and stormed off.  We were so shocked.  When she returned, she told us that if we wanted separate checks, we should tell her in the beginning.  I totally get that- I was a server too.  But if it's such a hassle to split the check, ask at the beginning.  It's not hard to do and saves a lot of time.  It's not my responsibility, as the customer, to know how difficult or easy your bill splitting process is.  After that, we went home and hours later, both my friend and I (we both got the same meal) were VERY sick.  When I called the cafe today to tell them, their number was disconnected.  I sent an email and I am waiting to hear back.. . UPDATE:  I received a follow up call from the General Manager at Cafe Selmarie the same day I called and posted this review, and she was very nice and apologetic about my experience, and offered a gift certificate.  It sounds like they did research to find out what could have made my friend and I sick, but didn't find anything.  She also said that they did not get any other reports and sold 32 dishes that day (although, most people don't make the connection- I only did because my friend and I both had the same symptoms and ate the same dish).  Additionally, she promised to talk to the server about her treatment.  Overall, I am happy that she called and have changed my rating to 3 stars because we did have an enjoyable time while we were eating and she did make an effort to resolve things with me.  She cares very much about the Cafe and how it is perceived, which is awesome.
