ReviewID: hzmw2YHhUp0NYLjiO5xFew
ReviewerID: 9edD68CtAYrZy9Z5-J3n9A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
Food: 3.5-4. Service: 2.5-3. Ambiance: 3-4 (pending where you sit!). . I was lucky to have experienced an enjoyable lunch here during Chicago's Restaurant Week. . . My rating for this restaurant for restaurant week would be 4 stars but if it wasn't for restaurant week, I'd give it a 3.5 stars. My reasoning is that you can't go wrong with a 3 course meal costing $22 at this restaurant. . . I suggest going to this restaurant w/ a partner in crime as to maximize the variety of dishes you can taste. . . FOOD:. . For appetizers I was able to try their kobe beef sashimi and lobster bisque. The kobe beef sashimi is served over a bar of solid himalayan salt w/ an accompanying mushroom chips and a side of truffle mayo and toasted bread. This dish was deeeelish. At first, I ate the kobe beef with everything on the dish and for my last two bites, I just ate the kobe beef without any of the fixings. The latter is the way to go! The kobe beef has a subtle taste of pure meat and you get a hint of the degree of marble the beef has undergone in spite of those ultra thin slices of meat. If you go here and do not get this dish......c'mon you're not thinking that right? As you're reading this review, your salivating reflexes should begin taking over. . . The lobster bisque could have been served a little bit warmer and from the taste, I sense some ingredient to be missing and or overempowering. It's quite difficult to eliminate the "seafood" taste from a lobster bisque and in doing so, that would just be both blasphemy yet a remarkable feat. Nevertheless, the dish probably could have been better maybe with a hint of fresh dill. The taste of this dish was as if they took the tips of the claws of the lobster and made a puree of it. I know i'm making this dish seem worse than it actually is but overall, I just feel it could have been prepared better. . . For entrees, I tried a petite 6 oz filet and their alaskan king salmon. Both dishes were quite good. Like the kobe beef sashimi, I was able to taste the pure meat flavor of the filet, however, the quality of texture didn't follow through as much. Nevertheless, the taste is memorable and as I'm writing this review right now, I wish I had a 6oz filet from David Burke right now!. . The King salmon was quite juicy, succulent in the middle of the filet and had an accompanying sauce on top that made me want to figure out what was in it! If you're visiting this restaurant and not feeling like eating meat, then order this dish!. . For dessert, I tried their "slice of prime" and "Apple cheddar pie" The slice of prime tastes like it was made somewhere else and not fresh. The apple cheddar pie, while fresh and seems like it was actually made at the restaurant, was just OK. If a restaurant dares to come up with a dish that can make your stomach cringe just from the name of it, it better follow through with the end result! Not so memorable this dish. . . SERVICE:. . A steakhouse of this caliber could afford to have more attentive and knowledgeable staff. When the main dishes came out, it appeared that a staffmember recited a simple laundry list of what we ordered. Albeit this steakhouse doesn't serve too many novel dishes, a little more enthusiasm would have been more appreciated. On another note, while finishing up my last couple of bites of entree and dessert, our waitress kept on asking if we were done. A more attentive person would have realized we were clearly still eating and wouldn't bother to ask on more than 1 too many occasions. . . AMBIANCE:. . Just try to get the booth in the back left corner of the restaurant :) Seats are stylish and comfy. . . *The articles and phrases written herein reflect my opinions as an amateur restaurant critique and in no way reflect said experiences here from a personal standpoint, because then, I'd give a rating of 5 stars because I truly enjoyed my lunch here :)  Yes, I'm referring to YOU if you happen to read this. hehe *
