ReviewID: hZysjxA5cE0DLNZX5r4qkw
ReviewerID: 49EVOXwLnE81c9mv2B9r9Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bhojanic
Category: Indian
What an interesting trip we had to Bhojanic...  . I'll start with the background:  We were a large party (about 12) with a reservation for 8:00 so that we could settle down in time for trivia at 8:30.  I'll leave the details to some of the others, but suffice it to say that our reservation was botched horribly and we ended up at a table too small for us in the dining area (as opposed to the bar area, where trivia was going on).  . And the service got no better as the night went on.  A few notable quotables:. 1)  Server: "Has everyone been here before?". Us:  half "yes" half "no". Server:  "Wait, you HAVEN'T???"  like it was some sort of a problem?. 2) Server:  "These are tapas.  They're small dishes.  Some people just get tapas for their meal and share them.". I had no idea what tapas are, being that I've been living under a rock for the past 5 years.... 3)  Server:  "I can take up to 4 cards.  Well, maybe I can handle... Yeah, I can take 5 cards.  Just for you guys though!". Oh, how kind of you.  I've seen servers refuse to separate checks, but this is a whole new level.. 4) "Excuse me, can I get an order of garlic naan?"  . *walks away*. .      But enough about service... on to the good stuff.  I like the way the menu was set up.  An odd choice to have "tapas" on the menu, as they were really more along the lines of the traditional appetizers you'll see at most Indian places.  The rest of the menu is comprised of "Thalis."  Basically, they have a daily specials menu with various entrees and you can choose combinations of those to be served with bread, rice, and raita.  We opted for the 2 veggie, 1 meat with chloe (chickpeas), aloo gobi (cauliflower and potatoes), and chicken tikka masala.  Spicy, but probably not as spicy as they should have been, but still very tasty.  .      One other thing I noted:  no poppadoms with chutney to start the meal!  What sadness!  Apparently you would have to pay extra...   not so cool...  Oh yeah, and your food comes out on a metal tray instead of a plate.  Yeah.. like prison style.... .     So that's 41/2 stars for the food, minus 1/2 for the no poppodums/prison cafeteria tray thing, giving me 4.  Then 2 stars for the strange service.  That makes 3 stars for you, Bhojanic. .      I feel like I owe Bhojanic a return trip just to be fair, but I don't know that it'll happen since it's half way to the freaking perimeter...
