ReviewID: i-_ARzVYpczFframPXSJDw
ReviewerID: yv60ny6vAK6qDzzsK34Zkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gilbert&#39;s Mediterranean Cafe
Category: Greek
I've had the pleasure of eating from Gilbert's twice (in the restaurant and by delivery with . http://Zifty.com. ), and both times the food was wonderful!. . The first time, it was purely to celebrate the end of an exhausting quarter (well, it seems all art school quarters are drainers). Before heading back home, I needed to go out with my best pal in town, Jason. We ended up in Gilbert's because the kitchen at Blake's was closed, and Gilbert's serves food until late. I'm so glad this happened! When we entered the place asking for food, we were seated right away in one of the cool window tables. Lucky us because the place was packed! Besides, our server was super enthusiastic about having us there, and feeding us! . . We ended up enjoying a couple of drinks paired up with the Zorba Platter for 2. This platter has several Mediterranean delights to nibble on (mmmm, I love food nibbling, yes...) where the Hummus was the king. The pita bread is puffier than your normal pita bread, but you know what? When it comes to bread, puffier is BETTER! MMMMM! Needless to say, Jason and I had a great late snack, cold, delicious beer for me, some vodka drink for him, lots of nice people watching (we indulged our aesthetically trained eyes with a couple of very attractive guys) and hours of wonderful chit-chat that, at times, shifted to profound conversation.. . The second time I enjoyed Gilbert's food was yesterday and today. My adorable boyfriend bought me dinner...after I tortured him for a little while with the "why don't you buy me dinner, you romantic dude from Seattle?" crap. He is, indeed, a very romantic man. But this time it was more about surrendering at my pain in the pineapple whining. Gotta love to be a woman! I do!. . Because my stomach is a mess right now and can't take a lot of things, he ordered the Moussaka Eggplant with ground lamb that comes with bechamel sauce and provolone cheese; he also added an order of hummus b'Tahini (same delightful spread and puffy bread); and as a bonus, he also ordered a cup of Mother's Lentil soup (which I had today for dinner). The amount of food lasted for three meals. And the flavors, OH, the flavors!. . The Moussaka was perfect. Now, I want to say perfect a hundred times. Imagine some tender eggplant mixed with big pieces of divine, heavenly and luscious lamb, all covered with the creamy blend of the provolone and bechamel. The side yellow rice was full-flavored, good-tasting and savory...I saved half-of the dish for today's lunch and ate it bit by bit. I love when I'm on a dish I want to never end.. . My dinner tonight was the lentil soup and hummus leftovers. These tasted as if the food just came out of the kitchen. The soup was delicate and well-balanced, and flavor wise, delicious. It made me as happy as the rest of the dishes, and it was perfect for a light dinner.... . I'm definitely going to enjoy Gilbert's as much as possible before I move away from Atlanta (the thought of it it's beginning to be really sad to me). Next time, I'd love to try the paella. But I need to bring someone with me because it's for 2. . . Definitely, this is a place I'd recommend to anyone, hands on fire!
