ReviewID: I0basZ0UbrmXF9THSUeV_g
ReviewerID: iSkHqZTrnUlWMdlTzosozg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Casa Vega
Category: Mexican
Up until about a few months ago, I hadn't been to Casa Vega in a couple of years, and probably won't go again for quite sometime. Perhaps, it is because I try not to eat Mexican Food too often, or maybe it is because there are similar restaurants very close to where I live? Regardless, CV is a really good place for what it is, and. I give it five stars for everything it is, not everything its not! . Hmmm, do you want the good news or the bad news first? Let's save the best for last...... . First, everything  CV is NOT......... . NOT somewhere to go if you don't want to consume 24,612 calories, or on one of those dated low-carb diets. . NOT inexpensive as far as Mexican Food goes. . NOT somewhere you go if you are looking for really Authentic tasting MF. . NOT for those who hate waiting awhile to be seated. . NOT for those who don't like watery and flavorless blended Margaritas. .  NOT a place with really friendly service. . NOT for those who don't like to pay for valet parking since it is sometimes hard to find street parking. . NOT somewhere for people who give restaurants a low yelp rating because of a long wait or type of clientele. . I know that seems like LOTS of NOTS for a place I gave 5 stars, but it's NOT! LOL. . And now, everything Casa Vega IS....... . For people who don't mind consuming 24,612 calories in under two hours ; ). . For those who like it DARK.....and I mean really dark!. . a place for good Cadillac Margaritas &amp; a wide variety of other drinks. . fast at getting your order to the table, and while still nice and HOT!. . somewhere you usually see a celebrity or two..... . a place that serves up generous and tasty portions (and good chips and salsa too). . a big, yet intimate feeling space. . an institution in the valley ( i think it opened almost 50 years ago). . I am sure there are more good things I could write about CV, but just go there for yourself, and I think you will be happy you did.  Sorry, no money back guarantees....Well, at least not from me  : )
