ReviewID: i0SYQr_h2inC4dDGEj2BjA
ReviewerID: 355W7iKObLwu3greKAJcqQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Rosa Mexicano
Category: Mexican
Yikes! so granted half the reason I hated this place was the full dining experience/scenario, but still not a fan.... . Came here when visiting my friend and a former coworkers of her's birthday dinner was here, so bear in mind i knew none of these people with whom we were dining.... . Waited for a bit for our table (party of about 7 so had reservations), but we were seated upstairs within about 10-15 minutes, which was fine...our waiter didn't give us a drink menu, and took a VERY long time to even take drink orders, and as i had seen no drink menu and i hate tequila, i ordered sangria...when someone else requested the drink menu i told him to hold on, i may want to change it...he either ignored me or didnt hear me, so whatever, i got sangria ($12, also not a huge fan)...which took a VERY long time to get there.... . I got a poke ceviche type appetizer, which was fairly good, but i certainly wouldn't come here for a $14 appetizer for the hell of it...everyone else ordered entrees, 2 different guacamoles, a couple got a bottle of wine, everyone but my friend and i got desserts...now bear in mind that the company- while i'm sure nice people (one had a light up lip gloss which the majority of the table went nuts over hmm..)-where not exactly a crowd i'd usually hang around with, and at the end of dinner (i spent $12 + $14) they stated that we all should put in $66 bucks. . HOLY FUCK. are you joking? i mean i've been to plenty a birthday dinner where everyone chips in for the bday girl but given i didnt even KNOW the birthday girl and had one tiny appetizer and one drink, $66 was really f'ing pushing it.. . i'm not sure how the prices got THAT high (probably something to do with that married couple getting a bottle of wine between the 2 of them when no one else wanted any), but seriously??? . . being shafted out of about $30 (which in reality my friend ended up footing some of as I didn't even BRING that much cash and wanted to bitch about the fact that i spent under $30 and certainly wasn't shelling out $66, so she paid for both of ours and i gave her cash) for a truly horrendous dining experience with subpar service and mediocre food (appetizer so obviously still starving) and drink ensure that i will not be back here.
