ReviewID: I0ybuKRDHnz9FFBWmYqxLA
ReviewerID: vpEUTxk-Deb3LaJwm3c-cg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
My fiance and I had talked about going to Alinea before, but we kept changing our minds, wondering if it was really worth the price tag. We had some friends come in town from San Francisco and they were interested in going, so we thought we'd splurge as a special occasion to catch up with them. We were not disappointed! . . I was a little disappointed that we could only get a reservation for 6PM for our group because that seemed so early for dinner, but we did not leave until 10:30! It was an all night experience. . . We had the Tasting with the wine pairings. One of our group did not enjoy wine, but they were very accommodating and willing to do a pairing of other beverages for them to enjoy. We were a little nervous about only having the Tasting and not the Tour - thinking we would be hungry still at the end of the meal - but none of us were, including the guys! . . Not only was the size of what we ordered a concern for me, but I also opted for my meal to be vegetarian and I wasn't sure if anything would be lost in the experience - it most definitely was not! In fact, some of my dishes looked better than the meat eaters dishes! They were creative though and many of the dishes looked exactly the same with creative changes made. Some dishes were more successful than others, but we really appreciated the creativity and presentation of each course. We also enjoyed hearing about all our pairings with the wine. The staff was so helpful and FUN. Maybe it is because we were the youngest group in the restaurant, but they were not the least bit stuffy and they definitely had fun with us.. . I like the added touch of getting a copy of your menu at the end of the meal. It is great to remember what we had and as a little souvenir of your special evening. . . If I had any complaint it was about the book! I knew there was a book available, and I thought it would be a great gift for our friends and for my fiance. Online it said you could order and the Achatz would sign it... when I tried to order online I had no luck, so I called the restaurant. They told me the only way I could have the book signed was if I bought it when I was at dinner. I told them we had only just recently been to dinner there and asked if I could order the signed copy and pay for the shipping and they refused. I thought that was pretty ridiculous! You offer to sell the book online and don't have it set up, but when I offer to pay for shipping after dropping $1500 on a dinner you won't even allow me to pay for the shipping of a copy of the book? That left a bad taste in my mouth, but I ultimately ordered the books on Amazon for less $ and free shipping.... but no autograph :o(
