ReviewID: i1iXKR3LUsO2zo16JtfmyQ
ReviewerID: RyfHFx9h6sOWMCOynNCvow
Rating: 2
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
To start, I am a steak snob.  I am fortunate enough to have traveled the world for work and have an employer who generously supports my quest for the best steakhouses. . . As for Cut, it needs to sharpen its blade.  Quality food, but service needs to match.  When you pay 5 star prices, you should expect 5 star service.  Unfortunately, Cut still has some lessons on how to service their valued customer.. . First, the hostess was warm.  No snobby pretentious lady who believes you are beneath her because she will one day be a famous model/actress.  We were sat at a good table.  But I don't recommend the table near the elevator; better to walk out before shelling $200/person to be near a busy walkway and steel curtains.. . Did I say I love steak?  I was waiting to be wowed.  And the steak, when cooked right (explained later), was excellent.  I had the prime corn-fed ribeye and my wife had the american waygu filet.  The filet was superb.  Too bad there were no Japanese A5 cuts available.  It was explained that there was a shortage.  And I did not take star points away for something Cut cannot control.. . Service Breakdown:. . 1) Here is where it got bad: my steak was medium well instead of medium rare.  Mistakes happen, but my waitress was gone for 10 minutes before we could flag her down.  When you are servicing meat, it is customary for 5-star restaurants to check if the temperature is to your liking.  My server missed the memo.. . 2) After she took my plate away (and with no attitude...thankfully!), I waited to receive my new plate.  It took some time and my wife had to eat alone.  When I did receive my plate, a busser delivered it.  Again, protocol is to have a manager or assistant manager deliver any food sent back to the kitchen.. . 3) To make the situation worse, my waiter didn't check back on the temperature for another 10 minutes!  Luckily, they got it right.. . 4) I didn't complain to the manger that night.  Since it was my birthday, I decided to leave the drama for a call the next day.  So, when I called, it took me two days to connect.  The GM never gave me a call-back during the scheduled time.  In addition, the hostess kept on saying they were too busy to address my issue and almost hung up on me!  I had to tell her, "Fine, then why don't you take my number and have someone call me back."  It was her Edison moment.. . 5)  GM resolution: come back again and I will 'take care of you.'  And we will address the issue with the waitress.   Translation: we are going to make you whole by asking you to spend more money.  I don't know what I expected after talking to the GM, but the resolution did not sit well.. . Overall, I have high standards of quality for a restaurant that charges high prices and markets itself as one of the top steakhouse and, "...the most excited and talked-about restaurant and lounge threesome in the 21st century. "  . . Cut needs to workout the service process issues before I drop another $200/person: . . 2 out of 5 Ribeye rating
