ReviewID: I1pSpDGeCm5Uv1hix_Rcvg
ReviewerID: NXUdf0i5qOBo45JgXPMBTQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Eat It or Beat It?. **EAT IT!!**. . 3.5 STARS. . Wurstkuchu... oh all the hype and everything about sausages. Well, first off, no homo, but I enjoy my sausages and when I heard about this place, I knew I had to try it and forunately, one of my great friends happened to work there! Her and I went during a weekday (early evening) and fortunately there was NO LINE which is something I was very thankful for! . . The location is apparently in the "Arts District" in downtown L.A. and clearly, the people are very artsy and "different" I should say. Nevertheless, the ambiance of the restaurant was very chill. Although I never got a chance to experience the "full-experience" of hustle and bustle, I could very much imagine it in my head. Upon entering Wurstkuche, I noticed how TINY the ordering/front counter was... and immediately I thought to myself... hmm, many people waiting outside... small ordering counter... AH! Just like sprinkles (not quite that small)... great marketing strategy! In any case, I call the ambiance very "hipster" and as my friend told me, D-twn LA seems to try really hard to be all "hipster-like" such as Williamsburg, NY (the orgin of "hipster"), which by the way is a GREAT area to check out if you're in NYC! It's much like Wurstkuche: industrialized-ish area and slightly shady looking but very HIP! . . Now, onto the sausages:. . Rattlesnake/Rabbit Sausage w/ Peppers and Sauerkraut ($7.50):. Alright, so upon taking a bite from this "exotic" dog, my first thought was hmm, very delicious... doesn't quite taste anything "exotic" that I haven't already tasted (maybe because I'm Asian and I've already eaten a bunch of weird disgusting shit (to the normal person) as it is). The sausage was definitely filling and there was a nice quiet crunch to the sausage... but quite honestly, nothing special. For a $7.50 sausage, I expected a bit more, but who am I to kid... I mean, what else can you do to a sausage? The peppers and sauerkraut was normal. . . Apple Vegetarian Sausage ($6ish):. Definitely a different taste and unique in it's own way. I don't think I've ever had a vegetarian dog quite like this but yummy nonetheless!. . Belgian Fries:. NOW, this is what I call delicious fries! Thick cuts with sea-salt and fried to perfection! Crunchy, not greasy, and delicious! Also, you choose from different sauces/dips and I had the pesto and some Asian sweet sourish sauce (eh). Pesto was the best one. . . CONCLUSION:. I think what really gets to me is the price... I mean, the bill totaled to about $22 for just two sausages, a pelagrino, and small fries... hmm, but apart from that, the sausages were in fact delicious but next time, I'll be trying one of the more "normal" sausages and judge it based on that. Save yourself the extra dollar or two and just order a regular bratwurst (sausage). Additionally, next time, I'll definitely be trying one of their brews because it seems to be made in-house. . . Definitely check out this place and if you don't want to wait in the infamous long line... (WEEKDAYS, EARLY EVENING/DINNER)! According to my friend, as the night wears on, the more people, so beat the crowd! I'll definitely be coming back again and updating my review, so don't you worry Wurstkuche ;) Ambiance was definitely different and a PLUS, not too many of these around, so I say, EAT ITTT!!!!!
