ReviewID: i2Ldb4y3FdcUQszFMrXR4w
ReviewerID: 15nI6GFkmdrG880vPqQZaQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
One of the staple of Vietnamese food is Pho (pronounced "fuh" like "duh").  I lived in the greater Los Angeles area for a while and had my fav pho restaurant out in the SFV.  Coming back to Chi, I didn't think I'd find anything close to what I was used to out in the West Coast.  But Tank Noodles proved me wrong.. . Tank serves up great bowls of Pho noodles.  The bowls are big and full of delicious rice noodles and thinly sliced raw beef.  The broth is salty and hearty.  Add in some condiments and it's all oh-so-yummy!  Everytime I go to Tank, I wanted to try out something different.  But I keep coming back to the Pho Tai again and again.. . Some of the other dishes I've had there are: . Bun Bo Hue.  It's spicy and yummy with pork feet, blood cubes, cha-lua, pork or is that beef slices along with broth and thick rice noodles.  . . Mi Bo Kho.  It is best described as egg noodles in beef stew.  It's really yummy!  Make sure you tell the waiter/waitress that you want the soup and not the Banh Me Bo Kho, which is a bowl of the beef stew with a loaf of french bread for dipping, although that's delicous too!. . Bun Ca Ri Ga.  Curry chicken soup is very hearty and delicious!  . . Goi Cuon Tom. aka Shrimp spring rolls.  They're ok.  You get 2 in an order.  Not the best I've had but they'll do if you're looking to eat some appetizers.. . Bo Tai Chanh.  Thinly sliced raw beef cooked with lemon juice served with some greens on a plate.  Eat it with the accompany shrimp chips.  Yummay!!!. . Ca Phe Sua Da.  My girlfriend loves their Vietnamese ice coffee.  It is served with condensed milk and is premade, ie. you don't get the hot water, coffer, filter/drip cup like other places.. . Service is as expected with authentic Asian restaurant.  Pretty much if you want something, you wave at the service staff and they'll stop by.  Sit there silently and you'll be sitting there for a while.... . Great authentic Vietnamese Pho restaurant.
