ReviewID: I33CEkxfg00NyGtB7FDTLw
ReviewerID: tXKTfiUh_3R1En0xYonXdw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
If I was to design a lounge from scratch, it might look very close to the lounge at Tru.  It's very close to having drinks in an art museum.  The photos on the website aren't accurate, and I can't find any new ones or I'd upload them.  Small tables, individually lit by small halogen spots, surrounded by art, with a Bang CD player on the wall providing a quiet backbeat to the conversation.  I could hear my compatriots without raising my voice at all.. . My only complaint is that the drink menu is a bit limited.  And I'm glad they gave me a menu, because had I not looked at the menu, the waiter and I would likely have agreed on a Booker's bourbon on the rocks, which would have turned out to be $64 a glass.  Turns out, there's Booker's, and then there's Booker's Master Artisan Distiller's Hyper-Select Special Import Release, or some such thing.. . My score coming into Tru: 2 Ketel One martinis, 2 Crown &amp; Cokes, 1 glass of zin.  It was time to slow down.  So I had Johnnie Walker Black on the rocks.  4 of them.  They came in 8 ounce tumblers, and the bartender had a HEAVY hand.  My traveling companion and I were meeting two friends of his here.  He neglected to mention that his friends were of the genus femalia, species modelous.  Thankfully, I get better looking as I drink.  I would say I also get more charming, but that's hardly possible.. . Two hours into the event, everyone decided to get dessert.  I was in no position (or, frankly, state) to argue, so I had the strawberry soup.  A fascinating idea, reasonably well executed.  My one suggestion: the lemongrass gelee cubes want to stick to the bowl, and necessitated some help from my finger in order to crawl into my spoon.  This had nothing to do with my close relationship with Johnnie Walker and everything to do with the power of wet suction [get your mind out of the gutter and Google it, troglodyte].  This could be solved by including a rolled white-chocolate tube, which could be used to help push the gelee cubes into the spoon.  See---I come with solutions, not just problems.. . We eventually left at least 5 minutes before they would have thrown us out.  I will be back the very next time I'm in Chicago.  It was just that good.  If there was a place like this in SF, I'd have a chair with my name on it.
