ReviewID: I37BOCTFhcUpwxcuLGkdmQ
ReviewerID: 3YhYjrqk7Q6DI12LqU7AXA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Toro Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
The first time I went to Toro, I simply wanted carry-out, but on that particular day they were understaffed and couldnt take take-out orders. Needless to say I was disappointed. However, I recently returned to dine in on a Wednesday night. We were (me and bf) their first diners that night, and upon entering, we were welcomed with a "moshi moshi." We ordered a yellow submarine, hiroshima, spider, and I think the fourth maki we got was called subzero or something like that. Well, let me first say that I love that they used real crab meat in the majority of the rolls we had. I think I only noticed fake crab meat in the hiroshima. Secondly, our bill came out to be like $53 total (after tax, minus tip), which is awesome! In addition to the makis, we also had the green mussels for an appetizer, which were good but nothing spectacular. It was covered in "tiffany sauce," which I think is a combo of sriracha and something else--not sure though. I would describe it's flavor as spicy hot lol. The yellow submarine's main ingredients were salmon, mango, and avocado. I enjoyed it because it was very fresh and light. We followed that up with the spider. Now, the hiroshima. This is something I have never seen before. The maki came out in a saucer with it sitting in a liquid sauce. This maki is the crazy horse deep-fried. If I remember correctly, it also had tiffany sauce on top. I dont know what the liquid sauce was, but it was good. Not salty nor sweet, but it wasnt bland. Just cant describe the taste. Can only say it has flavor. For those who dont really eat raw fish, this would be something you should order, unless you dont like fried food. The hiroshima is something I definitely have never had anywhere else before. I was pretty content after the third roll, but I think I was being a glutton when I decided to order the fourth roll, the subzero. Just had to suffer myself to eat another roll of goodness.. . It seems that no matter what day of the week it is, this place gets a pretty good dinner crowd. As I said earlier, we were there on a Wednesday night and it filled up pretty quickly and there was a little line by the time we left. I'd say this is one place you cant miss for it's good food and very decent price.
