ReviewID: I3U_5v8ylAB7PwyKPRbhAw
ReviewerID: o00v9qTPAqMleVqyZbkm8A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft Atlanta
Category: American (New)
As a surprise to help combat the hectic week of holiday this and holiday that, Shelli took me to Craft to get away from it all.. . I had peeked in just a few days prior as I bought a gift card for Mickey, but hadn't gotten the full experience of seeing the space. Overall it's quite warm and inviting. As we were just a bit early for our reservation, we were sat in the downstairs (ground level area) and proceeded to order drinks, as we were assured it would be just a moment before we were seated. I started with a Kumkwat Mojito, while Shelli sipped on a Prosecco. We watched the diners around us as they drank and ate, and before we knew it, 30 minutes had passed. Not quite sure what the hold up was (granted the diners we were replacing were taking their sweet ass time), but I attribute it to the newness of the place... So beware, if you're eating upstairs, don't come starving in case you have to sit around.... . Walking up the stairs, we were transplanted to a space that was a little more "serious". Something about the vibe was just more "put-together" compared to the relaxed atmosphere we had just come from.. . We were seated and introduced to the menu. Here was what came to my plate:. . Frisse salad with bacon and gorgonzola. Braised short ribs. Roasted parsnips. Roasted brussel sprouts. Sauteed escarole. Rosemary ice cream. Cardamom ice milk. . The frisse salad was quite nice, and a large portion. The bacon added a nice texture and flavor interjection in an otherwise creamy-ish salad. Shelli had ordered the endive salad with pecans and white cheddar. Quite nice as well. I enjoy the "sharing" nature that they invoke here with "family-style" plating. Makes for a pleasant "tasting" experience. We're off to a good start.. . Up next was the main, and I had chosen the short ribs. I enjoyed this dish quite a bit as it was just so succulent. It was served in a cast iron pot, accompanied by some root vegetables, and an amazing sauce. The only complaint I have is that this didn't seem to be a "sharing" portion (1 piece) and didn't quite understand it's lack of "plating". Nonetheless, a wonderful entree.. . On the side, we had chosen to share a few items. The roasted parsnips were nicely crisped on one side... Very tasty. The brussel sprouts were treated the same way, sliced down the center with a nice burnt layer. The escarole was quite flavorful as well.. . My favorite part of any meal such as this is looking over the dessert menu. I am a sucker for sorbets. I am not sure where that started, but I look at this menu with great anticipation. As I fast-forwarded to the sorbets, I was a little disappointed. Fairly standard fare when it comes to flavors, though I am sure that they're quite nice as they're all made in house. But my attention was immediately diverted as I spotted a rosemary ice cream. I have to try this I thought. and then a couple of lines below, a cardamom ice milk. Ice milk? I have to try this one too.... . The rosemary ice cream was quite nice. It wasn't overpowering, but it was certainly there. The ice milk however was just divine. It really isn't the easiest thing to explain, but I would have it be a close kin to a sorbet. Not quite a sherbet, but not quite a sorbet... Somewhere there is a fine line, and it delicately balances on it. Ice milk... I am now on the look out.. . We left quite late, and now I understand why the table before us was just sitting around. It's a nice experience, and the food is great. Nothing overly complicated, just nicely prepared solid dishes with great ingredients.. . I was in such amazement when I left, I apparently I forgot to turn my headlights on in the car. Less than a couple of blocks away from the restaurant, I was pulled over by a cop. I was sucked back into the outside world, and thus ended the wonderful escape from reality.
