ReviewID: I43Mem6enxFrxtqibVdjKQ
ReviewerID: RclKVs5XTI_8BX6ivwXLCA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
Oh Versailles, how I would love to praise thee.... . ... but I just can't. I've been to Versailles twice now (I know, only twice-- don't get your panties all up in a bunch) and am not convinced. The restaurant itself looks like a place I would automatically love. Cool sign with its huge obtrusive (in a good way) logo on the outside. Old-school homey interior, friendly staff ... I dig all that stuff.. .  But, I keep hearing and reading how the Versailles lemon-roasted chicken is so good. Well, I've had it twice and not only can I not recommend it, but I will not eat it again. It's not so BAD, it's just NOT GOOD and that makes me sad.. .  The chicken arrives at your table and by its appearance, you're just ready to dive in. Carcass intact, golden-brown skin, adorned with sliced raw onions... Then you take a bite. Hmmm... pretty dry... not much flavor. Well, maybe just the breast meat is dry... that's passable I guess (actually in a restaurant it shouldn't be passable). So I go for the thigh, my favorite part of a chicken. Dark meat's gotta be juicy, right? Wrong. Dry again! Are you kidding me???. .  Saddened by this (and somewhat desperate at this point), I cut off some meat from the drumstick, tear off a good amount of skin to accompany it, put some of the raw onion on top, drag it through the lemon sauce and go for it. Okay not bad, but again, do you want to go out to eat and have "not bad"? I don't.. .  I should mention here that the lemon sauce shouldn't really be thought of as "sauce", let's be honest. It's actually just half a notch above lemon juice. It kinda tastes like the lemon juice that comes in those plastic lemons with the green cap at the supermarkets. Toss in some garlic powder... there you have it.. . My friends still love that chicken though. Actually, I am envious. I want to like it. I guess my opinion of the lemon chicken at Versailles is best summarized in this (partial) quote by Jonathan Gold of LA Weekly:. . "Everybody but me, it appears, adores the crisp-skinned roast chicken at he Cuban restaurant Versailles...". . Why not pan the place? Well, I'm sure they have other things at Versailles that I might like. The menu has alot of alternatives. I tried the Cuban sandwich. It was very good. I want to try some pork the next time my friends are eating their friggin' chiggin (jab, jab).. . Again, the place just looks and feels like a place I should love. I'm trying...
