ReviewID: I8PGHZhkP6GmKAT16NUviw
ReviewerID: vzGRxQviUCpx4PZxCWI8Hw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
Before I write this review, I must preface it by saying that my great grandparents were from Italy.  I have garlic in my blood.  So please exercise caution when reading this commentary.....as your ancestors might not have bestowed upon you the genes necessary for adequate garlic digestion.  Grazie la mia Nona!. .      Eh-hem.  Ahhhh.....The Stinking Rose.  How lovely is your name, and yet.....how incredibly uninviting.  You'd think that a restaurant with the word 'stinking' in it would be a key place to avoid huh?  But in this case...'stinking' is a synonym for gloooooriouuuuuuus! .     .      The handful of times that I've entered this surprisingly non-stinky restaurant, I have walked away a better woman.  Ok, maybe not a better woman....but a BIGGER woman, yes.  How could you not, when every single gosh darn thing on that menu is scrumdidliumptious?!  Yes that's right.  The food there is excellent.  Not just excellent, but verrrrry excellent.  I usually order the pork chops.  A generous chop  covered with caramelized apples and onions served with a warm helping of garlic mashed potatoes and all you can eat garlic buns. Need I say more?  I have also sampled from the plates of my co-conspirators and have been wowed every time.  Anything from meatloaf (anything but ordinary) to filet mignon.  Boo-ya! . .       But wait.  Before you go darting off to garlic heaven, I must say one thing.  Icecream.  Thaaaaaat's right.  You should not be allowed to set foot in that joint unless you sign a release form/contract.  The release form so that you cannot legally sue the place when you wake up smelling to high heaven....killing your household plants and losing your job in the process.  Reason for firing:  Stank.   Oh believe you me my friend....it'll happen.  The contract, on the other hand, would be a written oath in the form of....THOU SHALT NOT  REMOVE THYSELF FROM THE PREMISES WITHOUT EATING GARLIC ICECREAM LEST YE BE CAST INTO THE FIREY DEPTHS OF HELL.  Wow.  Who knew icecream could be so dangerous? . .       Folks, I will say only this...there is something otherwordly about that bowl of icy goodness.  It took me 3 visits to get up the nerve to eat that shiznit.  And not because it was garlic helado...but because it sets you back a good 8 bucks.  Um...Yeah.  Waiter!  I'll have the water refill please.  Thanks so much.  But on this particular evening, in this particular month of this particular year....a group decision made it possible to partake in the mystery desert.  And boy were we glad we were all suckers for the cold stuff.  . .      Here comes a brief description.  Wait for it..... .       The garlic is so subtle, you almost miss it.  It's the aftertaste that gives it away.  Like a big sister running to mom after you peed on the carpet.  Damn it!!  AHHHH!!!!!!  She would have never KNOWN!!!!  . .        The thing that makes this concoction divine (As in...bust out the winged angels and harp playing cherubs) is that atop the half-dome of creamy white milkiness...is a blanket of Mole Caramel sauce.  Did you read that last part?  MOLE CARAMEL SAUCE.  In other words, you have these three flavors bursting in your mouth like fireworks on the 4th:  Garlic, Chocolate, and burnt caramel.  Believe me when I say that it is worth a trip out to La Cienega just to experience this postre.  . .        So if you have the evening free and don't have to be anywhere or talk to anyone....or...be around any other living creature the next day, get'cho tooshie over there.  It'll be well worth the ostracism.
