ReviewID: I_AEGvX_rjfRfpxfic6cMQ
ReviewerID: dTUShR6wGDzGyNYBH2GS-Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Ok, I admit it.  I'm a pizza snob.  Well, I am now.  You see, I kept putting off a visit to Pizzeria Mozza because I don't make reservations for Pizza at a place that does not serve take out or offer delivery.  I don't wait 30 days for a prime table in a hip joint just because everyone else is doing it.  If I did that, I'd have jumped off a bridge by now just like mama said.. . So, my friend David innocently called me and said, "hey, I read a review of Pizzeria Mozza in a wine-mag and I want to check it out."  I replied, "good luck getting a table.  If you do, I'll join you".  Let's just say I had to eat my words.. . When we arrived, we were seated promptly and presented with menus containing a list of Italian words a mile long that I have never seen before.  When the server arrived, I just said, "I have no clue what half the stuff is on this menu, so I need a primer" and then proceeded to list off the strangest names on the menu while she answered, "cheese, it's cheese", almost every time.  So, for those of you who go in the future, if it's strange, Italian, and in Italics, it's probably cheese.. . I started with a Beet salad that had so much horseradish it reminded me of the times in college when we did shots of wasabi peas from TJ's.  We would each grab a handful of peas, shove them in our mouths, and try not to make a face.  Damn, those beets were potent.  I made several faces.. . After clearing my sinuses with the Beets, I moved on to the main course, the Bianca Pizza.  The crust was perfect, the toppings delicate, the sauce flavorful and light.  Fresh and amazing.. . Along with my meal, I had a couple of glasses of the Lambrusco (red, bubbly, cold, wine).  It was a fantastic accompaniment.. . Service was top notch, the food was excellent, and the ambiance warm.  We even exchanged chatter with the tables around us, something you rarely ever see in LA.. . I left a changed man, with a deeper knowledge of Italian cheeses, and a willingness to make future reservations for Pizza.
