ReviewID: I_Jtl2mFXFJimlBXwJ-o2Q
ReviewerID: q1D8PDH9SDZrrTCWECkA3g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I have heard a lot of buzz about Craft. Not only is it Top Chef's Tom somethingsomething's restaurant, but I heard it's a restaurant where you get what you pay for. . . I actually work in Century City where Craft is located, which is a really strange location for a restaurant to be at, seeing that the area is all work buildings. Anyway, I had the opportunity to dine at Craft last night b/c of a work function, to which I took advantage of and did not hold back. . . The decor of the restaurant surprised me. I guess I was expecting a look-and-feel of a fancyshmancy restaurant with dim lighting and romantic music...but Craft didn't really have any of that. I don't know if that's a bad or good thing, I just know it wasn't what I expected. . . Anyway, our server was extremely friendly and accommodating. They have many staff members standing around the restaurant who are willing to refill your drinks ASAP. Ok, so onto the foods that I tried:. . FIRST, SECOND, THIRD COURSES: . *I don't remember which dishes were first, second or third courses, but these are the ones I remember trying. . . Japanese Hamachi &amp; Grapefruit  17. . (I love sushi. This was an OKAY dish. The hamachi was a little on the fishy side for me, but the combo. of the fish and grapefruit was new and refreshing.). . Bigeye Tuna &amp; Niçoise Olive  17.. (Skip it. Not a big deal. I could barely taste the tuna.). . Wild Arugula &amp; Parmesan  12.. (Very simple salad but its simplicity was on point. I'm not a huge fan of arugula b/c its shape make its hard for me to cram in my mouth, but I would order this again.). . Beef Short Rib &amp; Root Vegetables  30.. (VERY tender and juicy, but a little too salty in me. I felt like I needed a bowl of rice to eat this with. Yes, that's my Asian side talking.). . Niman Ranch Beef Flatiron  33.. (I'm not a BIG meat person, so I don't know if my opinion counts on this one, but I didn't think it was anything too special.) . . SIDE DISHES:. . Sugar Snap Peas  9.. (I love snap peas as is. I find them delish even raw, so this side dish was good. It wasn't seasoned all crazy, but I liked it.). . Assorted Mushrooms  16.. (I love mushrooms and the way it was sauteed was perfecto.). . Gratin  11.. (If you want something creamy, buttery and oozzzy, this potato dish is good.). . THE NAMES OF DISHES I DON'T REMEMER: . . Something something Tortellini with peas. (VERY GOOD. That's all I remember and that's all you need to know.). . Something something Mackerel. (A little salty, but the way it was cooked made it very crunchy and yum!). . DESSERT:. . Peanut Butter Cup 12. (Ohmygah! I don't have a sweet tooth and I am not a huge dessert fan in general, but this dessert (which is their most popular one), is so motherfreakin good! PLEASE TRY IT IF YOU LIKE PEANUT BUTTER! I was seriously thinking about this dessert all day! Plus it comes with ice cream that is toffee-esque...yum!). . Pink Lady Apple Crisp  12. Vanilla Ice Cream. (Classic baked apple pie with vanilla ice cream. It was good but nothing out of this world.) . . Chocolate Soufflé  12. Vanilla Crème Anglaise &amp; Mint Cookie Ice Cream . (This dessert is def. for chocolate lovers. The chocolate was DARK and rich. A little TOO chocolately for my taste, but I can see how chocolate lovers would die over this dessert. Also, I am NOT a mint fan, but their mint cookie ice cream was BOMB. They had bits and pieces of cookie in the ice cream, so the texture of smooth and crunch was a cool combo!). . All in all, Craft is probably one of the few restaurants I have been to where their price matches the quality of their food. I can't stand shelling out $$$$$$$$ and walking out of a fancy restaurant thinking, "Wait, did I just eat?" Craft does say its portions are "family style" which is funny b/c the portions aren't that big, but seriously, when I got home, I was DEF. full. It doesn't hit you till you start eating dessert where you're like "Yeah, those sneaky, small dishes pack some room in my stomach!"
