ReviewID: I_K_hj7Px6rOVaZt5ekW1A
ReviewerID: Q33wDFQyS6L7QAm7LVgyIA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I had been anticipating my first experience at Alcove. A group of friends and I had dinner here a few days ago. . . We parked valet (which cost us $7), and went to order our food. Being indecisive girls, it took us forever, and it took us a while to creep up the crowded line to order. We got our numbers and sat down in the patio.. . . It took FOREVER for our food to come out ... i mean, FOREVER.. Everyone's food came out about 30 minutes after we ordered... except mine. THEN, like 15 more minutes waiting for my dinner, they managed to get my order wrong, so we had to wait another 10 minutes or so for my dish.  I was really disappointed... . One of my friends ordered the Bean Bean Bean salad.. She didn't even eat half of it, and she complained that her chicken was really dry and tough to eat.. . My dish, the Salmon Sandwich wasn't all that great either. It was salmon on foccacia with an orange salsa and a vinaigrette that tasted like strawberries. The flavors did not go well together. I mean, it wasn't bad, but it definitely wasn't good either. . . Your best bet is to probably stick to Alcove's breakfast menu. . I don't know how many Eggs Benedicts my friend tried, but she claimed that the one she had that night was the best one she's had so far.. . After dinner, we ordered our desserts:. Bread pUdding, which looks like a muffin was overly sweet. Chocolate cake was fluffy and not too sweet. Lemon-raspberry cake is really rich and full of flavor. I'm not a fan of fruity flavors, but the white chocolate shavings balanced nicely with the lemon and raspberry flavors.. Note that each slice of cake is ~$7-8. . When it started getting cold, the heat lamps and candles were lit, and it was warm enough to sit outside until about 10:30pm chatting away.. . Food/service: 1 star. Dessert: 3 stars. Ambience at night: 4 stars. . Let's hope that the next time I visit and order my brunch, the food and the service will be a lot better.
