ReviewID: i_Nc6fqlKje0BBkSSdU9SA
ReviewerID: B12BUnZWX2ZiZfzB1SSRWQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
OK, after seeing it on Diner's, etc., I decided to check it out.. It's in an unusual building. Maybe once a Der Weiner or something. I don't know, but anyway.. . Ambience.. The inside is split between a small ordering/pickup/waiting area and an equally sized eating area. The eating area was kind of interesting as it was very open, with benches around the outside and tables inside, looked like one big group eating, not segmented and separated like a fast food joint. The place seemed to be going for a nightclub/bar kinda thing, and I think it was kind of close, considering it was a fast food restaurant setup they were working with. There are outside tables, too.. . Offerings.. First think that caught my eye was beer taps. Interesting. And not Miller and Bud. They were offering good beer. Arrogant Bastard, for instance.. I flipped a mental coin between pastrami and pulled pork, and went with the pulled pork sandwich. This saved me from ordering the side red cabbage slaw, as it was on the sandwich. Sandwiches are served a la carte, so all sides are extra. The 1/4, 1/2 or Full chicken comes as a meal, though. Belgian fries, green salads, slaw, black beans and some other non-traditional fast food sides, too. (Belgian fries? I guess the psuedo- Frenchie, mussle lovers like their fries like we do.). We mentioned we were new to Oinkster, and the cashier slowed down and led us through the menu. He offered a few samples of things, and that was good. He was happy we were there, and I appreciated that.. We tasted and ordered the Orange Lemonade. Pretty good. The only thing that was missing was the tequila!. . Opinion.. My pulled pork sandwich was OK. If I go back, probably will, I will order the pastrami. If that is just OK, I will not be back. The pork isn't pulled so much as it is blended. Almost like a tuna salad sandwich. Not the taste, mind you, but the texture and consistency. I didn't like it. They use a Carolina -type BBQ sauce, though you wouldn't know it was on the sandwich. Luckily, I self served myself a take home container of it, and that helped a lot.. My wife got a cheeseburger. I sat next to her as she ate. I kept waiting for her to say something about it. Nothing. She opened, ate, finished, went to bed, and not two days later, has not said one word about the burger. I guess she doesn't need to . . .. My two young sons got fries and chicken. The fries were GONE, and they were looking for more. The chicken was 1/2 eaten. But, this isn't really a place for young kids.. . Summation.. They may have good stuff here, but I didn't find it on the first pass. If I go back, it will be with some friends, no kids, and most likely, without a wife. I would like to kick back with a pastrami sandwich and a pint of the Bastard and relax, but that is more for the ambience, and "fast food place with beer" feel, than the food.
