ReviewID: IADVz2xN4RSi3UiWi7CtMA
ReviewerID: 6O9eZiBGBDN5V_o3iYLoQw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Seasons 52
Category: American (New)
I went here for my birthday with my family based on a recommendation from a friend. I love using seasonal produce in my own cooking and I love even more that a restaurant does the same to produce healthy dishes. So my friend was spot on. Now, my birthday is in November so their menu selection featured pumpkin, butternut squash, lots of fish and apples. We started out with mushrooms stuffed with shrimp and crab and the beef carpaccio. Both were fabulous. The mushrooms were overflowing with shrimp and crab and oozing with cheese. The beef carpaccio was perfectly seasoned and paired with capers, arugula and cheese as well. My picky brother loved both, so that's saying a lot for this place. I don't remember what entree I got but I think it was fish. I do remember the butternut squash ravioli that came with my entree. They were delicious, very rich, but delicious nonetheless. For desert, each of us got one of their shot glass desserts. I laughed at the size thinking it was going to leave me wanting more. Quite the contrary! The amount was perfect: I wasn't over-stuff and satisfied my sweet tooth. . . Now one my thing. My dad is very picky and critical when it comes to restaurants. He expects exceptional service as well as perfectly prepared food. In all my 22 years of dining with my father, this was the first restaurant we've been to that he didn't have one negative thing to say. In fact, he couldn't stop raving about how great his meal was and how much he enjoyed it. So definitely check this place out. It's expensive but I believe it's totally worth it for the experience. Our server was fantastic. He was very informative and helped us pick out the perfect bottle of wine. . . Oh but reservations were nearly impossible to get! I called a week in advance to get reservations for the Perimeter location and they were completely booked! So I had to make reservations at the Buckhead location. And it took me a while to figure out where to park, so I drove around in circles on Peachtree Street. That was awesome. Especially in rush hour traffic. Signs would help! But other than that, absolutely mind-blowing.
