ReviewID: ib-CV-QFHbQ3fUT8m6yJaw
ReviewerID: ITxXy4IbW6cpCoThb2lUug
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Reservations:  . Basically, you have to call at 10:00 a.m. each day to get a reservation a month out.  Your best bet is to do as I did and arrive before 6:30 p.m. and sit at the bar.  The two of us arrived at 6 p.m. on a Monday and had no problems getting seats at the bar.  The host told me that if it was a Saturday, it would probably be full already.  Sitting at the bar is more fun than sitting at the table because you get to see them prepare the food.. . The Food (we split everything):. First off, because we could see the food being prepared, I can say that they do take great care in preparing the dishes.  Silverton was behind the bar and you can tell she really wants her dishes to be perfect.. . They start you off with an amuse bouche of mozzarella cheese (I think) wrapped around olives, pesto, and some kind of leafy green.  Good...and free.  . . We ordered the grilled octopus appetizer.  This was the first time I tried grilled octopus, and I'm glad I did.  It wasn't tough or chewy like one would expect.  The octopus had a nice charred flavor to it.    . . Next we had the burrata cheese with bacon, escarole, and shallots.  It comes on top of bread, like a bruschetta.  This was really good.  The saltiness of the bacon married well with the soft cheese.. . Orrechiette with sausage and chard.  I read previous reviews and everyone seemed to rave about this pasta.  The pasta itself was cooked perfectly al dente.  The sausage in the sauce was a little bit too salty if you ate it alone, but as long as you mixed in some pasta it was fine.  Together it was really tasty.. . Beef Tagliatta ordered medium rare.  Wow was this steak cooked perfectly with a nice balsamic sauce that wasn't too salty or too sweet, it was just right.  . . We were way too full to order dessert.  . . Service:. Service was good, although I've had better at other restaurants.  The sommelier recommended a really good wine to go with dinner.  And sitting at the bar we could see him and the waiters drinking and tasting wine.  I really think this was done so they knew how the wine tasted in case a customer asked as opposed to getting drunk.  Everyone was really nice, I just wished they paid more attention to keeping my water glass full.
