ReviewID: Ib0G6nmo0xpdReBpj7tznw
ReviewerID: 1QY--CuntVsGymMzAkfqgQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Buttermilk Channel
Category: American (New)
BRUNCH REVIEW: . . I live right up the street from this place, so I've been wanting to stop by for some time now.  My cousins and I decided to drop in this past Sunday for brunch.  We opted for the no reservation approach-- mostly because we figured like most NYC brunch places, they didn't take reservations... we were wrong!  Score one for Buttermilk.. . We arrived around 11:30am on this rainy, dreary Sunday morning.  There was, predictably, a 45-minute-to-an-hour wait, plus everyone was smushed up inside the area immediately next to the door.  Not wanting to stand around for an hour, we left and wandered around the neighborhood for a bit.  They took our phone number down and said they'd call when our table opened up.  . . After about 45 minutes, we headed back to Buttermilk.  Unfortunately, due to weather/parking issues and reservations showing up late, our table still wasn't ready.  So we stood inside browsing the menus for another 15 minutes or so.  Right around then, I thought to myself, "y'know, they have been very gracious and apologetic about the wait situation, but it'd be really nice if they offered us some complimentary drinks to tide us ove--"  And before I could complete my thought, along came the manager to apologize and offer us a free round of drinks/coffee.  Another point for Buttermilk.. . We finally were seated after a total of roughly an hour and half wait.  They sat us at the end of the communal table, which, given the ample amount of space afforded to each place setting at the table, I thought was actually pretty nice and added to the homey feel of the place.  We ordered some bloody marys (I got the Classic, my cousin got the Court Street garnished with antipasti from Caputo.  She won.), and our food.. . I ordered the Salmon Platter.  I have to say, the salmon was pretty great and the dish as a whole was very tasty.  I think because I had been waiting around for so long, it wasn't quite enough to fill me up.  It's a good thing my cousins had some leftovers.... . One cousin ordered the Short Rib Hash and the other ordered the Fried Pork Chops &amp; Cheddar Waffles.  Both were very good (my mouth is starting to water just writing about them).  The Hash wasn't too salty (which is my complaint about a lot of hash) and the Pork Chops were very juicy and tender.  The Cheddar Waffles were a near-perfect combo of salty and sweet (with the syrup).  . . Outside of the crazy wait (note to self: make reservations next time), the brunch as a whole was very solid.  It didn't blow my mind, but it's definitely worth coming back for.  And, if nothing else, I'm really excited to try their dinner!
