ReviewID: IBpV29UYUecqhlz14J8OZg
ReviewerID: YWViHt1YSUmKJ2At5gxN3g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I've been here twice and both times I've gotten the spinach salad because it is SO GOOD!  The staff, for the most part, is friendly and engaging. I did feel a little demeaned by the manager when I thought my bottle of wine was corked and she spoke to me as though I were a child.  She convinced me it wasn't corked and I drank it anyway, although if i were her I would have politely brought me a new bottle and then bitched about me behind my back.  . . There is a little gem hidden in Alcove: a writing desk in the back room that has little notes in the drawers. One could spend an hour just reading all the notes. I only spent 10 minutes, but I thought it was an intriguing insight into human nature. Why do humans have such irresistible urges to leave a mark?  I didn't leave one because I couldn't think of anything profound to say. :(. . This resaturant is owned by the same people who do Aroma in Studio City -- you should check out Aroma if you like Alcove.. . -------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------. . I'm a writer who has trouble working in her own home. In my quest for the perfect coffee shop, I have devised my own star rating system for the shops I review on this site. Each attribute below is worth one star, which makes it possible for a shop to lack desirable attributes yet still receive a perfect Yelp rating.  Anything with a perfect Yelp rating is a place in which I am happy to sit for hours on end.. . * well lit. * cozy atmosphere with comfortable seating. * wifi (free or not). * open late. * serves loose leaf tea. * variety of affordable food and beverages. * interesting people-watching, whether it be out the window or in the shop. * not too crowded (I hardly ever go on the weekends because I know the odds would be against me). . I understand that my rating system is unique to my own needs but hopefully I will be able to highlight qualities that others may be interested in.
