ReviewID: IBsShZ0mPbcd3Ywxzz8URQ
ReviewerID: HhQ4ylDUrzg08HzVlYiNlg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
For a celebration the bosses left it up to me to choose a spot for lunch on them. Of course my counter part is up in age and SUPER picky! She only eats Mexican food! Because of this,  I've let her choose the place we eat to celebrate for the last 4 years!  Finally, I had ENOUGH of tacos and burritos and I suggested something I wanted to do. So, I took a chance on Sushi-gen . I mean geez, my first choice in 4 years best be good and I best not disappoint!  So I called ahead of time to make sure they served chicken teriyaki for Julie, they did (I know, I know...chicken?!?!).  They also informed me there are NO reservations available.  So we hopped the metro, walked a couple of blocks and found this delectable little place. It was a Friday, probably about 12:15 pm...LUNCH RUSH!!  There were several parties waiting to be seated, I asked the host how long the wait for 4 would be, he informed me 15 minutes. I said okay but was seriously doubting we'd get seated that fast.  Well, color me happy, it really was only a 15 minute wait!!  The restaurant was packed but the host and other staff was friendly (but not too friendly) and informative despite a slight language barrier.  When we were seated they gave us just the perfect amount of time to sit, get comfortable, wash our hands and make up our minds on drinks before taking our order. We admired the artwork and decor of the establishment and as soon as we knew it, another waiter was back with our drinks and ready for our food order. Very quick and impressive with it being during the lunch rush and all.  . . As everyone seems to agree, sashimi was off the hook! And thanks to everyones informative reviews, I even tried uni for the first time! Everyone was extremely satisfied with their meal, even picky Julie!! And also I forgot to mention my boss is vegetarian but he managed to find a veggie alternative and also liked the place. I had no regrets choosing sushi-gen and I have a feeling it will be my new craving : ). . If you like sushi, sashimi...try this place! Fresh, tasty, perfect temperature, presentation is great, staff is nice and not disgruntled. GO...GO NOW!
