ReviewID: idd0CQir-mXpDCJcVUWizg
ReviewerID: 8RHNYu8pWqlQcUhX3fS22A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ru San&#39;s
Category: Sushi Bars
(2.5 stars, for the record) I've learned to like (not love) Ru San's after a few visits and understanding where they stand in my Atlanta sushi arsenal. Don't ever go to Ru San's for a delicate, thoughtful, and luxurious dining experience. Ru San's is more like a sushi diner for quick and inexpensive sushi. . . Service is typically prompt, but borderline rushed. If it's a busy day, it is definitely rushed. I wouldn't be surprised if the server asked you to stand up, after seeing a few empty plates, so he could access your credit card. Don't go expecting anything less than prompt to rushed service. Timing and meal experience are foreign ideas to the service staff, regardless of how much you spend with a server. . . The food is hit or miss. I've had a very satisfying meal with good food, but I've also had a borderline gagging experience. Don't ever order anything high-end. I ordered Toro (fatty tuna) and it was horrible, unbelievably horrible, it was partially frozen and unbelievably fatty. I don't expect the world when I order Toro as it is the lower end of the often prized fatty tuna (otoro and chutoro being more highly priced), but the piece I ordered was DISGUSTING!!! Me, nor my guest, will ever forget the low quality of the meat, nor will we ever trust Ru San's for quality or luxury. . . Back to my intro. Nowadays, I only go to Ru San's at 11:00 a.m. for their buffet for a $9.99 buffet of mostly fresh fish and some of their premium rolls. At the beginning of the buffet (11:00 - 11:15 a.m.) my experiences have always been positive. After, I've left without having a bite of meat/fish (if you can picture a roughed up sushi bar with old fish sitting and spicy mayo). They also have decent fried rice, calamari, and other non sushi/sashimi dishes. . . If you treat Ru San's as an inexpensive place to get some tuna, salmon, or specialty rolls in a rush and at a very low cost it's great, you should be reasonably satisfied. If you try to compare it to higher quality sushi restaurants, you will be sorely disappointed or, possibly, utterly disgusted. For the record, Ru San's has never claimed to be fine dining; it really tries to be hip, fun, and inexpensive.
