ReviewID: IdeK8OIyX3TeSA3t8Y7NmA
ReviewerID: oiTfb6yARFWli9QCHW2uAQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
The wait is excruciating, but worth it.  What's the big deal about this place?  It's simply the beef, nothing else.  There's pretty much only 2 choices for your Shabu-Shabu.  You can get either 10 pcs. or 15 pcs., which you  would indicate next to your name on the waiting list.  You can also get the beef extra lean or w/ fat/regular.  The beef is very tender and if you don't overcook it, it'll melt in your mouth.  By the time you are seated, your pot of water is already boiling, ready for you to start cooking.  It's an "eat and go" place.  You will not want to sit and chat while eating slow because there are so many people waiting that you feel the pressure to free up your seat for the next party.  They will also let you know that it's about time to get moving when they give you the check mid-way through your meal.   If you still don't get the message, once you finish cooking all your veggies and beef, but while still working on it, they will move your pot aside and start boiling a fresh pot of water on your boiler for the next person.  This is kind of funny to me.  What a way to put the pressure on.  They are telling you, "your time's up, next!". . Be prepared to wait at least an hour.  Be sure you are around when the old man calls your name, otherwise you are crossed off the waiting list!. . P.S.- Dress light to come here.  No air con, only fans.  Oh, and surprised that it's an "A" rating!  (you can smell bathroom odor when you pass the kitchen in the back).. . ***EDITED 09/12/07***. . Tonight we decided to eat here again.  Unfortunately, I was so disappointed!  Somehow the meat was much more tougher than usual.  The cut seems to be thicker (not necessarily a good thing when it comes to shabu shabu) and rough.  Don't know what happened here with the consistency and the quality of the meat.  I also noticed there were much less people on the waiting list and it was at dinner time!  We waited only about 20 minutes.  Is there something I don't know?  What happened.  I think I will stick to Ten Shabu in West Covina from now on.  So disappointed.  Minus 2 stars from before!
