ReviewID: idG2Wee5I4vwFMF9fhuUEQ
ReviewerID: Pnqwg10bpCo3ApShjkoa3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Veggie Grill
Category: Vegetarian
5 stars is not easily earned by me.  But Veggie Grill, I love you.  You make being vegan easy and you win over the hearts of many carnivores.. . This was my 3rd visit to Veggie Grill, but my first visit to this location.  I went today because they were having a promotion for Earth Day for first time Veggie Grill patrons to have a comped entree when accompanied by a Veggie Grill veteran patron.  Who really cares if you're really a Veggie Grill virgin or not... just say that you are so you can get free food!. . What was even better was that not only did the cashier comp my friend's entree, but she actually comped the side he ordered with it too!  SCORE!  And even better, she comped the more expensive meal of the two!  DOUBLE SCORE!  My friend and I split the bill and it came out to $8/person for an entree, side, and drink (as opposed to about $15/person without promotion).  My friend and I were here for lunch on a Thursday afternoon and the place was packed!  (most likely because of the Earth Day promotion).  We ended up sitting outside, but luckily they had the heat lamps on since it was a bit gloomy and chilly outside.. . Today, I got the Bayou chicken sandwich with a side of steamed kale and my friend the Papa's Portobello with a side of sweetheart fries (aka sweet potato fries).  The Bayou chicken was deeee-lish!  Their soy chicken is good, not dry, and has great texture... blacken it with cajun spices and you've got a great kick of flavor in that vegan sandwich!  The steamed kale was okay... I do prefer the fries, but I was trying to be somewhat healthy with my choices.  The side of kale isn't anything fantastic, in my humble opinion, but it's something refreshing if you don't want fried foods.  It's not overly cooked and soggy, but still has some nice body to it, drizzled with some dressing.. . The portobello sandwich, as reported by my friend, had an interesting texture and I quote, "does not make me miss meat at all."  The sweetheart fries are never disappointing.  Always with the perfect amount of crisp and that side of their chipotle ranch sauce is amazing!  AMA-ZA-ZING!. . Today I tried out their Hawaiian Tea, sampled a sip... which was okay.. a bit bland.  Hey, only 30 calories per serving.  But their peach iced tea was even better... lightly sweetened and only 10 calories per serving.  I decided to make an Arnold Palmer with the peach iced tea and regular lemonade... mmMMmm.. . In the past visits, I've had their Sante Fe Crispy Chicken sandwich which still remains to be my favorite thus far.  Anything deep fried always tastes good!  I've also had their Chipotle BBQ burger, which was good and is one of my friend's favorite as well.. . Veggie Grill has definitely become one of my favorite American vegetarian restaurants, alongside with Native Foods.  Who knew that when I was signing up to be on their email list (so I could get a free meal birthday coupon), that they'd also send me emails on special promotions like on Earth Day?  They don't spam you at all so be sure you sign up!
