ReviewID: IdZ-LWghLOIdXz_oGWI2Ag
ReviewerID: CXLJPkPhqMUysBA9TiPPHw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
You know, I've always avoided Toast cuz:. . 1. There is always a long ass line. You would think it was New York City and they were giving out free herpes vaccinations... . http://wcbstv.com/loca.... . . 2. 99.99999% of the patrons look like L.A. wanna-be douche bags. By that I don't mean they want to look like douche bags, I mean they want to be the stereotypical fictional Angeleno personified by media and TV shows, but instead bare a closer resemblance to Summer's Eve.. .  Heck, that's why they eat at Toast, one of the trendiest cafés in town, every afternoon with their Jackie O sunglasses and tattered high-end vintage ensembles that cost only 2 of my car. Yup, it's to be seen by the masses pushing a salad around a plate 10 minutes before they puke up that one dandelion leaf meant for their chihuahua hiding under the table that they accidentally consumed while attempting to kiss Tinkerbell on her cute little inbred puppy mouth. I mean, pretty much the sole reason they have a dog is because no one else will listen to their incessant talk on who has a great face and what big name they met yesterday, and Tinkerbell gets walks, food and treats and even though she's aware of her master's douchery, she knows when she's got a good thing going. So, I guess Tinkerbell is a bit of a whore, but can you blame her? I can't. Not with her pricing.. . So, once inside Toast I am transported to Disneyland, only dirty and without rides. It was as hot as... well, me. So, as you can imagine, it was scorching! I even broke a sweat, but you see, the point to all of this is:. . If you can make it through the asshats and douches you will be pleasantly surprised.The food is really good, and no, it's not hype. Trust me, I was all prepared to bicthify, but damn, my falafel was to live, yup, live for! Mmmmmmm. Oh, and I got to pretty much share my tiny spot with 74.2 dogs all of which would comfortably fit in a Louis Vuitton Handbag.
