ReviewID: iENqWxLWGyixy9Pj8Tgb0Q
ReviewerID: MOZNSqLAo8TfhCi5x8iLzg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
Seriously...310 reviews and will my voice even be heard? . . Let me see.. . I am surprised that I didn't review this place. Given that I have visited Palm Thai occasionally for the last 3 years. Was introduced by a friend who insists on calling this place 'The Thai Elvis Restaurant". . .  It's decent Thai food and one reason we like visiting this place is the huge dining hall. Visit on a weekend and you will know what I mean. The exuberance of diners talking about their adventures, the cling/clang of porcelain bowls and utensils, the fire-burning under the Tom Yum soup. Here you witness a cluster of  Thai food lovers from all over town. . . Just yesterday we revisited the restaurant. . . Food is a bit on the saltier side but that's ok. What's more disappointing is they started serving Chicken white meat only. No more dark meat. I "pulled" one of supervisors to our table and asked...she said "Yep, we started that almost 7 months ago". And why? "Cos more customers were asking for white meat". . . "Curry tastes better with dark meat!" I protested. . . She lamented and said "I know!".. . And now all the curry dishes now taste rather blend simply because breast meat itself is utterly flavor-soaking resilient. No matter of you slice it, cook it, season it, it's just plain dry and tasteless. Too bad that in a bowl of Panang curry, all I can taste now is the gravy and then the cardboard chicken. . . So what's with this deal about asking for white meat? Health reasons? Premium meat? It may work for artsy fartsy Gordon Ramsey's dishes but not here. Curry Chicken has to be prepared with dark meat. . . If health is a concern, let me tell you all white-meat eaters out there: exercise more. . . Eat all you want, just freaking exercise. You can have fried chicken 5 days a week. Just freaking exercise. That's the way it is and will be. . . If you want to eat and not exercise, don't ask for white meat. Ask for vegetarian salad drizzled with purified water. . . That being said not returning to Palm Thai anytime soon. We will miss you, Thai Elvis!
