ReviewID: iezeJhkYDAprwg8_4Ka4Lg
ReviewerID: ojm14lh_LrlO_-XXHbu7AQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Overland Café
Category: American (New)
This review is only based off of brunch and being slightly intoxicated, so it might be off by +/-1 star.. . I'll admit it, my friends and I can be considered borderline alki's, so when we heard that our friend lived 2 blocks away from a place that offers $5 all-you-can-drink-champagne for weekend brunch, we actually got up before noon-time for it.. . A few of my friends had been there before, so they requested the British-accent waitress who was more than delighted to serve us. I forget her name, so I'll call her Kate. . . Of course, the five of us ordered the $5 bubbly-deal to go with our breakfast. The champagne is a cheap one (what do you expect, right?) - probably in the $2.99 aisle at BevMo!, and it's a very dry one. So with that in mind, I figured the five of us would have to drink 8 bottles total to come out even. . . And the challenge began.. . I ordered the corned-beef hash with over-medium eggs. From what I remember, the hash was seasoned well, so thumbs up there.. . This is where I went from a 29" waist to maybe a 34". Kate didn't hesitate to bring us a couple of bottles to our table every time she walked by. I think my alcohol tolerance may be a little too high, because 8 bottles later, I was still very much sober, but felt like I was gonna burst. They don't call it bubbly for nothing, I guess. Andy was so full afterwards, he threw up what looked like a piece of bread surrounded by a foam champagne bath in the middle of the crosswalk. That shit was Nick Cannon hilarious. A dog must've licked it up soon afterwards because it was gone a few hours later. -True story. . . Challenge OVER.. . So in conclusion, their breakfast isn't bad at all, the waitress that served us was very friendly, and you shouldn't try to take advantage of their $5 champagne since you're more likely to feel like a hot-air balloon than feel any buzz at all... but that's just me.
