ReviewID: IFASuHG3PekSSunF_3Ic7w
ReviewerID: UVxY0iyPaqY7s4BSFtt-xA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Soowon Galbi KBBQ is the current "hot" KBBQ place in Los Angeles' K-Town. There are a lot to choose from, but this is the current Chi-Chi place people are flocking toward. . . And for good reason, as the decor is new and modern, they cook at your table with real wood charcoals, and they have a huge amount of meat selections, both raw and unflavered, and marinated. There is always a line now, especially on the weekends. . . 2 friends and I came here on a recent Saturday night, about 6:30. We waited about 15 - 20 minutes for a table. There is valet parking in a small lot, but we found the one stall that wasn't part of the valet system, so we saved a couple of bucks, with a nod from the Valet. Otherwise, parking can be a bit of an issue. Even on the street is a bit of a challenge on a busy Saturday.. . We ordered Pork Bellies (came out like 3 huge slabs of bacon, enough for Shaquille O'Neil to be satisfied) which were perhaps 70% fat. Too fatty for me, personally, and my freinds, who work out daily, didn;t really go for it. Also Galbi (aka Kalbi) which instead of the strips with small bones in it, this was a large bone with a rolled hunk of meat dangling from it. Also we had the Rib Eye, as I recall, unseasoned. These slabs of meat are large, and they throw them on the grill and scissor cut them after they start cooking.. . The banchan was great, tasty and a good selection. However, they served small korean won-ton type squares, which were hard to separate from each other, and we stuffed these with a piece of meat, sort of like a Korean Potsticker. I have wrapped the meat in lettuce at some KBBQ places, but never this way. It was good, but technically challenging even for the best chopstick experts!. . It gets pretty smoky in here, so I wouldn't recommend it on the first date, as she will probably not appreciate the BBQ perfume afterwards in her hair and clothes! The service was spotty, as they were super busy, and forgeting us, and it took several tries to get more wonton wrappers, water, etc. The sweet Mama-san doesn't speak much English, so we had to try and flag down the next generation for help. We ordered rice at the beginning, for example, and got it at the very end of our meal. . . They don;t have assigned tables per server, they simply roam up and down the aisles and help cook and serve wherever it is needed, so you may have 2 or 3 people helping you, which theoretically sounds good, but it lacked continuity and accountability, ergo, our less than stellar service. . . The bill was $72.50, and that is with just water to drink, no booze, sodas, desserts, or sides beyond the banchans. So a bit pricey, but if you love meat and smoke, this is the spark after dark!
