ReviewID: iFFJ2wjYHWEJnQEdndiFDA
ReviewerID: _xFrjg55612CA61OQ4PrdQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
I have a hard time handing over all five stars. I guess I think of five stars as "now that I know this place exists, I can't live without it" and want to reserve it for serious, serious food love. . . We were in the market for a cheap meal. We got there at five pm and there was a line of people on the sidewalk. You wait outside until a table opens, then an empolyee will come out and invite the next group in. I was starving, having saved myself all day, so the wait felt eternal but was probably 25 minutes. . . When seated, we realized there was no liquor or beer. Well, fine, even cheaper meal! We split a "1/2 guace with chips" as the appetizer and settled on sharing the Hollenback muchaca (shredded beef) burrito. . . The guac came first- good thing I resisted ordering the "full guac with chips", the 1/2 was huge! For $5.50, it was crazy good deal. It was also crazy good-tasting guacamole! The problem was the two of us could never finish it, even if we drowned our burrito in it. Not being able to finish an order of guac just felt wrong. I'm more accustomed to licking the little bowl than leaving any behind. . . We didn't really dent our huge guac mound before the burrito showed up. It was, as promised, enormous. Stewart divided into two very large burritos. We ordered sour cream to go on top and melted cheese, extra charges fyi. . . It wasn't as pretty as I expected it to be, and it tasted a litle different than I would have thought. The meat was very good- tender, juicy, flavorful. The red and green bell peppers on top were a very predominant flavor, along with a tangy tomatoey sauce with a zip. The Rice and Beans, which I had read were excellent, were sort of drowned out, couldn't really discern their taste. I sort of tried to order an extra side of each for this reason but the waitress looked at me like I was insane and warned me "Is very big! Burrito is very large!", but next time I would, even if I couldn't finish everything. . . The sour cream and guac did their thing on top and did it well. Over all, it tasted very good, in a comfort food kind of way, not in a "how did the genius chef achieve this?" kind of way. It was very tasty and a great price- our entire check with sodas, oversized guac, and tricked out burrito was 21 bucks. Even with the tip it was still slightly less than our Arclight movie tickets!. . And even splitting the massive burrito, I left STUFFED. They gave us a handful of double bubble and tootsie rolls (the long skinny kind, horay) which was perfect for the movie were going to. . . It was hike from Culver City, but I'll come back some day. I'd like to try some of the other dishes.. . Oh- when we left at 6 pm, the line was looooooooooooog, yikes.
