ReviewID: iFT7-sbeq8oyKoMKCJsYfw
ReviewerID: j-NVhdEo0DJJEuOe-zQ9rA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
one thing about living in ktown is ur close to all the "authentic" kbbq and tofu houses. and one good thing about the newlyweds living in ktown is they're a stone's throw away from manna.. lucky.. . picked up the newlyweds from LAX and one thing they missed the most was kbbq. so off we went after dropping off their 2 big luggages and a box and a carry on, make that 2, and another box?.. see, this would have been my first time here since they've been sooo busy with their wedding prep and all. now that that's over, they're finally freed up and well, they kinda got no choice since i picked them up.. . . got their around 11a on a weekday and there were only about 2-3 parties. i was expecting a crowd from all the rave reviews. but i guess they come out at night and the weekends. cool, less bbq smell for me.. . one good thing here is they let u order the meat u like unlike some other places where they make u order all the meats the first round. we got ourselves some short ribs, brisket and pork belly. while cooking, we also got to enjoy the banchan. they have by far the best kimchi i've tasted. i tried eating with the rice paper too and decided that was too much work and i was better off with a small bowl of rice instead. the meat was so good i had to pat myself in the back for not finishing my rice. self control, baby! i was determined to eat the meat! sooo much good food i tell ya! . . since there weren't that many people when we came by, the service was actually decent. there really wasn't that much to attend to anyway since we were cooking our own food. i do give them credit when our banchan was refilled in a timely manner.. . after we paid our bill and headed out, i noticed the empty parking spot uphill next to the resto. after stressing out parking on the street... i *hate* parking on the street.... there was parking??? oh, oh better yet, there was valet parking????? dammit, i must've been too hungry to notice that when we got in! . . this is one place i'd definitely consider going back and back and back..
