ReviewID: ig5RVYUrqDGpdcVQuz6OBw
ReviewerID: BsO5wbGRqoY-WZi8vzNv2Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
Oooo-weee, this little piggy is stuffed!!  . . I was so excited to eat here mainly because I love the name.  When we first walked in, I was surprised to see the fast food set up mixed in with the vintage diner look. Orders are placed at the counter, then you're given a number to place on your table.  Half of the indoor seating area is arranged with traditional fast food tables--booths around the walls, paired with tables and chairs.  The other half of the indoor area is "loungy," i.e., booth seating with low cocktail tables.  Hip, lounge music pipes through the speakers, while images of snowboarding and surfing display via Fuel TV on two flat screen TVs.  If I had to sum it up, I'd say imagine Mel's Diner meets Carl's Jr. mashed together with Wahoo's Fish Tacos, but with the sounds of Jason Bentley's coolest, "chill" play list.. . I felt like dirty, greedy swine because I wanted to try everything. My eyes got bigger as I placed my order: pastrami sandwich, chili cheese fries, fresh orange lemonade, and...oh! an ube shake.  Wow, they have cupcakes here too!  In fear of turning into the beginning of a Miyazaki movie, the first thing I did when I got back home was shower and floss and brush my grills.  At least if I fall into a full-fledged food comma and wake up as a flesh-toned, four-legged, curly-tailed animal rolling around in mud, my last human memory will be taking care of hygiene. . . The apple-smoked pastrami sandwich was good enough to come back for, but my pastrami heart still belongs to Johnny.  My friends enjoyed their burgers and expressed interest in returning for more; and the hubby was happy with his pulled-pork sandwich.  The ube (taro) shake was really good, but what won me over was the fresh orange lemonade.  I think it takes first place in my lemonade list.  It was refreshing, not tooth-ache sweet, and the perfect blend of orange and lemon.  When my straw hit the bottom of the cup and made that "last drop/on empty" gurgle, I turned around to look for the refill station of fountain drinks, but there was no such thing in sight.  That's when I knew they had me: I got comfortable in the diner setting, but mentally I thought I was at the kind of fast food joint where you can get up and refill your drink.  . . At the end of it all, I decided to forgo the cupcake.  I think the icing on the cake would have made my stomach squeal.
