ReviewID: ig_nTJ9PGx-3U99whWxWvw
ReviewerID: xgAMvZPwe28s3CbzxNShbA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Yard House
Category: Gluten-Free
I work downtown and have a buddy who lives downtown. Over the summer The Yard House became a bit of a regular spot to meet up but after our experience on 10.08.09 I really doubt either of us will ever be back. . . We met up at The Yard House with the intention having dinner and catching the Nebraska game. We walked in we saw the game was playing on a few TVs with the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim on all the others. Fair enough but I really can't understand why someone would be rooting for the Angels when Los Doyers are just a couple miles up the street.. . The hostess asked us were we'd like to sit and we said anywhere was fine as long as we could watch the Nebraska game which should be a perfectly reasonable request at any sports bar. . . About 10 minutes later we're taken to a table way out in the weeds that was surrounded by the Angels game.  Immediately we asked if one of the TVs could be switched to the Nebraska game and the hostess said they could as long as it was OK with the people around us. . . 15 minutes and two more requests later, a TV was finally switched over to Nebraska game and of course it was a TV that only one of us could see. We're friends and all but we're really not into sitting in each other's laps. . . By this point we were frustrated enough to walk out but our appetizers  howed up just in the nick of time. I think the nachos were decent but we busy shoveling down our food to actually pause for a moment and taste anything because we couldn't leave The Yard House soon enough. . . As if we needed any more of a sign to leave, as we were settling up the check, our one little TV was abruptly switched over the Kings game. . . Good thing my buddy lives just a few blocks down the street so we were able to finish watching the game on his No-Def TV.. . Sorry Yard House, but you definitely came up short. It's pretty sad that sitting on a lumpy futon and not having dinner turned out to be the better option.
