ReviewID: IhhMaOmZs8VdcjIaZLmwdg
ReviewerID: s87zpgyLdo24Sy7by9ezRA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Cooper 35 Asian Pub
Category: Bars
I wrote a review for Gray's Papaya where I mentioned that everyone should hit up Gray's after getting hammered from a bar. That bar is the ridiculously lame pub called Asian Pub. Let's talk about this shithole of a place.. . Name: Asian Pub. Oh, I get it. How bout' I open a black owned pub and called it "Black Joint". . . Food: Fucktardedly terrible.. I first noticed the selections of shitty foods they offered. I have a feeling that the owner was involved in a massive accident that lead him to have brain damage. Thus explaining the indecisive set of bizarre and uncertain types of dishes such as Thai-flavored shrimp dish with kim-chi, meat gyoza (this was that ling-ling brand purchased from a store) with arm pit sauce, or even the cube of tofu served with irrelevant sauce.. . Every dish I ordered was completely untrue to the origin of the country. This wasn't fusion, this wasn't Asian, this was just a careless attempt to make money by offering ultra-cheap dishes to a crowd where their taste buds are probably too numb from gettin' crunk!. . Name of dish: Hawaiian coconut shrimp. What I saw: Tiny little shrimps battered and fried but served in a droopy sauce that dismisses the purpose of serving fried shrimps? . . Name of dish: Some stupid shrimp dish with sweet Thai sauce and kimchi. . What I thought: You're an asshole chef.. . Name of dish: Negimaki. What I tasted: Thin layer of grade-f military meat that needed to be re-used so that a pub in NY could afford to serve this delicate Japanese dish for $6 bucks.. What I thought: Someone call Homeland, this is biological warfare.. . Name of dish: Fried "No way anyone could fuck this dish up" tofu. Yep. They fucked it up. The presentation was laughable. Some of them were cubes, others were pyramids, served with garlic, they ass-raped this Taiwanese-style dish I love. Oh, and this wasn't stinky tofu either, but it came with a stink. How so? They served us rotten tofu! Oh, and the piece of shit sauce was something they thought it was "cool" I guess? Have a 7 year old child locked in a basement with condiments to play with. . What I thought: Fuck you.. . So this place if definitely for cheap drinks. If you want food, forget about it. If you want quality drinks, again, forget about it. If you just want booze and you wanna order all types of cocktails, no need since all selections here taste like gin. Even my plain coke tasted like booze. I guess they forgot to wash my cup from a previous order?. . Bottom-line: I hate you Asian Pub you culinary racist!. . I recommend: . Licking a hobo's left nut, since it'll have more flavor than this place.. . PS.. . If you're writing a review of this place, you'll notice a picture of one of their dish. How awesome not to have a pic of a real dish, but instead it's fucking edamame. Something that doesn't require cooking, but they'd prolly fuck it up regardless.
