ReviewID: ihTjbGMOxr6KJSoH0dUfVw
ReviewerID: euHTJJlKXlpwffMEPy3eAg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Market
Category: American (New)
My fellow foodies, please please please be warned. This place was a great disappointment. My husband and I live nearby and have been waiting to try this place since we saw it under construction several months ago. We went last nite and will never be back. Pls, read on and learn from my misery. :) . . We waited almost 10 mins for the server to come over, at which time I had to request a wine list. The server then went table to table looking for said list. Once she brought me one, she walked away and disappeared for another five minutes. . . Things got worse when our drinks and appetizer arrived. Note, the drinks were fairly strong (only saving grace of the entire evening), though they should be for $12 a pop. We ordered the nachos and they were made w/ Tostitos, even though the menu describes them as "fried corn chips" (i.e., makes them sound homemade)! In fact, they were made w/ the chips from the bottom of the bag! Little crumbly pathetic chips from a bag. The cheese on top wasn't even melted. To top it off, the "nachos" (I use that term loosely) were served on this crazy contraption that had like three levels, and the little dishes w/ salsa, sour cream and guacamole were held to this stupid thing w/ SCOTCH TAPE. Guac was from a can as well. . . OK so then my husband goes to the bathroom and they have a ROLL OF TOILET PAPER sitting next to the sink with which to dry your hands after washing. GROSS! . . Then our entrees come. My salad was pathetic, and it was obvious that from the way the carrots and radishes were sliced that the base of the salad was from a bag. My husband's burger (he ordered it Medium, but not bloody) looked like a pathetic little shriveled hockey puck. He sent it back, and the second time around it only looked slightly less charred. He said it was "the kind of burger that makes you never want to eat a burger again." What a bummer. The fries he got were good, I'll give you that. . . So $90 later we were feeling pretty disgruntled after signing the bill. My husband decided he should at least let the manager know about our horrible experience. (We weren't looking for any concessions.) He talked to the manager (looked about 25 yrs old and my hub interrupted him texting his friends) ... the manager just stared at him. Didn't even say "sorry buddy" or "take a leap." Nothing. . . I should also mention that you cannot even hear yourself think in this place. The acoustics are horrible. We were there on a Tues nite. Can't imagine how loud it must get on the weekends .... . . Hopefully I've saved at least one of you from trying this joke of a bar/restaurant. There are too many other good restaurants to try in this fabulous city!!!
