ReviewID: II_l7zYdMevzk0PFXN3T4g
ReviewerID: TreApN-iV9Bf8epU-TNtXw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
Ah, Canter's. I've been going to this deli for over 10 years and I keep coming back for several things: 1. their pastrami reuben sandwich, 2. their salads, and 3. they're open 24 hours. . . 1. The reuben comes piled high (though not as high as it used to be) with soft, juicy, flavorful pastrami, Swiss (I think) cheese and loads of sauerkraut, sandwiched between some tasty grilled rye bread. To this day I have never found another reuben sandwich that tops Canter's. It comes with potato chips and if you want fries (trust me, you're gonna want the fries) it's a dollar more. I do love it but my friends and I have it less often these days because they've raised their prices and it's hard to justify spending $16 (incl. tax and tip) on one sandwich.. . 2. Their salads are only slightly less expensive but I give them a thumbs up for their freshness and size. I usually order the chopped salad and by the time I'm through I'm pretty stuffed.. . 3. Although there are quite a few 24-hour places in L.A., Canter's is one of my favorites because they never seem to care how long we stay. Once a friend and I rolled in around 2am and didn't leave til after 6, and they never once said anything to us. Probably because the restaurant was pretty empty, but it's nice to know there's somewhere we can go if we're not ready to go home yet.. . People complain about the service but honestly, I've never had a bad experience there. Some of the older waitresses are gruff but it's never to the point where it's unpleasant to me. I think they just have a reputation to maintain, so what's the harm?. . The Kibbitz Room bar next door is divey and the drinks are the cheapest I've ever had. But sometimes if they have a band playing it's hard to hear your mates when you're sitting in the next room over having dinner. So you might want to request a table in the first room.. . Rodney Bingenheimer has a regular booth here, and you never know who you might see. My favorite celebrity sighting here was ELVIRA!
