ReviewID: IICNbWpJH5YmEnpmK4gBkw
ReviewerID: Qc1haLfcYvouQdC06qYl5A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I have only graced Bottega Louie with my presence twice but both times were sensational.  My first time there, I was in awe of the interior design - so unlike anything I've seen in LA!  Very high ceilings, clean white walls, open floor plan. Bottega Louie makes an impact.. . When you walk in, you're greeted by a bakery/dessert counter selling croissants,  macarons in pretty pastels and other assorted European pastries.  The deli counter is next with a huge selection of gourmet salads and hot entrees.  The "groceries" section reminds me of Dean &amp; Deluca but on a smaller scale. I'm a sucker for packaging and the mere sight of gourmet pasta and sauces in simple jars lined on the shelves got me giddy with daydreams of cooking grand meals in a kitchen bathed in sunlight. Nevermind that I have the cooking skills of a turnip. Bottega Louie makes you DREAM.. . Let's get on to the best part: the FOOD.  My friend and I went for brunch and I ordered the Caprese Frittata with a side of applewood smoked bacon. The portions are large - I was pleasantly surprised with the size of the frittata and couldn't even finish it. The ingredients were fresh - you can smell the fresh basil right away.  The bacon was hearty. I'm a fan of thin, crispy bacon but there are times when you just want to bite into REAL meat; thick and flavorful.  Their bacon was no joke.. . The second time I went, I ordered the steak and eggs.  A slab of NY steak with 3 fried eggs, butter lettuce salad and roasted potatos with onions.  I also got the arugula salad. This meal was amazing.  I love arugula, you can't go wrong with it.  It's a very simple salad with just red onions, parmesan, lemon juice, olive oil and cracked pepper.  I ordered my steak medium rare and was so glad they got it right! Most places tend to overcook their steak.. . All in all, I'd go back to Bottega Louie in a heart beat.. . Helpful tips:. . 1) Parking is a bitch. There are a lot of paid lots in the area but if its Sunday and you want to score a free parking meter, expect to drive around for at least 10 minutes.  . . 2) Unless you're with a large group, it isn't hard to get a table since the restaurant is huge.. . 3) Order the pizza.  It's an open kitchen so you can watch them make your pizza from scratch.. . 4) Service is great; No complaints here. They're friendly, fast and the atmosphere is low-key.  Shannon Doherty was seated in a corner and no one bothered her throughout her brunch.. . 5) Are the waiters hot? YES. Great eye candy and a throw-back to historic Hollywood when waiters were dressed to the nines and took service seriously.. . 6) Check out their restrooms. I know that sounds weird but their bathrooms are elegantly designed with gold fixtures throughout.  I never felt more important in a restroom!
