ReviewID: iiEOxYv8eC_KFyG4FNaafA
ReviewerID: IL4O2SIcumu1un5UkgB3FQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
There is so much hype these days surrounding the Kogi BBQ truck.  Apparently you can find out where the truck is headed through Twitter, or on their website.  There is now a cult following surrounding this roach coach, with people boasting that they waited over an hour to get some of their tacos and burritos, stuffed with korean bbq meats instead of the normal mexican style meats.  Recently, they just opened a brick and mortar location as part of the Alibi Room, out here in Culver City.  The same tacos, burritos, and sliders that are featured on their trucks are also featured on the menu here, with a bit of a slight price increase.  Anyways, two of my friends and I came here on a Wednesday night, wanting to try out what these tacos were all about, but for sure not willing to wait very long for some tacos.. . Well, Alibi was definitely pretty busy for a Wednesday night.  It was apparant that none of the people here were regulars- they were all here to try out the food from the Kogi menu, and so thus it was probably more of an Asian biased crowd tonight.  My friends, Sam and Carol, and I promptly went to the bar and sat down, ordering a selection of their Korean short rib tacos, their Spicy Pork tacos, their short rib sliders and also their spicy pork sliders.  We also ordered the "Korean spiced" french fries.  At the cart, the prices for tacos are apparantly $2 each, while at the sit down location, it is $7 for 3, so slightly pricier, but probably worth it if you don't wanna wait on line.. . Lets start with the tacos, which is their signature dish.  The tacos come in sets of 3 at Alibi, all of them with your choice of meat, some lettuce, and some spiced cabbage... not quite kim chi as it is still fresh and crunchy.  The initial bite into the taco definitely brings about a set of mixed flavors that is weird- you taste the typical flavor of the corn tortillas, but then it is contrasted by the flavor of korean kalbi.  It is definitely a bit odd to taste these two flavors together, but it definitely works out, as the meat is well flavored, and the corn tortillas are steamed to a nice texture.  My friends and I all thought that the spicy pork was much more flavorful than the kalbi, and would definitely recommend that, as it provided a bit more of a spicy and distinct korean flavor.  Overall, their tacos are for sure the best thing on the menu after trying almost half of their menu last night.. . The next dish we had were the sliders.  The meat and veggies inside the sliders were exactly the same as that of a taco, except it is now sandwiched between two pieces of bread.  Overall, the sliders were dissapointing.  Because there is so much more bread, you would expect that they would put more meat in there, but they didn't.  There is the same amount of meat in each slider as there is in one taco, and so the flavor of the meat is completely gone by the time you bite into the slider.  Also, in terms of value, the 2 sliders cost the same amount as the 3 tacos, so you should definitely get the tacos.  Sliders are something I will not get again here.. . Don't get the fries.  5 dollars for fries that were not that great- there is no point in getting these.  You are better off getting more tacos! (We still ate them though.). . So what's the final verdict?  Well, the tacos were good, but not something that I found to be that impressive, especially given the fact that there is now a cult following for these tacos.  They are definitely something different- I've never had Korean meats inside a corn tortilla before, but despite the unique blend of two flavors, I would still rather eat at a Mexican taco truck.  There isn't much about the taco that would give me a reason to want to wait forever for them, plus the cost of the tacos are significantly more than those of other Mexican taco trucks.  Most of the Mexican taco trucks sell tacos from $1 to $1.50, which is more reasonable for something sold out of a truck.  I think that if these tacos were around $1.25, I would find them to be more favorable.  For now, I probably won't go back unless a friend of mine wants to confirm that they just don't live up to the hype :)
