ReviewID: IIwipTYRv-ZbPjQpE2nMpA
ReviewerID: NBJVYt7sO-2WDg3bPwBT0Q
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
This is it.  I'm TOTALLY over Kogi.. . Not that their food tastes like crap, but I've just come to realize that their egos have gotten way too big and in a lot of ways are unprofessional.. . A few weeks ago, they were making an appearance in San Gabriel, so I went with a fellow Yelper (who I think shall remain unnamed) who lives near by and, although it was not her first time, still wanted to go check it out and I told her I'd go with her.  It was not my first time either.. . So the truck was supposed to be at that location from 10:30-1.  . . - 10:15 PM: we show up and there's probably already about 40-50 people in line.  No worries.  . - 10:30 PM:  no truck and the line has probably doubled.  . - 10:45 PM:  no truck and the line has gotten a little bigger.. - 10:55 PM: I call 2 people who could possibly be in front of a computer to ask them if they see any location updates on Twitter to no avail.. - 11:10 PM: Off in the distance, we finally see the truck roll up with a long line of cars in tow.. - 11:12 PM: The truck spends about 10-15 minutes attempting to park.. - 11:25-11:30: Panel finally opens up and the first orders are taken.. - 11:40 PM: A San Gabriel PD officer rolls up and after about 10 minutes of discussion (and a halt in ordering), tells everybody the truck cannot be legally parked on the street without a permit.  He was however nice enough to announce a location around the corner on Valley Blvd that was technically County territory and thus could park there.. - 12:00 AM: Truck arrives at new location and proceeds to take another 5-10 minutes to park.  By this time, there is NO organization to the line and it has now become one big clusterf*ck.. - 12:10 AM: By this time I realize just how unprofessional and disorganized this all is.  Everybody was going absolutely nuts for food that is just ok at best.  I start intentionally badmouthing about it loud enough for the people around me to hear.  And most of them were all either in high school or college.  Like they know any better.. 12:35 AM: We finally order and wait about 5-6 minutes for our food.  We go back to her car where I grudgingly ate my kimchi quesadilla and most of my short rib burrito simply because I was hungry.. . When I got home (past 1 AM mind you), I tweeted a quick thing about it on Twitter and the next day when I woke up, I had received a direct message from Alice at Kogi and she left her email address.  I actually waited a couple of days to cool down some more before writing a detailed email describing the events of that night, my thoughts, and basically told her it all came down to a lack of researching their location and lack of attention to detail.  Proper location research could have easily avoided the 40 minute delay and the hassle of having to close up and move.. . Her response did not help at all or anything she said did not do anything to make me sympathize for them.  Ok, so I did concede on the traffic thing, because let's face it, this is LA we live in and traffic at most times can be quite hectic.  But nothing else she said did anything to change my mind.  In fact, I even elaborated my suggestions, going off her attempted rebuttal.. . One of her excuses she was trying to make was that Chef Roy was out of town that week and things at the company had been chaotic.  I'm sorry, but the owner of the company being out of town should have NO bearing on how smoothly your business is run.  It's not his job to babysit you 24/7.  That right there told me their laziness and that they slack off when he's not around.  Totally unprofessional.. . I'll admit, writing this review has gotten me worked up a little, so I will stop here.  Now I understand why certain individuals refuse to deal with them.. . I'd give -10 stars if I could. *SIGH*
