ReviewID: IJ2pvgDIEdp30B7lxvhKMg
ReviewerID: kRLkHf0lJWNOoJrxA5HA3A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hand in Hand
Category: Pubs
I have to say that my first impression of Hand in Hand was not good. Not at all. In the words of Judy the manager - It was all popped collar frat boys and "OMG! It's Britney, Ashley and Megan!" girls.. . So I decided to give H in H and Justin J. (promote! promote!) a second chance and check out his Sunday promo of $1 dollar fish tacos and $1 dollar beers. . Maybe it was the weather that kept people from coming out because the crowd never seem to appear. Or maybe Justin missed the boat in the fact that almost EVERYBODY sells PBR for a buck and $1 dollar fish tacos aren't to hard to come by in this town. Either way, the patio was quiet and so went for the inside. This was fine for Laura and me since we both were nursing a serious hang over and could use a little peace and quiet.. We sat at a small side table off to our selves and were graciously greeted by our waitress Farah who was pretty nice and attentive. . . Like I said, we came for the $1 dollar fish tacos and after drinking 4 gallons of Sweet Water the night before, there was no way we were drinking beer - so we settled on a very spicy and tasty Bloody Mary. Perfect-o! It was perfect in every way to take away that "I'm never drinking beer again" feeling while adding that slight shampoo effect.. . Back to the fish taco's..........I swear I fished and fished until I could fish no more looking for the meat in this thing. Then, at the bottom of a pile of shredded lettuce and some green runny sauce I think I found a sliver of fish. Well, that's what I am telling myself at this point. But yeah, long on garden, short on flipper. The fried mushrooms only added insult to injury when I tore in to these deep fried batter dipped fungi. . . All was not lost! . We did however really, really, REALLY enjoy the British blue cheese chips. They were so light and crispy and perfectly topped with bacon and blue cheese that just melted in your mouth. Next time I will order 2 plates of these tasty little munchies. . . So again I am some what disappointed in Justin J and his shameless promos but I can't fault him for this particular mishap. I just need to learn to never trust anything he promotes. In all fairness, I did ask my waitress for JJ just so I could say hi, but at last......she knew of no Justin so being the nice person she is, Farah sends out Judy, the manager to say hi. Both Judy and Farah are really cool peeps which I will say added the 3rd star to this review. . The crazy thing is I think I read some where that Justin said he will be on the patio wearing a pink boa and paten leather white shoes?!?!? I would have loved to seen that! . But then again, he would have had to BEEN there to do so.
