ReviewID: IJzu6SVqzf_Q0pBANW0dEg
ReviewerID: dVLpmVuxREIzDc0TIiKmfw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
We've been meaning to go to Spring for years and I can't, for the life of me, remember why we put it off.  We had a great dinner and a wonderful time.. . We were momentarily tempted by the Tasting Menu-- a very reasonable $65 for 5 courses.  Since there was no printed menu to accompany it, we half-hoped it was a Thyme Cafe-style Tasting, ie. pick your own from the ala carte menu.  Even more intriguing, the Tasting is a chef's surprise.  The chef will put together a 5 course tasting based on his whims, your strong preferences and any other reasonable extenuating circumstances.  Looking at the menu, however, we just couldn't turn down the opportunity to try as many different things as possible, so we created our own multi-course Tasting.. . First course: Cold apps.  The Hamachi sashimi-- each slice served atop a thin tile of perfectly pink watermelon and the Hamachi tartare, a special.  We hadn't intended to double up on Hamachi, but the preparations were so different, it didn't seem redundant at all.. . Second course:  Warm apps.  Smoked eel with pork belly and a perennial Spring appetizer, the Maine Scallop and Yukon gold potato "ravioli".  I'm not quite sure why this was dubbed ravioli, but it was terribly delicious and made us regret not ordering Shawn McClain's signature Maine Scallops and Oxtail entree.  I was also intrigued by the Lemongrass and Coconut Soup (highly recommended by the server), but, as comfortable as it was in the dining room, it was 90 degrees outside and I just couldn't do it.. . Main course.  Cod with Black Beans and Skatewing with roasted cauliflower.  I've requested a copy of the menu from Spring, because unfortunately, my detailed memory of this part of the meal was wiped clean by the very enjoyable Saumur rose  and bottle of Albariño we had with the meal.  I'll update when my memory is jogged, but in a nutshell, everything was lovely.  My skate was sauteed in the traditional manner, served atop its accompaniments.  The sauce was below the skate and rather salty on its own, however.  Once I toppled the presentation tower and swirled the components together a bit, the flavors cohered much better.. . Dessert: Quinoa poundcake with apricot compote and ginger ice cream.  Who knew you could make poundcake out of quinoa?  It was delicious.  We enjoyed this with the recommended wine, a late harvest Verdelho from Australia.. . There was Verdelho left in our glasses when the food-runner brought our tiny sake cups of "chocolate soup" (served without explanation along with warm towels in a bamboo box).  The chocolate and wine together was so splendid that when we gushed about it to our server, he brought us another round and explained that it was infused with tarragon-- an herb I could taste once pointed out to me, but had tasted hazelnutty with the wine.. . The service was excellent-- our server was affable and read us perfectly, giving us a wealth of information, suggestions and even recommendations for an after-dinner drink location nearby.  . . All the extra touches (the chocolate soup, the warm towels, the way the hostess went to the front door and opened it for us on our way out) went a long way toward making a nice evening out more memorable.  The space itself is lovely, though I can imagine that it might get loud if busy.. . I do not hesitate to recommend Spring.. . (Oh, and because I like to review these things, the bathroom was pretty swank, but really dimly lit and the handsoap was terrible, food service industry stuff.)
