ReviewID: IMbAI6kq08jJPcmH22EOFg
ReviewerID: Dg1cJ224IfS2YwuJV5d5wQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
I went back to din tai fung because i had a friend visiting LA who was dying to go.. she's taiwanese and she regularly goes to the din tai fung in taipei. Lets just say she also knows exactly what to order!. . We got the Shanghai chicken rice cake ($7.50), house chicken soup ($6.25), vegetable and pork wantons with spicy sauce ($7.00), juicy pork dumplings ($7.25) and for dessert we got the sweet eight flavor rice ($3.75). . . The rice cakes were not overpowered by saltiness, good portions of chicken and vegetables also. The noodles were thick and there were also rice cakes stir fried into them. But definately not the best. My friends got the house chicken soup which was REALLY good. It came with bits of steamed chicken with the bones still intact. Each bowl is really made for 1 person. We also got a few servings of the juicy pork dumplings but asked the waitor to bring them to us only when we finished the ones before... because these dumplings do NOT taste good cold!!! Just becareful with the first bite because the soup inside is PIPING HOT! I think everybody burns thier mouth at least once! My favorite was the wontons with the spicy sauce. I would say only 6 or 7 wontons came out for this order but each one was well worth it! The spicy peppper sauce that they come in is really really good. Definately everyone's favorite in the table. For dessert we got the 8 flavor rice. Supposedly this is much better in Taipei.. but I thought it was really good nonetheless! Its sweet sticky rice with red bean infused in the middle. Also there are some pieces of chestnuts(??) implanted throughout the rice. It came out HOT and fresh. . . I think din tai fung stands out because of the hot and freshness of thier food. Also, you  never leave feeling bloated from the saltiness or weighed down by the heaviness of the food... and MAN, are they popular!! We went at 7pm on a saturday night and it was really packed. Waited at least 30 min for our table. They give you an order form so you can get started. I also noticed people ordering the green beans. I must try it next time!
