ReviewID: iN9sPSzTmVUeq_48XPAMow
ReviewerID: YeS72RYFOUITiMVnFuG22A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cafe Selmarie
Category: American (Traditional)
So. I keep thinking about reviewing Selmarie. But I don't. Because I work there. And I know from the talk threads about how people feel about reviewing your workplace. So I will make it very clear.. . I WORK HERE. I AM BIASED.. . I also hesitate because one of my managers (Hi, Anne!) reads Yelp on a fairly regular basis. We currently have a list of all our good reviews hanging in the front window. Say nice things, and you could be up there too.. . But in all seriousness. I really, really like Selmarie. I eat here every day. Not necessarily because I want to, but because it's there, and I kind of have to. I'll give you a rundown of items as they come to me. Sorry in advance for the length and the vegetarian slant.. . Menu:. *Veggie Chili: excellent.. *Salads: good in general. The pear salad is only served as a special. It's my favorite. Order it. But leave me one.. *Sweet Potato Fries: hands down favorite thing on the menu. I love sweet potatoes. I love chipotle dip.. *Grilled Cheese: Jaime makes the best. Get multigrain bread, and add tomatoes and avocado. Yum.. *Soups: delicious and often vegetarian. My favorites include: butternut squash, pumpkin, sweet potato, tomato bisque (ask for croutons), tomato florentine. There's a lot of non vegetarian ones that I haven't tried, but I'm sure they're good too. *Mac &amp; Cheese: tasty. Many different cheeses. This ain't blue box.. *Quiche: goodness. Get the Italian veggie with sundried tomatoes. But again, save me some.. *Breakfast Burrito: second favorite thing on the menu. I wish I worked more mornings so I could eat this more often.. *Breakfast Potatoes: come with burrito. Add to the deliciousness.. *French Toast: get the one with the berries. It was the most amazing french toast I've ever had. Honestly.. . Desserts (I work at the counter, and if you ask, I will be honest, but here I'll just list my favorites, in no particular order):. *Sacher Torte (say it with me: soccer): I explain what this is about 80 times a day. But it's still my favorite.. *Raspberry Marzipan Torte: mmm, marzipan.. *Tiramisu: so, so, so good.. *Tres Leches: dripping with condensed milk and sweetness.. *Strawberry Roulade (say it with me: roo-laud): sweet and light and fruity.. *Mixed Fruit Tart/Raspberry Custard Tart/Raspberry Chocolate Tart: I'm a fruit addict. All fresh. All delicious. The Rasp. Chocolate is sinful.. *Morning Bun: the lemon glaze gets me every time.. *Chocolate Mousse Torte/Raspberry Bavarian Torte: the first time I had these, I wasn't too thrilled. Recently I tried them again, and have honestly been converted. Both are amazing.. *Spanish Almond Torte: mmm, more marzipan, and apricot preserves.. . Cookies (all excellent, again, my favorites):. *Kolachkys, Apricot Circles, Raspberry Hearts, Raspberry Almond Tartlets, Florentines, Wedding Cakes, Rugelah, Oatmeal Chocolate Almond Coconut, Sugar Cookies.. . So, yeah. It's ALL good. You really can't go wrong. I, of course, get sick of it all. That's only because I look at it/have it every day. But you don't work there, so you won't.. . Edit: I guess there's some question as to Selmarie's reservation policy. We *DO* take reservations. But *only* for parties of 6 or more. Except for weekends, you probably won't need one anyway. If you are desperate for something Selmarie, and don't have 6 people, call ahead when you're on your way. We will kindly put you on the list.
