ReviewID: iNB1V5oXUCsmaERpA7p5hQ
ReviewerID: R5QmeesF5XYUsvP1XJqDYQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
After a hike, this is where two hungry women came for brunch on a weekend (OK, today).. . We each got a lobster roll, which is on a butter toasted roll &amp; comes with fries.  My friend doesn't like fries, so she asked if she could substitute something else.  They were very accommodating, &amp; she got a side salad instead.  The lobster roll, while small in serving size, is very tasty, on a very buttery roll.  I stuck with the fries, &amp; they give you a very generous serving of fries, which were pretty good, but I wasn't able to finish them.. . My friend had heard that the lobster roll is on the small side, so we also got tweety's herb scramble with fine herbs, jack cheese, shallots and crème fraiche to share.  It comes with 2 toasts and "home fries"--roasted potatoes with rosemary &amp; marjoram (I think, some Italian tasting blend).  Also quite good.. . We finished off by sharing the chocolate bread and butter pudding, which came in a small dish with heart shaped handles because it was Valentine's Day.  It had a torched top like crème brulee., &amp; was less bready, more eggy than other bread puddings I've had.  Also, very good, we polished that off.. . Um, yeah, we ate ALL of that...3 entrees, &amp; a dessert between the 2 of us.  I don't know if our server was surprised, since my friend is a very slender Asian woman, &amp; I'm also very short (not so thin though).  . . They had some interesting sounding drink specials, but we didn't have anything to drink besides LA's finest tap water.  . . Menu is pretty heavy on the seafood, &amp; I'd be interested in coming back &amp; trying more out, including some drinks.  . . Service was pretty good, but a little slow. We had the bartender as our server, even though we weren't sitting at the bar, and it got pretty busy while we were there, so he got swamped with drinks behind the counter.  He was very pleasant &amp; friendly, with a nice smile.  It looked like in addition to bartending, he was also the server for the bar &amp; at least a couple of tables.  The place was pretty small &amp; he looked like he was one of two servers in the restaurant, plus the manager was assisting with the serving too.  Our water was refilled constantly &amp; finished dishes were cleared away pretty promptly.  . . The décor has a cat theme...photos on the walls all have cats in them.  There's also seating available at the 2 bars (regular bar &amp; seafood bar), and outdoor courtyard seating with heat lamps by the entrance.  . . Women's restroom is a single room, clean, but no hook or shelf for your purse.. . It looks like this is one of two locations, with the other location being in Santa Barbara.. . We parked on the street, but apparently they validate if you park in the garage.. . Located on the NW corner of Sunset and Vine, at the end of a courtyard in the shopping center that contains Borders and Bed Bath &amp; Beyond.
