ReviewID: iNBu9NOPZVT2XetVqMldNA
ReviewerID: kxj7TPtJY2zbEjGV0PYfAA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pops For Champagne
Category: Wine Bars
I wanted to go here for my birthday and, of course, my boyfriend obliged (he's so nice!).  . . I definitely had a good time.  We chose a semi-inexpensive bottle of pink champagne (it was about $35) and it was delicious.  We also chose the chocolate fondue as our dessert and it was great.  I don't really like chocolate (I know, don't ask) so I would definitely choose something else next time but if you like chocolate - go for it!. . Only downsides: There was a private party in the main part of the bar so we had to go downstairs to the jazz club area.  It was nice, but a bit less classy than the upstairs.  I would have preferred the upstairs seating area, but what can you do?  The downstairs area atmosphere is slightly offensive - there is a lot of weird, club-like glass and metal and the whole place was blue.  There were weird blue lights that were providing the dim light - it was really bizarre.  It's also a jazz club but obviously nothing was happening in terms of music because it was early. . . Also, we had no idea it would be so difficult to drink an entire bottle of champagne.   This isn't the bar's fault, but I'd say come prepared to down the whole thing so you don't waste your money.  Or bring friends.  Or try one of their individual champagne cocktails - they're good if you just want to sample one or two things. . . Plus: because we had to go downstairs, very few people actually went down so the one bartender was really attentive and super nice.  He helped us pick a good champagne and was always around to refill our glasses.. . This bar is definitely great for a date especially since we didn't even have to pay that much.  I think our total bill was about $45, which is great considering we got a bottle of champagne and dessert.  You don't have to be rolling in dough to treat a special person to a glass of champagne on a special occasion.
