ReviewID: IoAaWPFrY_2bOmNzJ4Ssdg
ReviewerID: KRLXzow88a6m_ZABejX-Ig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
.... . Silence.. . Roughly 8 minutes and 53 seconds later, my cousin Ron emerges from his bowl unscathed.  No trace of his meal was to be found on his end of the table like a crime scene unsolved.. . "Dang!  You were really hungry!"  We yell in unison.. . A little voice inside whispers, "ramen" and stockpiles on your craving until you can't take it anymore and you have to travel 47 miles (55 minutes or an hour and a half in traffic) just to satiate the beast within.. . It's the same amount of time and distance from Fontana if we were to go to their Costa Mesa location (2975 Harbor Blvd.), except that it closes at 7:00 PM every day.  . . F Costa Mesa then, and the rain!  We want ramen now!  If you want to know, it took us only 40 minutes to get to Little Tokyo.  That's how bad we wanted it.  We tried downplaying the hype, but it was too late and fortunately, it quelled the beast within us.  . . They only have one type of ramen - Daikoku - and the other - Tsukumen -has the ingredients separated.  I ordered the richer kotteri Daikoku, which had more extracted back fat in its broth.  It was tasty, but with the history of high blood pressure in my family, it was dangerously tasty.. . Each of us independently agreed that this was some damn good soup.  My brother just thought that Ramen Setagaya in New York was better.  I told him that Daikokuya was good in its own right and that Setagaya had a clearer broth - making it incomparable in my opinion.. . Those silky noodles belong in that soup.  That creamy, fatty, complex-flavored broth hit the spot.  Bamboo shoots, chopped green onions, bean sprouts, marinated egg, and that pork melts in your mouth like butter.. . For $8.50 a bowl, it beats New York ramen prices, which typically run $10 - $15+.  You get an excellent deal in this L.A. establishment and you get a heaping serving of noodles to boot; verrrrry reasonable.. . Gyoza had that indescribable Asian flavor to it - umami?  It was crispy on the outside and juicy on the inside.  It was shaped like an enchilada.  It's much better than most ramen shops in New York don't have it this good.  Don't even think about salivating.. . Their tempura had a clean bite to it and didn't leave any unwanted residue in my mouth.  It was tasty and I marvelled at why the L.A. County Department of Public Health would give the facility a B grading.  Recount!. . While you wait, enjoy their complete line of Naruto manga on the shelf and their vintage Japanese posters, signs and ads.  You'll be glad you did...especially if you can read in Japanese.. . The staff was super friendly and wanted to accommodate the six of us the best they could in spite of the cramped quarters and limited seating. Their booths are built for four, but they have a ramen bar for you loners and lovebirds out there.  . . Like the tender, melt-in-your mouth kurobota pork they serve, it tenderized and melted its way into my heart - literally and figuratively.
