ReviewID: ipQmTHMgC88o18Llzk9Cjg
ReviewerID: Ta3V5b98z48RaV3fmmlqrQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Finally had the perfect occasion (excuse) to come and blow mega cash at what is rumored to be one of the best steakhouses in LA. See those four dollar signs in the business info? They are not a joke and this isn't a place I can make my weekly steak dinner place. Also, not the easiest place to get a reservation. Book well in advance and be prepared to settle for less then prime hours. . . First off, it's in the Beverly Wilshire. Enough said. Think $18 valet (but only $12 with restaurant validation! Woo!). . Being in this lux hotel does mean that the interior is also gorgeous. It's smooth and sleek and with huge windows on one side. The servers are (as expected) extremely polite and ready to cater to your every whim but also not overwhelming. . . On to the important things: the food. I did enjoy them bringing the meat display to the table. You can really see the difference between the Wagyu beef and all the others (oh the marbling! the glorious FAT). That said, as much as I would have loved to try the real Wagyu, at $120-160 per piece I wasn't feeling like that big a player that night. Instead of getting the actual steak, we settled on the Kobe steak sashimi appetizer to get a taste of the good stuff (for a mere $22). It's a big hearty serving and certainly enough to share. I do appreciate when high end restaurant serve ample portions. While I want to say it was divine, I have to say I was a little disappointed. It's served smothered in so much sauce that you can barely taste the meat. So while the texture was wonderful (exceptionally soft and tender), I mostly tasted the sauce and little meat.To compare: you wouldn't drown your tuna sashimi in soy sauce would you? No. I think not. . . For the main course I had the Angus/Wagyu hybrid filet (normally 6oz but for $20 more I bumped it to 8oz) with a shared side of  mashed potatoes (nothing green for me thanks). My steak was expertly cooked and seasoned exceptionally well with just enough salt and just enough char to the outside while maintaining that deep rare middle. Yes, I like my steaks to bleed. I want to say I was blown away by my half Wagyu filet but while it was delicious (I ate every last bite) I do not think it was exceptional although it did seem more tender then the 100% American beef. The potatoes were great, very simple, classic, no frills and they were a perfect side to let the main star of the meal shine through. Did I mention the pretzel bread yet? I didn't? Silly me! It's heaven. GET IT.. . My only real disappointment (annoyance?) was that the cocktails were made with a lot of mediocre liquor. Stoli vodka? At this place? Why in heavens name would you serve that when there is Grey Goose to be had? Also, $17 for a drink made with vodka that costs $17 for an entire bottle is stupid. I went for the tequila blackberry martini because at least that seemed to be made with something top shelf. . . Overall they know how to cook meat here and I truly enjoyed myself in their laid back but still upscale atmosphere. If they'd ease up on the sauce on the steak sashimi (I want more meat taste!) and actually use top shelf liquor in the drinks, I'd give it a five.
