ReviewID: IqzzJZITN54BmK773yptqQ
ReviewerID: XbQ5UAJtcCUwVY9AY99SMA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
The Good:. . * We were 1/2 an hour late 4 our reservations and they had no problem seating us...Our table was under this cute black &amp; white bungalow.. . * Bagna Calda: . . Spread on creamy like it was garlic butter, I tricked my 6 yr. old son and convinced him it was butter and he ate 3 rolls of garlic bread with this stuff spread on top.. . * Calamari: Good and larged portion. . * The Roasted Rabbit: . . My boyfriend and I wanted to be a lil bit adventurous and with all the reviews about how good it was we didn't want to miss out. It can actually fool me 4 chicken, the texture on outside and inside even with the bones..I would've thought it was chicken without a doubt if I had not known it was RABBIT. The Kalamata Olives on topped gave it a great flavor and the Garlic Mashed Potatoes were so good and can really taste the garlic.. . *  The Garlic Ice Cream: . . Well after reading so many reviews on how people can't taste the garlic and don't like the caramel sauce...So I ordered mine plain without sauce. YES u definitely can taste the garlic it definitely gives u that KICK you're looking for. I have to say being a Garlic Fan and living in Northern Cali, going to the annual Garlic Festival...That this Garlic Ice Cream tasted soooo much better at The Stinking Rose...I've tried all kinds of Garlic Ice Cream Flavors n this gets HANDS DOWN!. . The Service:. . Awesome, they were quick and pretty much catered to us the whole night to what ever we had desired :). . Why I gave them only 4 Stars:. . Well, the reason how I found out about this Restaurant was through giving reviews on The Crab House here in SF and figured out The Stinking Rose is The Sister Restaurant! Well since my boyfriend lives in Southern CA and wasn't able to share my Crab House moment on eating their Scrumpcious Garlic Buttered Crab, I decided to have it with him at The Stinking Rose... . Well, I wasn't as satisfied to it as I was at The Crab House...It's funny because they even give you the Crab House SF BIB when they serve the Crab. The Lots of Crab Portion was the same...But it was prepared differently! Crab House mixes whatever that brown pepper corned garlic butter that is so yummy within the crab legs and at The Stinking Rose they gave 2 sauces and none of them came to as tasty ast it was at the crab house. Oh and another thing being spoiled coming from the BAY...I could tell their crab legs weren't FRESH how it is in SF...I know, it is Beverly Hills so it's not like how it is in SF where the ocean is right there! However, going back to how I know it wasn't fresh...Well Crab Lovers 101...When u crack open the crab and the meat somehow brittle into pieces and stick to it's shell rather than being able to remove meat as a whole piece...#1 Sign your crab wasn't fresh...#2 I get a stomach ache if the Crab wasn't fresh and I mean ALIVE Before they cooked it! At least with Dugeneous Crab. Which is what happened I had an awful stomach ache in the middle of the night!. . Can't wait to go back, but want to try the one here in Frisco :)
