ReviewID: iR4W3_9b2nEwE2jMHlaXBw
ReviewerID: 5JyWtecepguVJDN_lp6g3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Opera
Category: Chinese
The 1st time we went here my husband was a little skeptical about trying Opera, why go to this place when the "real" Chinese food is just down the street in Chinatown for a lot less money? But this isn't anything like going to Chinatown, this is theater-the decor is bold, loud colors with funky chairs and unique light fixtures, the crowd mostly non Asian, the food is traditional Chinese with a contemporary twist. Most of the seating is out in the open but there are private "vaults" that used to be for movie reel storage if you want a romantic/private table for two or four. . . Opera is one of the KDK restaurants (Gioco, Red Light and Marche are the others) and is located is the rapidly gentrifying South Loop right across the street from Gioco.. . We usually go on one of Opera's two weekly prix fixe nights (Tuesday and Sunday) where any one appetizer, entree and dessert from their regular menu is $28.95 which is a very good deal considering the entree we order is $30. We've also done the chef's tasting menu but decided if we went with a large group again, we'd just order several things and share.. . I've ordered the crab &amp; chopstick appetizer, a jumbo lump crabcake with crab springrolls. It was good but not as good as the duck nacho appetizer. I ordered the seafood medley with bird's nest noodles the 1st time but I now always order the Peking duck prepared three ways (boneless breast meat with pancakes and plum sauce, cherry-glazed leg-thigh portion and ground duck meat mixed with chow fun noodles) which is all delicious and a HUGE portion. I'd highly recommend it. . . There are 4-5 dessert selections, I've had the steamed banana and date pudding with date and cognac ice cream and a caramelized banana cream sauce which was tasty and the Tao of Chocolate which was very good, I think they change it from time to time but it's had a yummy flourless chocolate cake the last couple of times which is awesome.
