ReviewID: irGUxsmh9Q16Qlr5EMczEQ
ReviewerID: -p9MYS2eZhUnHacbMAc_6Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
a bit overrated in  atmosphere.. it reminded me of a family restaurant more than anything upscale really.. I thought it was odd how they have meatballs and chips for those waiting to be seated. The meatballs were nothing fancy. If anything, I thought they were subpar-tasted like straight from the freezer quality. The chips were good though. Very potato-y and crispy.. . Our waiter was great, friendly, outspoken guy.. . Anyway, we came here for the dinela price fix menu experience.. . To start, the spinning bowl salad was tasty. The eggs and croutons w/ red vinegar were delightful. The portion for two people were huge. The salads could have been a meal in itself.. . For the main entree, we both chose prime rib over salmon. Medium well was a better cut than the medium rare.. . The cream corn side that everyone raved about was okay. It reminded me of hk style cafe cream corn. I think  it's actually really overrated. It's like frozen corn in a cream goo sauce. Doesn't even taste very fresh off the cob... $6 extra-I think I will pass.. . Don't get peas as a side-not worth the extra money. There's nothing spectacular about it. Its literally just steamed peas. Ours was complimentary because the waiter told the guy peas instead of corn...so free of charge :). . The mashed potatoes were the best I've had. You can taste the fresh lumpy potato goodness in every bite. It is creamy and melt in your mouth good.. . For dessert, I loved the Brown sundae. The nuts were so crunchy, and the ice cream was smooth and divine.. . The English trifle was so so. I thought it was too sweet. It was lacking in presentation as well. It looks like messy shortcake. I'd definitely not want this again. Too artificially tasting and saccharine.. . Overall, a pretty good meal. The best prime rib I've had so far. =) Will come back again now that we're members of the VIP club ;)
