ReviewID: isS1ndbkHLIrI1Oxv88XtQ
ReviewerID: mwpqciBkHxE2MBw4bjKqpA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
My sister told me she came here one night and stood in line for over 2 freakin' hours, for the mild Chicago Polish Dog.  She lamented that the line went out the front, passed the store next to it and around the corner, halfway through the parking lot.  But, she loved her hot dog and had fun hanging out with her friends.. . What do my brother and I do?  Decide to check the place out, when we drove up to LA for an adventure! . . Yep, we be crazy tourists that day.. . We arrived in front of Pink's around 12:30, on a Saturday.  We actually got lucky and found a parking spot in the Pink's lot, though we didn't realize they had valet, as well.  At least, we didn't have to pay for street meter parking.  Another pleasant surprise, the line wasn't all that long.  It stretched out from the hot dog stand out to the store next door.  The time it took to wait, order and get our food took about 45 minutes.  . . Yeah, yeah, yeah.  45 minute wait?  Not long?  The way I see it, it was some place we wanted to check out and were willing to brave it out.  45 minutes is waaaaay better than having to wait 2 hours, which happened to the customers that were lining up, after we finished our food.. . There are a number of hot dog specials for you to choose from.  I ended up ordering the Millenium Dog (12" Jalapeno Dog w/ chili, onions, cheese, lettuce, tomatoes and avocado) and added 3 slices of bacon on top for $1.45, with a side of fries.  My brother got the Ozzy Spicy Dog (spicy polish hot dog w/ nacho cheese, American cheese, grilled onions, guacamole and chopped tomatoes), with onion rings.  . . With plenty of outdoor seating out back, we found an umbrella covered table for us to enjoy the goodies.  We had so much food, it was ridiculous.  But, somehow, we managed to eat most of it.  The food was good!  Thankfully, the weather was super nice and not too hot, so we could enjoy being outdoors. Definitely, it was just a great experience all around, averaging about $10 per person.. . Something to keep in mind, they DO NOT accept credit card and didn't have an ATM machine available.  My brother had to take a walk to Chevron, to get cash!. . Oh yeah, also, beware of the grill, by the open window, when you're about to make your order!  My brother's white, button-up shirt got black, grease splatter stains, from standing too close, even with the low glass barrier.  Freakin' sucky for him and the guy behind him, who got it on his white shirt, too.   Because it put my brother in a slightly bad mood over his $30 ruined, favorite shirt and I had to hear him grumble over it for a bit and having to search for an ATM, I'd actually give this place 3 1/2 stars, but I'm willing to round it up to a 4.. . Would I visit this place, again?  For sure!  I just recommend that if you don't want to wait (and suffer) through the long lines, just show up early, be wary of standing too close to the grill window, and bring cash!  . . Next time, I'm getting the MULLHOLLAND DRIVE DOG!
