ReviewID: It_t2FzdNCSHC_97MOAe_A
ReviewerID: ukf_t7zLsXL4qqwhVEMx5w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
We've been here before for drinks and loved the atmosphere of it and decided to come back for "date night." Reservations were fairly easy to get on . http://OpenTable.com. . . . As soon as we got there, we were promptly seated and didn't have to wait. There are tables of 4 in the middle of the room and tables for larger group stationed around the room and a banquet where there are only tables for 2. This is where we were seated and our neighbors were quite close to us. You could hear everyone's conversations and make it a bit difficult to have an intimate dinner with your date. . . Of course, we knew that they have fantastic handcrafted drinks, we knew that's how we were going to start the night. I typically don't care for gin, but the drink I ordered was absolutely delicious - even if there was gin in there. . . For appetizers, I had the Bone Marrow Flan and my date had the scallop. The Flan was served with brioche toast and it was very rich and delicious for the first few bites, but started getting too heavy. The fat and richness of the flan glazed over all the tastes buds on my tongue. The scallops that my bf ordered was spectacular. It was perfectly cook and had a fabulous carmelization on the outside and had a hint of curry. . . The table next to us had ordered the flat iron steak and I wish I had ordered that instead of the poached halibut. The entire place was a bit mushy and had no other texture except for the mushrooms underneath the fish. The plate was also very bland. I wish they had just seared the outside of the fish after the poaching. It would have made the plate 100% better. My bf ordered the bacon wrapped trout. It was a huge plate of food with and entire trout wrapped in bacon; it was also stuffed with collard greens. I didn't prefer his dish any better than mine. I would say after the appetizers, the main entree fell flat. . . We didn't order any desert, so I can't comment on their desert menu. . . I would go back for drinks, but maybe not for dinner.. unless they change their menu and there was something that "I HAD" to try.
