ReviewID: iTHkrJKQowt_RJeVOkXpNA
ReviewerID: oGydDIKM81Qqx1dm9PQfvg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mi Barrio Mexican Restaurant
Category: Mexican
I love me some Mexican food and this place, hands down; is the BEST Mexican food in Atlanta!  Leslie and I have been dying to try this place out!  We parked in the neighborhood behind the building and strolled along Memorial with Sno Balls in hand (thanks to Just Loaf'n...read review below).  We entered the pink building and we were surprised on what we saw.  Everyone who reviewed this was right...you feel like you have just entered someones kitchen...for me, I felt like we were in the basement of a house I use to live in Washington D.C.  . . Our adorable waiter that Leslie had crushed on (even though I think he was 15...which could explain why he could not serve our Margaritas to us) gave us our menus and we just squealed with delight.  I had no idea what to order....do I try the tacos or enchiladas?  or how about the tortas or even the flautas and gorditas?  What I do know is that I am for sure sticking to meats that I am familiar with...aka Chicken or Beef.  Speaking of meat...the quote of the day is from Leslie asking "What is Beef Tongue?" and the waiter replying "Um...Tongue from a cow."  If that wasn't a blonde moment for Leslie, second place goes to her way of speaking Spanish with a valley girl accent..."Can I have a tah-co with car-nay a-sawd-a?"  Good try Leslie, although the menu did say Steak not Carne Asada so I have no idea where she came up with that...maybe another one of her ways of attempting to flirt!  Anyways, I ordered the enchiladas platter and Leslie got the Tacos.  It was delicious!  The beef was seasoned well and very light.  Leslie also tried the Beef Tongue and loved it!  Plus it was nice to see that her Taco shells were fresh and huge!. . Can I say again that I LOVE THIS PLACE!  When we were done, I seriously did not want to leave and could have ordered more food.  Alas, they were closing so we got up and paid and got some fun Mexican candies on our way out.  I think we got a piece of chocolate filled with tamarind, a lollipop made from goats milk, and a mango fruit roll up dusted with salt and cayenne pepper!  Mmmmmmm....
