ReviewID: iTLdANG25Zq01U9ixyXP6Q
ReviewerID: I-MPn5jRfB8-Zl__twxWdQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Urban Belly
Category: Asian Fusion
I'm so thankful I came here with a great, old friend.. . Because the food is so good that all semblance of table manners go out the window the minute the bowls and plates hit your table.. . This is such a great concept and much needed for Chicago -- a communal table, self-ordering noodle joint. I really didn't know what to expect when we parked in the tiny strip mall that houses Urban Belly -- but I was glad that we got there when we did, at about 4:30 on a Sunday afternoon when it was not crowded. We really got to take our time to ask questions and order.. . I was floored by how quickly we were served. Our food came in rapid-fire succession: lamb and brandy dumplings, short-rib and scallion rice, sticky organic brown rice, Udon noodles (w/shrimp, coriander and sweet chili-lime broth) and Rice Cake (w/chicken, mango and Korean chili sauce). . . WHEW.. . Our pithy banter soon ceased and a hush fell between us, save for the bowl-slurping, lip-smacking, finger-licking, gutteral grunts of gastronomical delight!. . Or, as the kids who know what's hot in the streets would say: We smashed that food!. . When my dining companion and I finally came up for air, we just looked at each other, grinned like Cheshires and sighed. No words were needed. We hit the jackpot on an amazing meal in an awesome establishment!. . We were so busy eating that we almost forgot to open the wine we brought -- yep, it's BYOB and no corkage fee! You can't ask for much more than what you get here -- fresh, clean food, a perfect balance of Asian flavors, served fast, hot and relatively cheap. Five dishes between the two of us came out to about $47 Between the noodles and the rice, it was a Carb-a-palooza to be sure, but I can live with that.. . I only wish that Urban Belly was closer to my South Loop abode -- or maybe it's a good thing that it's not: If it was, I'd eat there everyday!
