ReviewID: IU4zGDBT2Y5OK7__BhgyCA
ReviewerID: j1Egc5vWcc6LxNc50Dg_Ig
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Ajna Bar
Category: Lounges
Yes, I feel like a moron for going here. . . Normally a 80% empty restaurant in the meatpacking at 8pm on a Wednesday means something's wrong. But I foolishly thought because chef Hung from Top Chef was here, we'd be in for a treat. . . This place is clearly weeks from shutting. There is no way a property like this can afford to sit so empty for long, and clearly they are putting NOTHING into the food, so we're in "giving up" time.. . We ordered 6 dishes, all from the sushi bar or apps. Each of them was hugely underwhelming. I define this underwhelming as, I can get much better version of the same dish, for half the price elsewhere.. . We got fried rice. Yup, just like the chinese restaurant down the road. We got steamed pork buns, could not hold a candle to momofuku. We got spicy tuna, garden variety. Decent piece of fish, rice and nothing else of any interest, except the $15 price. We got scallops, one of them was undercooked, and the sauce tasted like chef boyardee. My wife has shrimp dumplings that were gamey, I could only muster a small taste, it was so disgusting. . . My wife told the waiter the scallops were undercooked and the dumpling was gamey, he waved her off, as if because she was a woman she wouldn't know whether they were proper or not. I have a few years in the restaurant business and I tasted, she was spot on... but the waiter didn't give a flying you know what.. . We're not dirtbags, we were not asking for a freebie, he asked and we explained why we didn't finish either of the fish dishes.... For the record, they charged us for all of it. . . I asked if Hung was there. The waiter said yes. I expressed my surprise because this whole meal felt like a giant ripoff.... . . The waiter explained that really there are only a couple of signature dishes that really are good. WTF???????? So Hung will put his name as Exec Chef on the menu and because i didn't order one or two of his dishes, what do I get, garbage?. . Where I come from if you put your name on it, it represents you. sometimes that means doing a great job one something that is otherwise not so great, i.e. fried rice. But if you're the top chef in the world, I sure as heck expect something better than my local crappy Chinese restaurant.. . So seriously, let this place do itself a favor and fade off into the distance. You're not even going to have a good time, it was dead empty when we were there. They got $200 from me. Don't let them take your hard earned cash as well.. . Chris
