ReviewID: iu9wlsczJxToBvsDVgfxhg
ReviewerID: b0mWPfBcInCw11w1dzolGg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Furaibo Restaurant
Category: Japanese
I've been going to Furaibo for years; actually, make that 'I first went to Furaibo about three years ago and have gone there infrequently until recently.'  That's about a dozen times or so over the years, and three very recent visits.  The place has gone from a 2 1/2 star place to about a 4 - 4 1/2 in that time frame, and is consistently good to great now food wise, and is awesome service wise (as opposed to inconsistent/bad food timing/uncoordinated a few years ago).. . This is a chicken place. It's a big Japanese chicken chain.  You're eating at Japan's KFC, of sorts. Order accordingly: this means try the chicken (half chicken - tarzan your best bet) and try it not spicy or lightly spiced (spicy = "hey let's throw on salt and garlic powder" so the spiciest and second spiciest options just mean more salt) as the base flavor is a soy and honey flavor that works very well on a piece of fried (no breading) chicken.. . Cooking on weekends tends to be better. Sometimes the chicken (or other meat) is overcooked, and dry, unfortunately. When it's not, the food's amazing. It's been consistently good recently.. . Pitchers of beer $10, sake $8 = cheap.  This combined with pub feel and the good food means it gets packed after about 6pm regularly, more so on weekends. Come early, come often.. . Stay the hell away from their parking lot, unless you want to be parked in. Drive one block east and find parking in an apartment filled back street off of Sawtelle instead.. . Standouts and/or things Furaibo makes well, other than chicken: nasu miso (eggplant w/ miso sauce), most of their salads, scallop and squid dishes (except the fermented raw squid/shiokara (which smells way off)).  The 'traditional Japanese food' section is reliable, especially the stews.. . Popular items (although not my favorite, good things to try) are hanpen cheese (breaded &amp; fried fishcake stuffed with american cheese - tried it, don't ask me why everyone orders it - it tastes like... a kraft single omelette), spinach with bacon (good but there are better things), fried rice (the plain rice is bleh, and rice cakes take ages to come out usually), chicken wings, yakitori sticks and most of the grilled beef items.. . But really, this is a chicken place and everything else you can find at other Japanese izakayas better.  The chicken, when not overcooked (grumble) is unique, flavorful, delicious, addictive, etc.
