ReviewID: Iv9Xf10rAhZ5SPe0VvVhAQ
ReviewerID: xLgToPGTAlQOhaeWU6MFgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
Canter's may be my favorite restaurant in Los Angeles. . . Sometimes you just have to have matzoh ball soup. Admittedly overpriced, Canter's will be your Jewish mother if you feel a cold coming on. Why is matzoh ball soup univiersally expensive? It's just chicken stock and cracker meal; two of the cheapest ingredients possible. But I digress. They have yummy borscht too. Latkes with sour cream. Now I'm getting hungry.. . Don't forget to ask for a pickle tray. Oh yummy, crunchy pickles! Your tangy sourness makes my tastebuds sing. There are crunchy bagel chips too.. . I usually get the pastrami reuben. Veggies take note: veggie reubens are delicious and a nice change of pace. The fries are average; not always hot which is a big no-no.. . I guess Canter's easily get two stars from me because I can pretend I'm in NYC. You can even extend the fantasy by going across the street to Damiano's, the pizza joint. Not that you'll be hungry but I guess you could have an unusual beer. I digress again. Canter's marries an East Coast vibe with old school Hollywood gumshoe, tragic romance. The bar is tits. You can practically see Bukowski on a bar stool at 2 p.m. on a Tuesday. They pour 'em stiff and the price is right. Wander in on any given random day and you will definitely see some characters. There may only be three, two, or one person but I guarantee your curiosity will be aroused. They book the weirdest bands (you never know what you will get) and it's not really recommended on a Friday or Saturday night (amateur hipsters, crowded, smoky sidewalk). Please order only respectable drinks like whiskey or scotch. The "Sex and the City" movie may be hot but Cosmos went out YEARS ago (and they are gross). The fact that you can order a real drink in the restaurant contributes to the stars above as well. It was quite dangerous when I lived around the corner. A great neighborhood. That stretch of Fairfax from approximately Wilshire to Melrose being one of the very few reminding me of NYC (where else? maybe Downtown?).. . I probably haven't eaten that many different things at Canter's but it doesn't matter. I just love the whole scene. The people watching cannot be beat and you will see an occasional celeb. I once saw Mike Myers outside. I'm the farthest thing from a star-f*cker but I had to holler to him how great he is. He and his wife smiled. Yay.. . Let's not forget the bakery. Authentic bagels-poppy, onion, everything-and some not-so-authentic bagels-pizza-are winners. You will become lost in a world of cookies, cheesecakes, rugala (recommended!), and marble ryes. A very wide selection of breads baked on the premises are available. A sweet-tooth fiend's (like me!) heaven!. . Canter's is also a good place to go hang out and have a casual meeting or get some work done. Their large center room is not always open (if not crowded) but they will let you spread out and work there, and, obviously, order something. . . The service can be inattentive and even verge on the border of being rude or hostile. While I normally cannot tolerate that, this only adds a little more East Coast zing in the mix. I have also had cut-and-dry competency which is my favorite type of service. Get it right, get it quick, no smarmy small talk. . . Canter's you make me misty-eyed for the Big Apple but you offer a little slice to keep me going.
