ReviewID: iVSSlx0Bht07YKcLi8qJRw
ReviewerID: 9khCiEW5XvGfNyX9z4JRZQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fiddlehead Cafe
Category: American (New)
I attended a rather large engagement party on Saturday and I found that this place handled it superbly. The 30+ guests were seated at exactly 6:00 and the service could have been better. We showed a little early and grabbed a drink at the bar. The wine list is pretty extensive and they have some pretty sweet beers on tap. This is a really nice looking cafe. . . They started us off with their cheese appetizers, a mixed vegetable plate, and House Smoked Salmon with some kind of bread. (Sorry I suffer from CRS syndrome- can't remember shit) The standout was the different cheeses, with my favorite being the Valdeon Blue Cheese, the 3yr Cheddar and some kind of feta. I took down one of the plate myself and was wanted to take the left over Blue cheese to go, but I was denied! I was told no one wanted to smell stinky feet the rest of the night. . . My favorite thing of the night was for sure the salad. Roasted Beet &amp; Citrus Salad, Field Greens, Candied Pecans, Shaved Fennel, Blue Cheese Crouton, Champagne Vinaigrette. Holy Balls! I love me some beets and as soon as I saw this on the menu my eyes lit up. The salad did not disappoint and I will be coming back here just for this salad. . . The main dish I picked was the beef tenderloin and some sort of potato that I also cannot recall. I'm sorry by the time dinner was served I was 3 glasses of wine and 3 gin and tonics deep. I remember the meat being cooked perfectly and the potatoes were tasty. I also tried the woman's salmon and it was excellent. The dessert was your basic Crème Brulee and served its purpose. . . The service was excellent, as two very attentive waiters were assigned to our table. My wine glass was never empty and I was always rushed a fresh cocktail. The manager made his presence known and was always available for questions. The back party room is spacious and I really like the exposed brick look of the place. There was one little incident where a glass of wine was spilled on the woman's step dad and a punch was almost thrown, but all in all the night went on without a hitch. I look forward to coming back and trying the rest this place has to offer.
