ReviewID: IvXjzkIH-kUY2Cbeg54NaQ
ReviewerID: c9PwtsNozIxJ5NDMT5C9qQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
I grew up on instant ramen, like Sapporo, Top Ramen, etc. You'd think b/c of that I would be able to appreciate REAL ramen. But no, I don't! I still prefer the instant kind! I know, I know what you're thinking. WTH is wrong with me.. . Can you believe it? This is the first Japanese ramen place I have been to.  I'm no ramen pro obviously but I had to start somewhere. Well, let's just say I wasn't too impressed. I had the miso based ramen and the soup base really bothered me b/c I couldn't put my finger on the flavors. The noodles were kind of, plasticky? I'm not sure how to describe it but I'm the kind of gal who likes her noodles a bit overcooked. I wondered if I would've liked the ramen here more if I had went for the original clear broth or soy based broth vs. the miso base. Next time I try ramen I'll have to keep that in mind.  So I'll have to agree with Vince S.; it wasn't an orgy in my mouth.  I WILL give ramen a few more shots though. We've been eating in Little Tokyo pretty often, so there's bound to be someplace I like.. . BUT, on the brighter side, the pork curry cutlet was yummy. Presentation was really just the bare minimum and we wished there was a side dish of coleslaw or macaroni or something, but the cutlet itself was flavorful.. . What really bothered me was the heat inside this restaurant.  On one of the hottest days of the heat wave, it was hotter inside than outside! The wait was long too and parking's a pain in the butt.  And do I feel like eating ramen in a sweltering hot restaurant? That would be a big fat NO! . . But I did anyways.. . At around 10pm people started pouring in.  We decided to sit at the counter b/c it was hot, crowded, and we didn't feel like waiting for a table.  After a while it started getting cooler though, after we stopped moving and talking. Haha.. . +++ for being open late! They even opened on Labor Day until 12am!
