ReviewID: IWfWZyLZTPhxMnepYga36w
ReviewerID: dWk6HaJ7B6vUdEkABZ5sCw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
Whoa.  I've been to Sepia about a dozen times, always a big fan, but this was my first time going since they got the new chef in May.  And it is better.... . I had the cucumber mint gazpacho to start that had peekytoe crab rolled in thinly sliced cantaloupe.  Peekytoe crab is awesome, and I am currently (and have been for several years, ever since my peekytoe crab napolean at nomi for brunch) obsessed with it.  It was delicious and clean and fresh. We shared the agnolotti for our tweener.  It, again, was amazing and simple.  You could make 6 perfect bites out of the 3 agnolotti (half order).  For our entrees, I had the braised halibut with ratatouille and pistou broth.  It was so flavorful, light, and fresh. I was pleasantly full after the meal, but not wanting to pass out and die.  I really loved everything. But here's why i gave it 5 stars.... . I usually always make (or ask) my husband to get things we can share.  He is really great about this, which is definitely a part of why we are together.  I like to try lots of things at restaurants, but don't eat meat (with several exceptions), so main courses for him are fish. Almost always.  I was feeling exceptionally nice this evening and told him he could order whatever he wanted. I was thinking he was going to go for the pork, but he decided to have the trout.  The trout is completely deboned and laid flat, cooked on its skin side. The fish is lightly coated in cornmeal.  The fish is topped with a very lightly dressed "salad" of green beans, black eyed peas and candied bacon.  The vinegar just kisses the fish to make it completely perfect.  I tried the fish (no candied bacon) and it was one of the top 10 things I've ever put in my mouth.  I actually had a small tear. I get a little emotional about those things.  The last fish I shed a tear over was at MK (my favorite restaurant, but one I just can't review) about 4 years ago. It was a special. I had it once.  Which is probably best.  I think of it often. . . Anyways, Sepia has always been great, but I really prefer the food with the new chef.  Cocktailks were excellent as always.  Have a few french 75s with your meal.  I love gin.
