ReviewID: IWSw6v7zGkHxLX2hnm2Y6Q
ReviewerID: spVZJWlgIngemOsLArQLFg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
WHY SO SLOW? . . We arrived at about 6 pm on a Monday night. We sat outside and waited 15 minutes (during this time nobody else came to sit in/outside). Finally, we grabbed our own menus. 15 minutes after arrival a guy finallys came out to ask us for drinks and we order ramen. 1 coke, 1 water please. 1 soy mild with egg 1 miso spicy. A few minutes later, he comes back with a water, and a bunch of teas... Okay. mess up the drink order, that's easily fixable, he doesn't say sorry but brings a coke. We wait... A party of 6 sits down next to us. They grab a waiter and order really quickly. . . 15 minutes later (but it feels like an eternity) we get ONE ramen. Then the table nexts to us gets 2 ramens.. (mind you, we were there  and order about 25 minutes before they got there...) 15 minutes later we get the OTHER ramen. and it's bright red and spicy spicy hot...(the broth also smells/tastes metallic...is this the MSG? or because they use TAP WATER? this was supposed to be the mild soy ramen.. . We can't seem to flag down the servers but finally we go in and ask the rude half-asian looking girl about the noodles...she glares at us, and takes the bowl. She comes back with a new bowl that she slams on the table and proceeds to ignore us. . . A few minutes later the older lady with curly hair (manager, owner?) comes by and asks us if everythings okay. Besides the overrated broth, horrible noodles, incompetent servers and 35 minute wait time (+ 15 minute difference between getting 2 bowls of ramen) it's not even okay.. . the broth: not that great, has a metallic aftertaste and a ton of MSG. MSG is why people are so addicted to this place. MSG MSG MSG.. the noodles: I don't think it takes 25 minutes to boil noodles. i don't like eating crunchy al dente spaghetti noodles. I could make better noodles at home using a 10 cent pack from the grocery store.. sides: 99 cents for egg, really?. the bowl: what is the residue on the inside/outside of these bowls? are they not washing them, or are they just really messy?. the servers: are they slow, family, spacey, angry, unhappy, or just not very good? Is it because I'm not white?? Can someone give the half-asian  chick an attitude check? you're serving ramen, please don't spit in my broth.. the manager/lady with brown curly hair: she was actually pretty nice.. the drinks: my coke was pretty delicious.. . I'd rather go anywhere but here. This was not the first time here, but I had to give it another chance...and share my bitter unhappy experience with the faux-ramen. We redeemed the unhappy meal by going to the curry house for some dessert and some GOOD JAPANESE SERVICE.
