ReviewID: IzFhk6J7CUN4BPhQS5RShA
ReviewerID: E4lkihDcqDk4J9NVdyfFtQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
Tom, oh Tom! i guess my expectations were a bit too high!  I went to this little place few weeks after it opened the doors in the all too busy century city area.  The location is kinda oddly placed where parking is avaliable in the building with a hugh hole in the middle and costly at that.  Once you entered the restaurant you will notice these "cabanas" that are placed outside of the patio that hugs the exterior of the restaurant.  These "cabanas" are actually sofas that have four posts that have linen elegantly drape down (imagine a four season post bed with sheer linen canopy but its a soft).  It gave the restaurant an elegant but professional feel to it.  Craft tries to be a casual but yet upscale restaurant.  The sea of waiters are mostly wearing black on black on black, yet its hard to snatch one of them when needed.  You would think that if they hired that many servers that one, just one, will provide us with their undivided attention!  The scene is mostly young professionals that probably work in the area and the energy i got from this place was good!  . The decor was pretty simple.  I thought the usage of everyday household items that were used for lights and other decor pieces were quite innnovating... but the innovations stop there.  The a la carte type of menu seemed to be quite unfitting for a place that tries to be causal.  its been a while since i have been there but the menu wasnt what i would call memorable for me to recollect my thoughts and feelings of this place.   The four of us decided to order one dish per person and  few side dishes.  As the dishes came out (which seemed to be an eternity) we proceeded to do family style, since we were all too curious about all the selections that we had made.  The food was good but nothing that stuck out.  . Oysters were fresh and they had a great selection that truly displayed the diverse taste of each kinds they had avaliable.  However, the entrees were a bit bland.  The flavors were harmonious but my mouth wasnt wowed! The first thing i noticed was the portion size of the entrees.  It looked more like a tapas style entree.  If you want to create something for a small portion then make your entree flavorful and rich, yet the seasoning and spices were "safe".  For a top chef host i thought he would be pushing the enevlope and provide us with amazing flavors but i felt like he definitely played the safe card and for the amount you paying i began to wonder if it was worth it.. . The desserts (the most critic part of me) it was disappointing.  Chef Tom tried to come up with unique flavor combination, but i begin to wonder if he actually tasted the desserts before he oked it to be on the menu.  The pear tart tartin was very bitter and not pleasant.  i felt like i was eating an unripe pear that was drenched in liqour, however the crust was well made.  The crust saved the dish or close to it, it had a flaky texture that gave the pear a mmm Mmmm butter infested wonders of joy!  The Mission fig tart  was quite unpleasant.  If people didnt like figs, this will only further their dislike of the fruit.  Figs should be cooked to the point where they have their natural sweetness blossom out, however, the sweetness seemed to be not there.  The feeling i got in my mouth was like eating soap.  yup soap!  The creme fraiche panna cotta is the one dessert that was quite amazing.  The elegant smooth panna cotta was a great contrast to the gelee and grape sorbet.  The milkly smooth taste with a grape flavor that peaked and then meshed with the panna cotta was quite delicious! My mouth danced for joy! . . All in all paying 100 bucks a person for a din din by top chef Tom... is it worth it?  My answer is unfortunately i give him an "A" for effort.
