ReviewID: iZglLTMpVIYGf3palXUveA
ReviewerID: 7KVFZGqUq0d66OVpdnJNlw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yolk
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I freakin' love this place, so much so that I will break my own rule, and rate a place that has over 100 reviews already.  . . First, the menu is extensive.  I bring everyone I know here.  Someone visits from out of town - we HAVE to have brunch at Yolk, not only because I am a brunch whore, but because there is something for everyone (except the discerning organic nazi or the vegan).  Every visitor I have taken has sung the praises of this place.. . For the meat eaters in the crowd, the country skillet is fabulous - my dad was sold with this concoction with multiple kinds of meat thrown together with the potatoes and eggs any way your picky egg eater wants.  Oh, and they truly deal with their namesake well - no undercooked or overcooked eggs here.. . For the ovo-lacto vegetarian types, there are a bazillion options, including the delish pancakes and french toast, or the veggie skillet in which the asparagus is actually cooked well!  The eggs florentine, the spin on the benedict without the pig, will also serve those veggies well.. . My roommate salivates for the Sante Fe Frittata bi-monthly, loving the way they throw in both jalepenos and avocados in this piece de resistance.  Personally, I try something new everytime.. . The eggs benedict is fabulous.  The hollandaise is homemade.  The eggs are poached to perfection.  The scramlers are really well done, especially the cajun one - delicious!  I love their omelettes!  And I am a girl who really doesn't like pancakes, but I actually split a side order with my Sante Fe Frittata loving roommate because these are deliciousely cake-y.. . The food selection and its preparation is what makes me come back time and again to Yolk.  Yes, if you go during peak brunch hours on the weekend, there will be a wait, it is just that good - and popular.  Duh.  It happens.  If it sucked there would be no one there.  Because of this, service is quick moving, but not usually bad.. . Oh yolk, how I love thee.  That is why I make the pilgrimage at least once a month to sample your delectable delights.  I fully endorse others to do the same!  (And take in the smoldering Greek fella calling on the line - mmm - he is Yolk eye candy, indeed!)
