ReviewID: IZkCijJ17mOj3wj4iK_5KA
ReviewerID: Y19tJ1dAOjrE_CvdaDhcpA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I LOVE Pizzeria Mozza so I was excited to try Osteria Mozza.  Very disappointed with this restaurant.  . . 1.  Pretentious - I was a tad late, but they refused to seat my friends despite our 615 pm reservation (i.e., lots of open tables).  We wanted to order an appetizer while we looked over the menu and waiter refused, saying they want our entire order all at once.. . 2.  Food - Appetizers (in the mid-teens $) and pasta (in the high-teens low-20's $) were OK.  Not bad, but definitely not the best I've had (unlike Angelini Osteria's green lasagna or the agnolotti at La Terrazza).  The entrees ($30 range) were ALL too salty.  We're an adventurous lot and we picked the duck, the pork chop and the quail.  All salty.  Hot brown mess.  Desserts were good, I expected them to be given it is a Nancy Silverton restaurant.. . 3.  Service - For a place that charges this much for food, I expect the service to be decent.  I would call it benign neglect.  I think that because they feel the food is soooo wonderful that we should all feel lucky that we are eating there.  We have to flag down busboys since the waiter hardly checked in on us despite empty glasses and finished courses.  For our take-out bags, they combined all of them without asking if it was OK and when we expressed surprise, they acted like it was a pain.. . 4.  Stinky air - I don't know what it is about the open kitchen but all our hair and clothes were greasy and stinky after the meal.  Not quite Korean BBQ stinky and greasy, but definitely noticeable.. . 5.  Valet - $8.50.  ~20 min wait to get your car.  Applies to pizzeria too.. . Bottom Line - Not coming back to Osteria Mozza.  But would happily line up for Pizzeria Mozza next door.  Its not the dollar expense per se -- would happily spend for a great meal -- but what you get after the money, time and pain (1 month before reservation) for Osteria Mozza is just not worth it.
