ReviewID: IzL2btxca8PrENhkEsdkkA
ReviewerID: bx6AcusVzV17KMX8i5J2XQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
As I drove pass by Magic Castle on Franklink after an hour &amp; half of 5 and 101 in the rare, rainny night of S. CA-trying to find Yamashiro, the sound bites of Sue &amp; Trent from 'Swingers' pop into my head.  I would now, definitely think twice when I tell people I'm from LA. . . [-Anaheim.] . . Spend all those years away from home at Chicago, I'm the only one in my family haven't really get to check out Yamashiro. Little that I know it's right next to the Magic Castle where we've often visited as OC kids growing up from our favorite Uncle Chuck's invitation.. . -I've always heard good things about Yamashiro, always want to check it out, but just never such an occasion for the drive.  When I finally get to check it out this time, everything was just surreal about it. ^^  I drove through the winding road up the hill, feel a bit as going to the hidden hotspring place in Taipei Valley.  When I see the Japanese house in the dark fills with fabulous people from Hollywood, I feel like Michael J. Fox in 'Bright Light, Big City' about stepping into an energetic party.  My slack put me up for the occasion, the cocktail put me at ease to mingle with the nice looking people, there must be all the different dimming colorS on the wall that set out the mood.  You get to see the Geisha in kimono walking around the beautiful Japanese Garden in the middle which is probably the most surreal part.  I've to remind myself-I'm in Hollywood, not in Kyoto &amp; yes, I'm far away from being drunk. ;^P. . In the end, if I was drunk-I was drunk by the mood from the nice setting that Yamshiro &amp; Hollywood could offer.  I was glad  that I made the trip in this rainny night-everything seems little gloomy, little unclear, little ... movie-like.  . . When I walk outside of Yamashiro waiting for my car from the valet, I sniff the cold air pass by, touch the drizzle, rain-drops fall upon me.  I look out to the beautiful night view of LA &amp; think to myself. . -such a 'Bright Light, Big City'.
