ReviewID: izN2GlF1P2BjdpIqW9Ij4Q
ReviewerID: UX1qfvGmxTBtNYzI2notYg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
I went here last night with some friends, and let me start off by saying I am vegan and the only reason I am writing this review is because I want to look out for my vegan friends on yelp who, like me, had no vegan reviews for flip burger. Well, now you do!. When we walked in, I was starving and since it was a Thursday night at a new-ish restaurant I figured it wouldn't be that busy. WRONG. We had a 30 minute wait which turned into a 45 minute wait. There was no place to sit while waiting, it was extremely noisy and you are forced to watch other people devour their food, or you could hang out at the bar if you're into that.. Once we finally got seated it was worth it because we got the best seat in the house (the large booth closest to the kitchen.) The booths are the best because they are padded so it blocks out most of the noise. The service was slow at first, but as it got later, people started clearing out making it easier for our server.. I ordered the "faux-lafel" burger and made it vegan by requesting no feta cheese spread. They also had a mushroom burger with swiss cheese. I also ordered fries on the side. If you are vegan MAKE SURE YOU TELL THE SERVER because they fry all their fries in duck fat!! Thank goodness we didn't have to find this out the hard way as they have a separate frier with vegetable oil. My two friends ordered a typical beef burger and some sort of raw marinated beef burger that was reccomended by our server. They said they were both the best burgers they've ever had. For dessert they ordered the N2 milkshakes. Such a cool concept and they looked delicious. If I was vegetarian I would totally go for one, but unfortunately this place isn't as vegan friendly as I had hoped.. I would definitely go back again, but I'll save it as a place to take friends who eat meat as only having two menu options could get repetitive.
