ReviewID: izqiXzokV06U-q9wQOrXKA
ReviewerID: nL6FP8Vu5MY5GXpg-dshqw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
I'd like to preface that I'm a deep dish kind of guy, but my wife is not from Chicago so she likes her pizza in a non-Chicago way.  Well I was thinking of ideas for V-day.  And then my wife says that she's been craving wood oven pizza.  It reminded me that over the summer we decided to go for a run down Ravenswood.  This place looked really good, but we were stinky from running.  Even thought we wouldn't mind eating pizza, I'm pretty sure a stinky Jon in the restaurant would ruin the ambiance (eww).. . Well we go there finally last night (not V-day but we went other places that night).  My wife is getting into her hungry more so we need some apps quick.  We get the poached seafood.  It was calamari, cuttlefish, and shrimp drizzled with olive oil and lemon.  It was light and hit the spot.  . . But they also had something they called the daily fried item.  I don't know about you but when they say that my heart usually skips a beat.  I'm not quite sure if that is excitement or a preemptive warning from my heart of an imminent heart attack.  I'll just assume excitement.  So we order it.  That day it was deep fried sandwiches.  Yup folks it was an Italian Monte Cristo, but fancy.  The bread was a good Italian bread with buffalo mozzarella, prosciutto, and fresh basil leaves.  It was served with a nice chunky tomato sauce.  Holy Sh!t it was amazing.  If I could eat 10 of these I would.. . A few minutes later and its pizza time.  Here were my first impressions.  The cheese doesn't cover all the pizza and they didn't cut it for us.  Then I notice the crust has little burnt edges from the wood-fired oven.  So with the pizza cutter they provided we cut the pizza.  For being burnt on the edges it sure is soggy in the middle.  Well that aside, the flavors were amazing.  We got the Diavola, which was buffalo mozzarella with spicy salami, basil, and red pepper flakes.  The dough was chewy and delicious.. . After wards my wife and I treated ourselves to some after dinner liquor.  It helped digest the carb overload that we both enjoyed.. . The only thing that stopped me from giving 5 stars was the price was more expensive than I would anticipate for a small pizza place.
