ReviewID: J2GV5u6Z3ROuu1S-JiQuYQ
ReviewerID: yAca6hYCWlfb-26Clc9BCA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
It takes a dedicated sort of fatass to travel 30 miles AGAINST friday afternoon crosstown traffic the night before a trip to Cabo merely to satisfy an incomprehensible dumpling craving.. . But i gots to eat, you know?. . This restaurant is housed in a rather sleek building that is actually nice in that way that is common amongst newish suburban commercial centers.  The restrooms were also shockingly pristine and made me a bit skeptical - some of the best chinese restaurants I have been to in my life house some of the worst bathrooms.. . Ok, enough potty room talk.  The efficient hostess takes your order before you even sit down.  She wears a headset, and by god, she uses it.  This gives enough lead time to the dumpling-makers that you can see through the glass window making the dumplings from scratch.    This is the single-coolest aspect about this place.  That and the fact the dumplings are assembled by a series of japanese robots.  Ok, thats not true but wouldn't that be awesome?. . We started with the juicy pork dumplings, and juicy vegetable/pork dumplings.  I thought these were very tasty although my eating companion (EC) prefers the drier dumplings.  We moved on to the dry dumplings - an order of fish dumplings and an order of the open-faced rice and pork dumplings.  I thought the latter was quite good and yummy.  My EC thought the fish dumplings could have used more flavor and I concur.  Overall I was quite satisfied.. . I think the real value is in the "fixins", i.e. the side dishes you can order with the dumplings.  We chose some fried rice with crispy tender pork, cold sesame peanut noodles and a couple of the steamed pork buns.  These were fantastic and perfectly complemented the centerpiece of the dumpling extranvaganza.  Next time I want to try some of the soups they offer as appetizers.. . To sum up: . . PROS: clean place, overall great dumplings, great side dishes, people in window making dough (is it a one-way looking glass?) uncommonly clean bathrooms and restaurant, hostess with kick-ass headset. . CONS: reeeeaaallly far away, location induces suburban ennui, some dumplings could be more flavorful, supposedly a long wait even though we didn't wait long at all
