ReviewID: J2SX9c0ygXCahGRYEtEsUg
ReviewerID: DyoL3MTR2vxbkQN0T7PzNA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
As much as I want to give CUT more stars, I just can't. I kind of struggled with giving 3-stars.. . The FOOD:. My BF took me here for Valentine's Day, so we got to experience their prixe fixed menu. I would definitely give the appetizers and desserts 5-stars, but this place is a steakhouse so I was grading more on their steak. To start, we had Maple Glazed Pork Belly and Kobe Steak Sashimi. Both were AMAZING! Melt in your mouth goodness! Tender, perfect flavor and a surprisingly decent portion. Now with this kind of start to your meal, you'd have high expectations for your entree no? My BF ordered their Rib Eye Steak and I got their True Japanese Wagyu steak. The Rib Eye was DRY, bland and not cooked to order! He asked for medium and got pretty much well done. My True Japanese Wagyu was delicious which was expected, also considering there was an additional charge to select this item. Don't get me wrong, the True Japanese Wagyu was definitely very very good, however, I could find an equally delicious steak for a better price. I guess I was expecting mind-blowing like how I felt about my Kobe Beef sashimi. At least our meal ended on a happy note with a very delicious dessert. My BF got a chocolate cake, which was very good. BUT, my strawberry and cream something or rather was SUBLIME! It was this pastry ball thing on the outside and strawberry ice cream on the inside, and in between both was gooey soft marshmallow. Oh so heavenly!. . The PLACE and PRICE:. Decor is simple and contemporary. The place is actually quite small. We were lucky to get a booth away from the regular tables. The regular tables were all cluttered together, it looked like people were bumping elbows while cutting their steak. For the price, it is definitely a special occasion kind of place. Although, I didn't think it was worth it, the steaks that is. I would come back for their appetizers and desserts.. . The SERVICE:. Our waitress was quite nice. And our waters were filled regularly. But for as many waiters, waitresses, hosts and hostesses there seemed to be, service seemed rather slow. After we were done with our appetizer, I think we stared at our empty plates for a good 20 - 30 minutes. I don't want to be nit-picky or anything, but I guess I expected more being at a 5-star, Michelin rated restaurant. We were there for almost 3 hours.. . Maybe it was a fluke and next time will be better. We will come and try again, maybe once more; for the steaks. Appetizers and desserts got my vote. Steaks were pretty disappointing. But hey, try it out yourself. There's enough 5-stars from other yelpers to convince you its "the best steak ever". This is just one yelper's opinion. Oh and I believe there is only valet parking here since it's at the Beverly Hills Four Seasons and all. It is $12 with validation, $20 without. YIKES!
