ReviewID: j2UHoMMJ4mMB5tLrzb6HMw
ReviewerID: T9jRi4U2RQr40KGw_EGtgw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Joy Yee&#39;s Noodle Shop
Category: Vietnamese
This is my second review, my first after the one on DHResumes. You'll find that my comments will generally follow what Grams' always told me, "Don't say nothin' at all if you ain't got nothin' good to say." According to Yelp's stats that seems to separate me from more than 50% of Yelpers. In other words, I'll leave the berating to other people, while I'll review the places that I truly enjoy. For my culinary credentials, I grew up in a family that owns several restaurants that create amazing food. I have no association with any of the restaurants that I am reviewing other than that I eat at the mentioned locations and their food makes my stomach happy. Claro?. . Yes, I love, love, love Joy Yee's Noodle Shop. The place is bustling with customers and servers, they offer a gargantuan-sized menu that I have yet to make it through, the food is inexpensive, and the courses and drinks are tasty and satisfying. Joy Yee's is a place that Asians, Asian Americans and non-Asians can enjoy. It is not, however, a quiet place for a midday tea break.. . Given how my family, friends and I all love Joy Yee's, I suspect that at least some of the reviews by negative commentators are those of competitors or people with odd expectations. Please find my rebuttals in defense of a place that I frequent --. . 1) "It's loud and crowded" -- Yes, that happens when a place is popular. I found out just this past Sunday that they have a second floor. We sat upstairs and people filled that area too. There were people waiting for tables, ruffling through menus, even for the upstairs portion at about 2:30 PM. Besides being able to pack their large establishment, "loud and crowded" is the way things are really done in China. The Chinese invented fast food when they created the wok thousands of years ago. Go to good restaurants in Hong Kong, Beijing and Shanghai and you will find well-heeled patrons packing in to eat. Asians live to eat and Joy Yee's setting is traditional and efficient.. . 2) "The menu is huge." -- I've been going with my family and friends for years and I sincerely doubt that I've eaten everything on the menu. You can pick what you like using the pictures in the front of the menu or look for additional options in the middle or back pages. This place offers cuisines from all over the Indochinese region, yet the cooking is great whether you want Chinese, Japanese, Thai, or Korean food. Joy Yee's does Indochinese mixed menu better than any other place I've eaten. . Also, since I have an allergy to MSG, I stay away from many places in Chinatown, and enjoy my favorite haunts. Joy Yee's doesn't use MSG and the fried foods are remarkably not greasy. Out of curiosity, does anyone know how many chefs Joy Yee's has?. . 3) "The drinks are just alright." -- Drinking their mango tapioca is like drinking a cold, refreshing kind of sunshine. The mango tapioca is addicting. It's like tasty happiness blended for you. These drinks could make even the Grinch happy.. . 4) "The waiter recommended ..." -- I have never seen one of the waiters try to up-sell us or any of the other customers. Figure out what you want from the menu or by what others have ordered. These waiters are as mellow in a sea of busyness as can be.. . 5) "The chairs ..." -- Yes, I have to agree that the chairs are a bit strange. A few months back some friends and I were speculating on the design of the chairs. I believe that I figured it out and, frankly, my hat is off to the manager. Good business sense was used in choosing these chairs. If you see how crowded it gets, you can figure out why they selected these chairs.. . To any of their competitors who think that slagging off one of the most popular places in Chinatown is the way to bring in customers, think again. Try improving your own food quality and prep timing, keeping your restaurants clean, and losing the attitude. Those are the secret ingredients that have made Joy Yee's a destination in Chicago, as well as the two other locations.
