ReviewID: J4e27j9F-5TYfVgIAcrjrg
ReviewerID: 7h9eMPhbQoMaPqdaTgafLg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mayan Palace Mexican Cuisine
Category: Mexican
I will never go to another Mexican place in Chicago again., well, at least not sober.. . It was a Thursday night and I felt like eating enchiladas. So, I came onto yelp, typed in enchiladas or something, and wala, I was given Mayan Palace. And the reviews said they had half-priced margaritas on Tuesday and Thursday nights. . . Awesome.. . So my girlfriend and I hopped in a cab and mosey'ed our asses over here. It's a quiet little joint, and it was jam-packed, as in, to the point that the line extends out the front door. There was also a midget standing on someone's shoulders downing a pitcher of lemon margarita.. . We're standing there, thinking, "Fuck, we're not going to get a seat for like an hour." and the lady says "Fifteen minutes.". . Awesome.. . We grab a margarita, and maybe ten minutes later, we've got seats. There's chips on salsa and two glasses of water already on the table when we're seated.. . Awesome.. . And, now is when it gets good. The service is amazing. Beyond amazing. You don't have one specific server for your table; the entire crew is there to server you. Within seconds of a glass of water, or a margarita, or the salsa being emptied, a server will ask if you want a refill. Within seconds of him leaving, and a different server noticing that you are empty, they will ask if you need a refill. This is even though there was -no- standing room in the restaurant and it was busy as all hell. In addition, they did this while having a massive smile on their faces.. . Now the bonus:. A week and a half later, we went back, and the server recognized us, remembered where we were sitting the time before and commented on it. (We were in their covered, heated outdoor patio which was just slightly colder than their normal inside room.) Once again, we wouldn't go 3.4 seconds having an empty glass, cup, or basket of chips without an offer for a refill.. . This place is amazing. The service alone makes you want to eat here. The margaritas aren't amazing, but they're good. Get the lemon margarita. The guacamole appetizer is amazing, probably the best I've ever had. The ceviche looked good, but I haven't eaten it. (One old Mexican dude next to me ate two of them himself, and it's going on my plate next time.) The rest of the food is good too.. . Lastly, this is the -only- Mexican food I have ever had which has not caused my ass to explode, and for that, I will only go here ... assuming I am sober of course.
