ReviewID: J511OgkgXYtT_FM5dlIKPQ
ReviewerID: vLxpEHKZFzv8LYY5eeGjTg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Who has two thumbs and loves Mexican dishes in the morning? THIS GIRL!  As I have previously mentioned, there just aren't really any unique food options in Indy, so when I venture out of the city, I must stop in to the local delicacies that are offered elsewhere.  . . A few weeks ago I visited fellow (Elite) Yelper Sarah G. and our entire agenda was based on food.  Where were we eating, what time and how much did it cost were the constant worries of the visit.  Very productive, I might add!!. . We had a largish group of 7 adults and four babies for Sola on a Sunday morning.  They accepted our reservation (probably with a bit of a hesitation - I know I would have!) and were all ready for us when we arrived!  It was awesome!  Our table was centrally located and I loved the atmosphere.  It was just loud enough for a Sunday a.m. to lull my baby to sleep in his carseat and not too loud that we could have a conversation and talk without yelling.. . Our server was a lovely British (maybe?? Cute accent, that's all I know!) who was very helpful with the menu and only slightly scattered.  Despite her being a bit slow with the bill, everything else was AH-MA-ZING (as Sarah G. would say).. . So ...let's just discuss the food...We started off with drinks.  I had the palmango mimosa (soooo pretty and good), and we ordered these fried dough balls that came with lemon and raspberry dipping sauce.  DE-LISH-IS-NESS!  I wish I could have made my entire meal out of those but I am so happy I didn't. :P  i personally ordered the chilaquiles which was awesome!! There was a bit of kick to it but it was an incredible way to start my day (did I mention I was in a bad mood - I was, but they fixed it!).  I am just sitting here remembering the mouthwatering bites of the eggs, pico and guac all together now...mmmmmmm.. . I also indulged in a bite of Sarah G's short rib Benedict.  I believe that is the only reason she comes to this place! :) And, the kiddos had pancakes and some other goodies.  Everything was so wonderful! I wish this was in Indy.  I would love to take guests to this place for some enjoyable mid-morning treats, but alas, I can only experience such fabulousness when I'm in Chicago.. . Thank you, Sarah G, for my incredible tour of food in Lincoln Square area!
