ReviewID: j5GXSX4X2UwRQ3Tt-lAWCQ
ReviewerID: OzdqM7BbvL27AnrTZ27g-w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
February, 4th 2005:. I am in my closet, trying to figure out what to wear. It's not too cold out for the time of year but I have no idea of what is in store for me today.. Hard decisions.. . It's my first date with this guy. He's cute and I think we clicked. We are to meet under the Bean in Millenium Park. I prefer calling it the Cloud Gate...way more romantic. Right?. I am nervous. My English is not that good and I will have to talk all day long....wow...can I nod all day? Hmmm..... . Februrary 4th, 2010:. The date went pretty well. He took me to the suburbs (first trip ever for me!!) and we had a lovely time at the zoo....we hold hands watching dolphins. I learned one of my favorite English words, pacifier. I made a mess eating sushi. We listened to Travis in the car.. . And now it's 5 years later. So much happened since that day, a lot of bad actually...but a lot of love too. We are good together, in a very peaceful and serene way.. We got married last year.. . And in all that time we ate our way out through Chicago. With much delight.. We had come to sola a few times already for brunch (pre-Yelp era) and decided to give it a try for dinner this time. I put a killer new dress on, drove up there and met my date of the night in front of the restaurant. He was waiting for me with a frying pan. Under the lid, stellar earrings and a matching necklace.. And a monkey card.. . We go in, sit down and get lost in the menu. One of our favorite things in the world. I spot right away my appetizer, butter poached crab. I spot his. Share the news.. We are ready to start.. . The crab is a true delight. Two big chunks of king crab legs, a wonderful crab cake, sweet potato gnocchi, chive, ginger, tatsoi..... Rich, balanced, exquisite.. It is followed by the fish special of the day, opaka paka (Hawaiian red snapper) served with crispy skin. Roasted chestnut, long green beans, wild mushroom, ponzu reduction.. Solid if not mind-blowing.. . The true moment of grace was dessert. We chose the butternut squash bread pudding which was absolutely divine, Ho'oponopono style. Served with a soft soy ice cream (out of this world), a black sesame brittle and a sweet balsamic reduction it was no ordinary bread pudding....no....light and airy, it was more along the line of a slightly sweet custard with melting pieces of squash and it made my heart flutter. . . Just like my sweetie.. . Happy anniversary to us, and to many more to come! (raising my glass of Riesling to you guys)
