ReviewID: j6-froVSFoNUgXWgHacZrA
ReviewerID: y6unGuakjuegVMkB5Yk5Mw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
This place has $17 all you can eat Korean BBQ.  It's large group and birthday-friendly.  Fortunately, there is a large parking lot with valet service.  You get a decent variety of meat that they bring to your table including BBQ beef, short ribs, brisket, chicken, etc.  . . The table next to us was there for a birthday, and one of the staff shook a bottle of champagne and doused the birthday boy with the entire bottle while his friends laughed and took pictures.  While our party was also there for a birthday, the birthday girl was not wearing a champagne-friendly outfit so we elected to take the high road and let her off the hook easy.  The restaurant played this annoyingly cheesy, techno "Happy Birthday" song that was on loop like 8x in a row.  Despite that, did I mention this place has $17 all you can eat Korean BBQ?  . . While Manna is good for large groups and is extremely affordable, it is also very high volume.  The main dining area seats around 300 (there's an outdoor dining area in the back that seats more as well) and is extremely loud.  When we were there, the entire restaurant was packed to capacity, with a very boisterous crowd in the main dining area chanting for someone to chug a drink.  The clientele seemed to be high school to college aged kids.  One thing that really bothered me was the bathroom.  The guys bathroom only had one urinal and a single toilet... that didn't flush.  This place probably holds 400 people who are all drinking alcohol, and that's what they give us?  Is that even legal?  Regardless, this place has $17 all you can eat Korean BBQ.  . . Manna is somewhat dirty and has fallen into disrepair.  With that many people traveling in and out, the wear and tear is starting to show.  The guy next to me leaned back in his chair, and when he leaned forward, his hair stuck to the wall.  I don't even want to know what caused that... but this place has $17 all you can eat Korean BBQ. . . As for the food, I enjoyed the taste of the BBQ Beef, but the other meats we tried were rather bland.  While it's nice to have a large quantity, I didn't feel the quality was there.  There's other places I'd rather go for Korean BBQ.  But in these cash-strapped times, it bears repeating that this place has $17 all you can eat Korean BBQ.
