ReviewID: j6ggdWJeNs7VEWGugfqdAg
ReviewerID: ZJ_IIzT1W6NNgh1s-4zXmQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
Here's a key sign that you've got a severe case of chronic yelpitis: 50% of your dining conversation at one of the top Los Angeles restaurants is about what is and isn't going into your yelp review.  Crazy looking fork and fish knife?  "That's going in the yelp review!"  Servers bearing robust trays of walnut, sourdough, white, and crisp bread?  "That's getting a star!"  The waiter who I couldn't really understand, and was useless in eradicating my ever present confusion about what to order?  The salmon or the black bass?  The souffle or chocolate tart?  Well, I would dock him points if he hadn't been so gosh darn cute and curteous, even offerring to take my souffle with apricot sauce and vanilla bean ice cream off the bill should I find it unpleasing to my sensitive palate.  Bravo, Mister Puck! You have bred deliciously unpretentious waiters who appear to care more about customer satisfaction than the contents of their pockets.  . . Aside from the severe symptoms of yelpitis accumulating at our yelp dominated table of five, the evening was destined to be a success.  It was the always charming and adorable Lauren M.'s birthday, and there are few things better than celebrating the accumulation of years than with the accumulation of lots of pricey and delicious calories.  If you are going to splurge, Spago is most certainly a fabulous place to do it.  Case in point?  The best *crabcake (yes, "cake," singular) I have ever laid to rest in my belly.  Flakey, succulant pieces of high-quality crab, unhindered by unnecessary filler -- it was almost too much for a young girl to handle!  Oh but don't you worry, Lauren M. and I made sure that the cake was adequately cared for as we paraded it into our mouths with much fanfare.  . . After the unequivocal success of the cake 'o crab, I worried that my "boring" sounding steamed black bass entree would pale in comparison.  I was convinced that George M.'s wild king salmon would send me home sick with a case of the food jellies (aka "order's remorse"), but one taste of the delicate, moist bass, dancing in a symphony of soy and chili oil, and my heart went out to Mister Puck once again.  He even made sure that dear sore gums girl Lauren B. was fully accomodated with an order that wouldn't wreck havoc in her mouth.  Though there was no sign of the robustly accented Austrian in the restaurant, I could feel his presense lurking in the corner.  I know he was secretly singing Lauren a "Happy Birthday" song that would make even Simon Cowell take notice.  In pain most likely.. . Even with the delightful food, refreshing service and of course, creative flatware, there was something slightly off.  Could it be Michael Jackson's "Beat It" playing in the background?  Or the somewhat impersonal feel of the dining room?  Or maybe that while the key ingredients are there, the passion behind it is noticeably missing?  Has the Puck been lurking in the corner too long?  His hand is there, but the magic touch seems to have left the building.  If you are reading this Mister Puck, please bring it back.  Because at these prices, I'd prefer the flatware at Hatfield's, Grace or Osteria Mozza instead.  Course I'd happily fork that crabtastic cake any day.... . *Only a select few will know what this said before I clicked that "edit" button. ;)
