ReviewID: j7CTuFTqPGUcBT69u2_xfg
ReviewerID: O5MEkKg1KVxtSuRG4kOp2A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Pink's is AWESOME. Let me be honest and unbiased as I can be. Depending on the time of day you go, the line can be very long. But I've stood in the line as long as 45 minutes and as short at as 10 minutes. I recommend going on a Tuesday (or basically a weekday M-W) around 9 or 10. That's when I got in the shortest line. Thurs-Sun are club nights in LA so not a good idea (people are out and hungry, places are busy, it's common sense). . . HOWEVER, even if you do hit a line, just go with friends you can hold a conversation with for 45 minutes and the time will just fly by. I went with my honor society and we played games in line while we waited. We took post-its and markers and put celeb names on people's backs and they had to guess who they were using yes/no questions to everyone else who could see what was ont heir back. We even got strangers around us in line to join, it was fun!. . Now, as far as the dog is concerned: THE BEST DOG I'VE EVER EATEN, HANDS DOWN. I notice people want to make complaints like "Oh, I could make better at home" but to them I say, go ahead. You could make a burger at home as well but do you still go to mcdonald's or carl's jr. every now and again? You could make lasagna but it won't keep you from going to your favorite italian restaruant. WE CAN ALL COOK AT HOME but we don't because we want to be out, maybe with friends, and have someone else do the cooking work, have their own unique flavors, and not have to clean a kitchen afterward. STOP HATING. I don't think I could make Pink's delicious chili if I tried at home. Everyone has a special recipe, which is why you GO PLACES FOR OTHER FOOD. . . I find Pink's to be mouthwatering, the price is right, the atmosphere is fun, and it's just one of those things you do because it's an LA hot spot. You might catch a celeb there but even if you don't you still enjoy yourself. They also serve bottled sodas, which is just fun and nostalgic. And their seasoned fries are great! I just never have room for a whole order because of what I usually get. . . My order: 2 Huell Dogs and 2 Cream Sodas. . I eat like a champ!!. . I recommend that you go if you've never been and decide for yourself. DON'T LISTEN TO THESE REVIEWS (not even mine :)) Everyone likes what they like and you may just fall in love with Pink's like many of us have. There are like 20 different hot dogs to choose from, plus burritos and sandwiches. . . CHECK IT OUT!
