ReviewID: J7Ehv-tcJhQX0iTVGyvuVw
ReviewerID: YPuefjfa8t8rI0Cu2D3zJQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I know a place has got to be good when my sis turns down sushi for it.  SUSHI!  It's, like, her favorite food in the world!  Plus, she mentioned it a gajillion times, so I knew we'd be there at some point, sporting a stylish bib and trying not to crack seafood juice all over each other.. . On the way into the parking lot, I mistook the parking lot next door as theirs, so I was surprised to find the actual parking lot of theirs was TINY.  We happened to luck out because a car was leaving as we pulled in, so no need to roam around looking for parking.  I went inside first to try and get a table.  No one was around to help me and they have a complete party to be seated rule, so I went to the ladies room first (it was kinda dirty...).. . When I came back, I caught the waitress just in time to get the last table and before the party that was waiting outside came in with the two friends they were waiting for.  She grabbed a fresh paper towel roll and escorted us to a waxed paper covered table.. . The menu is short and sweet.  The boil is by the pound and you can pick from blue crabs, shrimp, king crab legs, dungeoness crabs or crawfish.  You can also get raw oysters, fried oysters, fried catfish, fried shrimp or hot wings and a variety of sides including corn, cajun fries, sweet potato fries or sausage.. . We got an order of fried oysters, a dungeoness crab (the whole shebang style), some corn, cajun fries and a soda (free refills!).  The oysters were fried perfectly dangerously.  You know when you fry an oyster so perfect that you run the risk of burning yourself with the incendiary juice that can and may drip from the oyster?  That's how perfect these were!  I burned my lip on a bit of this hot juice...  It hurt so good!. . The corn arrived with our gigantic dungeoness crab in their respective plastic bags.  It was a huge three pound crab.  It was the slightest bit overcooked, but not bad at all.  We went to town on the crab.  The cajun fries were nice and crispy, a perfect complement to the meal.  I was so enamored by the sauce (you get to pick from the original rajun cajun, lemon pepper, garlic butter or the whole shebang, which is all three combined) that i started "marinating" pieces of my crab in the sauce.  I'd crack open a leg and leave the meat on half it's shell and bury that in the sauce...  It was delicious!. . The aftermath was a table full of shells and rivers of crab water and shebang sauce that creeped towards the table's edge.  I was glad my sis took off her watch beforehand and that I followed suit with mine and my ring.  And boy was I glad that I put on that bib.  A moment of dorkiness, but I'd rather look dorky in that bib than smell heinously garlicky and seafoody.afterwards.. . I scrubbed my hands twice and even did a preliminary face wash before I left the restaurant, but I still felt a bit like I had food on my face.  Anyhoo, the food was great, the music was good and the young crowd was kind of unexpected but cool.. . It was definitely better than sushi...  Num, num, num
