ReviewID: j7EXdJUGjymIkm3I-C5CSg
ReviewerID: yKmFQVubUVypjzyY-0MD5w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
What could anyone possibly love more for on an anniversary but to be treated to the restaurant you both have been dreaming about for a year? Not much. . . Thanks to my honey and his generosity, we got to spend our anniversary at this pinnacle of dining experiences. Avid fans of Chef Tom's, we were thrilled to finally walk through the threshold of this restaurant our empty wallets had never afforded us before (and shouldn't have this time, really). . . I had heard/read about the family style dining offered at Craft, but what I didn't really grasp until the food was all in front of me, was that the portions are much too large for one person. Maybe if all I was eating were 3 perfectly seared and seasoned diver scallops, I would have been more ready for the heaping portion of blueberry rhubarb cobbler waiting in the wings, but with the menu listing "First Courses, Main Courses, and Sides", I thought we were supposed to choose one of each. Lo and behold, my first course of mozzarella ravioli with cherry tomatoes was delectable but also the size of a dinner portion of ravioli at, say, Fraiche. . . Fortunately, or unfortunately for my quickly filling stomach as the case may be, we had placed our entire order at once, so by the time I realized I would probably have to force dessert down the gullet (I would NEVER forgo it altogether!!!), it was too late. . . My date ate all the things I won't, including sweetbreads he seemed to like but which I would not touch no matter how much he appealed, and beef cheeks which were an unsettling texture for me. The assorted mushrooms were fantastic though I really wish we had also ordered the corn our waitress recommended most highly. . . If I learned one thing from the most elaborate meal of my life (this one), I learned that I would absolutely love to return to Craft, but next time I'll know better than to order one of each course for each guest. We can share, enjoy, and not regret needing a gluttony induced nap the moment we get home.
