ReviewID: jAJbBSKq8RUCkvFHo3_Ygg
ReviewerID: FUa2UYW8T8SeXtKdDzx3Bw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Greek Islands Restaurant
Category: Greek
Greek Islands is fast becoming a favorite date place for my boyfriend and I. Now that we live in the West Loop very close to Greektown, I'm sure it will become our most frequented restaurant. We love it there. The food is always delicious, the waiters are friendly, and the staff is helpful. . . We nearly always order the same thing: Chicken Shishkabob for my boyfriend, Avgolemono soup for me (it's my favorite), and of course a Saganaki appetizer. Their Saganaki is the best I've ever had and always makes my mouth happy. My Avgolemono soup is always delicious, hot, and made fresh. We both enjoy the Chicken Shishkabob-I eat a lot of the veggies, and he eats the chicken. Both are done very well-we both love the taste of grilled veggies, and they're fantastic here. Never over or under cooked, and always the right amount of char. I also love their rice pudding, which is, to date, the only dessert I've ever had there because it's so good. Next time, I'm going to try the Baklava, another favorite of mine. . . We love the date like atmosphere here. The lighting is lower than most places, but not so low that you can't see your food (I have had that happen before). Even when they are full of louder people, we can easily hold a conversation and focus on each other, which is important for a date. I love the decor as well. It's perfect for the restaurant and the atmosphere. Greek Islands has been around for a long time (my mom ate there 30 years ago when she lived in Evanston and came to the city) and I imagine it will be around for a lot longer. We always look forward to dining there. . . You can dress however you like here, which I appreciate. I have gone in jeans and a t-shirt, but also in a LBD and heels. I've seen large family gatherings here, work dinners, and even a few wedding receptions.  Free valet parking is a wonderful thing that they have. While we can now walk there, it allows our visitors to drive if they wish and not have to worry about parking, which is always a concern in the city. 5 stars all around for Greek Islands.
