ReviewID: JaleYn7SxuAq80tVHSLTjQ
ReviewerID: EKdyI4jpUF29YtPkKiCtcg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
4.5. . If you've been to Lucca Delicatessen in the Marina, then, this is a mini version, and less homier... I feel that the vibe in the Marina is more catered to the people, here, it's like, what's the word? NYish? Not snobbish, but eh, idk, i give up... I said, the VIBE people, the VIBE amongst the customers who come in and out... You order in the back, and pick up in the front. if you've never been, it's like a deli, the food is behind the counter and the name and the price is labelled for your conveinience. Oh, speaking of which, the only diff, you can sit and eat here if you like, but you'll feel cramped in. SHIET! i feel claustrophobic, just by STANDING there.. . the employees are very sweet and always willing to cater to your needs. . . Parking: hit or miss, with the streets and the one in the back of the alley.. . My mom had always told me about this place, and I just never came around to coming here, but i guess fate created an opportunity to make a chance, but again, not with my mom. :( Always, something comes up, or it's either TOO packed, or something, but nonetheless... . Ordered me a coppa salami baguette sandwich w a side of torchietti w/baby shrimp and basil pasta. The sandwich, it was decent, but i've tried better, so i give it a 3. The olive pasta was a bit too salty... The pasta, WOWWWWWWW! Simply divine... YUMMM..  i'm still craving some more... mmm.. a DEF 5. Total came out to be $14.88 but with $2 tip, almost $17.. . . oh, how could i ferget to grab me their sweet cupcakes, they were delish and juicy lookin.. looked simply so perfect, so perfect to the point where it would melt into my mouth... but, i guess the customers in there were kinda driving me crazy, everyone waving their hands around, picking what they want from one thing to another. . . When i initially got the food, i didn't think it was that pricey and was WELL worth it, but now, come to think of it, as i am writing this blog, i think $17 was DEF not worth it, maybe $12? . . Oh, btw, they cater too!. . Def worth checking out!
