ReviewID: JBiLrDr2diUKPtPv6p9MUw
ReviewerID: 6sVNq2y54baL-F-Hbykr3g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Food: was a bit hesitant to try the place due to mixed reviews but it was fantastic!  the bread with the olive oil spread was really good.  we had the beef tartar, the bacon risotto, and the peas ravioli to start.  the tartar tasted like tomatoes.. kinda like a bruschetta.  the bacon risotto was a bit too salty for my liking, and the peas ravioli was a bit sweet but balanced well with the spinach.   for entrees, we had the rack of lamb (special of the day) which was perfect and not gamey at all!  the mushrooms and mashed potatoes it came with the dish was very good as well.  the flat iron steak was also perfectly cooked.  the pork chop was very juicy and not dry as i thought it would be.  monk fish was very tender and flavorful.  for desserts, we had the souffle which was amazingly delicious with a hint of nutella.  i wasnt too excited about the chocolate tart.. a bit too sweet.  the donuts tasted like churros and it was just alright.  the panna cotta with the fruits was very light and refreshing.  definitely one of my favorites of the night.  all the dishes was beautifully presented and came with the right amount of portion size.. not too large and not too small.. . Ambiance: sleek and modern.  great covered patio dining with heat lamps.  great lounge area and bar area as well.  . . Staff: friendly and helpful.  I thought it was a bit odd that our waiter took our orders before reading us the specials of the day.  only when i tried to order the pasta dish did he mention that it was appetizer size and decided to tell us the specials.  either way he was very friendly and super helpful even when we accidentally charged an extra credit card by mistake.  i read in one of the reviews that a waiter was pretentious and tried to correct his pronunciation of the dishes which was exactly what our waiter did!  he corrected us a few times when we couldnt pronounce some of the dishes.  i thought it seemed a bit pretentious but i dont think he meant it to be that way.  he was still very very nice and funny and reminded me of chris kattan!. . Price: $$$
