ReviewID: JbINTAlCD56PNenK9zzSLw
ReviewerID: XDDKqUzVXs1jHx2NsRAjXg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mana Food Bar
Category: Vegetarian
Recently Amish S and I have been going to meat heavy restaurants, so I suggested a veg place like Mana.  I did my research on yelp, so I knew what to expect and what were the most popular dishes.  . . I ordered the nigori sake w/ pear nectar which was made with Snow Beauty nigori sake, agave nectar, and canned Jumex pear nectar.  Nigori is unfiltered so it's a cloudier and creamier.  It was very light and certainly tasty.    However, since Mana is striving to be more natural and organic, I was expecting fresh pear puree.    So you can easily make this by grabbing some nigori from Mitsuwa ($10) and Jumex (80 cents) at any mercado.  . . They took the pho off the menu because there were too many mixed reviews.  We shared the bulgogi, mushroom and polenta, and 2 sliders.  The tofu bulgogi was way too salty and the sauce tasted like thickened soy sauce.      I think they may be able to take the edge of the saltiness by using Asian pear puree, mirin, and some brown sugar to round off the flavor.  The mushroom and polenta was decent.  But, I have to say the best polenta I have had to date was from Scylla.  It was proscuitto wrapped shrimp accompanied by  polenta cake topped w/ egg yolk (I have a pix posted in my profile).  Last but not least, the sliders... get my 100% approval.  I could eat 10 of those sliders, and it is the greatest reason for me to go back.  [I have also uploaded some pics].         Our tab came out to about  $35 including T&amp;T and was the right amount for lunch portion.  For dinner, you probably need to share two more small plates for fullness.  $35 is slightly high for lunch prices and I can see how people can express concern for price.  But, I guess you have to think of it as, you would spend about the same at a Spanish tapas restaurant.  I actually enjoyed my exp. here much more than Ba-ba-reeba.  Overall, I greet Mana with open arms, and I really like the direction they are going with this concept. The only thing I can think of that may solidify return customers is if they give a psychological bonus like maybe provide free korean style ban chan, which wouldn't cost the restaurant much.  Or maybe have happy hours.  I don't know something that may pushes a little more value for the money.
