ReviewID: jbrbJeReXx9g3MGzsRheLQ
ReviewerID: Bezh6tDmCrL0-SnsV6CneA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pylos
Category: Greek
I love this place. It's my favorite restaurant on 7th... I love the claypots hanging overhead and the ambience. I've gotten take-out here once (if you prefer to eat in the privacy of your own rooftop) and eaten dinner here twice. A note on take-out: even though there is a take-out menu, they will still honor requests from the regular dinner menu, so don't think your options are limited! The order was ready at the pick-up time. Painless.. . Dinner: I walked in once during the week. The place had a good crowd. We were seated immediately at the communal table in the back by the bar. Which is a pretty nice, intimate experience, albeit different than table dining. The other time, I made reservations on Sat afternoon for that evening. On the phone, they'd said that only the communal table was available when I bumped my res from a 2 to a 3 but when I arrived, I was surprised with a nice corner table by the wine racks. I was seated immediately even though the rest of my party wasn't there yet. Service was attentive since the moment I walked in. Our request for more pita bread and the check were all turned around timely. I got a nice glass of a full bodied red (not sure what it was called, but I think there was only one - two options). . . Now, on to the food:. . Cold appetizers:. - poikilia (trio of dipping sauces): you get a generous portion of tzatziki, fish roe dip, and grilled eggplants with warm, fresh out of the oven pita bread. Note, that this is in addition to the complimentary pita bread with spicy, beany dip. . . Hot appetizers:. - pitakia kaisarias (savory phyllo pastries with beef, tomato, and cheese): very delicate layers and flavorful. party in my mouth. . - yiouvarlakia (pork and rice meat balls): reminds me of a shanghainese dish, well made and flavored. definitely an innovative twist to the typical meatball.. - ta afrata (diane's meatballs): they were also good and fluffy, but i think i prefer the one with rice. . . Entrees:. - freskos (baked cod): the white, buttery cod just melts in your mouth. It's lightly salted and tastes even better when complimented with the black eyed peas.. - krasata paidakia (short ribs): fall-off-the-bone meat with porcini mushroom mashed potatoes. i was so full at this point, i could only fit the ribs in. a hearty dish. . - moussaka: a beautifully arranged classical greek dish. a pretty hearty portion, i usually have leftovers. . . Great for small, intimate gatherings. The bar's been raised for any future Greek restaurants! Can't wait to come back for brunch.
