ReviewID: jBZH_Mwl2XUwBnuvll4fZQ
ReviewerID: 930YU51ZvuOQn4dWtZxj5A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
ABSOLUTE 5 Stars from me!!!  Early dinner (4:30ish) on a Sat. night helps beat a little bit of the parking blues. On SOUTH Vermont,  between 8th and 9th, you will see an outdoor taco bbq/stand, a laundromat and Soowon tucked behind the taco stand...random... but soooo worth the drive!! ummm... note to self, I would NOT drive my SUV here as the parking spaces are a bit small!!!  . I would agree to a certain degree with a previous review the neighborhood is lacking in visual appeal, but the restaurant itself and its interior are very sleek, modern, and A-grade presence.. I haven't had such great Korean bbq in a LONG while, better than OC, and by far, the best style of japchae/chapchae (glass noodles) (only no beef or egg :( but it didn't detract from the flavor), with a HUGE portion that could easily serve 5 people when accompanying some bbq bulgogi. I admit, the side dishes were not impressive, except for the kimchi, I thoroughly enjoyed the marinades/sauces, the bulgogi, shrimp, and the soup. I appreciated the service, although the restaurant was still pretty empty when we arrived, and got to enjoy eating and not having to cook my own food. Servers changed our grill between shrimp and bulgogi without being asked. I felt it was very attentive, maybe a little lacking in conversation, but again, it wasn't busy when I was there.  I will definitely be back, and stick to an early meal time :) to avoid the crowds I'd read about, let alone the traffic that progressively got worse outside.  . . For 2, our dinner with 2 sodas, bulgogi, shrimp, chapchae with 6 or so banchan/sides (disappointed I didn't get any bean sprouts) and a salad AND soup, 1 steamed rice, was only under $65 w/tip! Could easily have done without both bbq items, but I had to try it! For anyone who is timid about Korean, these are my three staples that I always introduce to my friends who are new to the cuisine and often a hit! Can't wait to go back for an early dinner/lunch!
