ReviewID: jCjUQOIS8MvaPIfYXI-_NA
ReviewerID: 4IAAIstib_oCMcpze7zMmg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
We arrived a half hour early before our reservations but I didn't mind at all cuz that just meant I had time to enjoy a Manhattan at the beautiful bar in the back. When the bartender asked me if I wanted my cocktail served on the rocks or up, I knew I was in good hands and I knew I wouldn't have to worry about her shaking it.. . The Manhattan itself was perfect, soo delicious and smooth. There was a little extra tang of something in the savoring of it that I couldn't put my finger on. AND they used brandied cherries instead of the despicable maraschino cherries. I tell ya, there's nothing like sipping on a Manhattan at a beautiful marble bar with your honey on a cold winter night.. . When we were seated, we got a little table near the front. I got to sit facing the restaurant. It's so purty! Very low light though; ideal for romantic dinners but terrible for food shots without flash. The restaurant was buzzing for a chilly Tuesday night with lots of big tables filled with friends and booths occupied by couples; the mozzarella bar was packed and the bar itself was getting there.. . Our server Nicole was attentive, friendly and helpful. When she thought we were splitting all our dishes -- we ordered the burratta with bacon and gnocchi with duck ragu and I ordered the quail -- she sorta whispered to bf that all the portions are medium size, thinking he wasn't going to order an entrée. She didn't say this with disdain or embarrassment, but helpfulness. I love that about this place. You'd think a fancy restaurant like this would be all snooty but it isn't! It seems dedicated to the enjoyment of the food rather than trying to look cool.. . In any case, the burratta was OMG divine and the tender gnocchi with that rich duck ragu made me weep. It was just soo good! ::tear:: But I have to say, I wasn't crazy about the quail I ordered. And it's not for the reason you think. I'm sure it was prepared beautifully -- wrapped in pancetta with radicchio and sage honey. The thing is, its little wings and little legs creeped me out. And I just about erped in my mouth when I had to cut into it. I think I've watched too many CSI episodes.. . From the bit I tasted, the meat was tender. When I cut into its little body ::shudder:: it was filled with savory vegetables. That's as far as I got. Fortunately I was full from our cheese and pasta. I think the next time I come here, I'll stick to cheese and pasta, which I'm more than happy to do.. . For dessert, I was tempted to order the delicious rosemary olive oil cakes I had last time but instead I chose the apple pie-ish dessert with its apple cider jelly gelato. Its warm, flaky pastry was the perfect accompaniment to the weather. The thin slice of apple was jellified and chewy; different but in a good way.. . I wish I could come here all the time but it's too expensive for my limited means so I'll just save it for special occasions or maybe just for when I want to stop in for a Manhattan and mozzarella cheese. But yes, this is my favorite restaurant.
