ReviewID: jecXsez-TSsuFUkyPGLcaA
ReviewerID: EUdmEz2I8IN8QzjAhVzzow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Another visit to Soowon resulted in another amazing night. Soowon has won my heart many times over and she just might be the sexiest thing in K-town (if not sexiest, she certainly smell the best). Soowon possesses the keys to my heart: delicious goodness + buttloads of alcohol. I love food and I love alcohol, but there's nothing like having them both at once in perfect harmony, it's kinda like sex but only better.. . The meat quality of Soowon is unrivaled from anywhere I've been to for Korean BBQ and trust me I've been to a lot. Granted that you do pay a slight premium for quality, it is worth every penny and if you're not willing to pay for quality, you're not worthy. You can always judge the meat by the marbling and tenderness and Soowon has some of the best. They serve up the meaty goodness with ~8 different types of delicious (not to mention endless) panchan along with moo and duk. I also really appreciate a Korean BBQ spot that uses charcoal cause you really just can't replace the flavor generated by a real fire (besides it makes me feel manlier cooking over real fire). . On this visit, we ordered up Combo A (this meat platter is serious food porn) between the 5 of us along with 2 bottles each of soju, baek se joo and mah goh lih. The combo from I recall comes with chadobegi, kalbi, pork neck, rib eye steak and marinated beef. Though the rib eye seemed a bit leaner (and tougher of course) than usual on this visit, everything was still delicious and we chowed down and left no meat behind! We also topped off our meal with the korean styled chawanmushi (steamed egg), which is a must have IMO. I was kinda sad that we didn't order my two personal favs here this time around: the thick cut samgyeopsal and the cow tongue..but oh well, it gives me a reason to come back.. . Soowon, though it's only been one day since I've seen you...I'm a mess without you. I miss you so damn much. I miss being with you, I miss being near you. I miss your scent; I miss your musk. And btw those two young ladies(think they might be sisters) that greets me everytime I walk in when I visit aren't so shabby either ;-)
