ReviewID: JEZ3oMAdsHipz4wQ60L40g
ReviewerID: MOZNSqLAo8TfhCi5x8iLzg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Either I have serious problems with my taste bud or something else is something else..... . After two unsuccessful attempts to eat at this place, we finally sat down at the counter last night. We had the ramen combo with pork cutlet, gyoza and eel on rice for a party of 3.. . I shall talk about the food first. Sumptuous portions for a darn good price. Love the gyoza, generously sprinkled with green onions. As for the eel on rice, let's just say that was well worth the $. The pork cutlet was thick and the crust well marinated. I love it when they prepared it with eggs. . . I have to admit I read most of the reviews here before I ate at Daikokuya and I try not to let the 4 and 5 stars-ists affect my taste on the ramen. This is one restaurant that works well on the conditional probability rule. Basically, if majority of every one else say this is good, chances are it will be good. I think confirmatory bias can work here as well, a concept popularized in psychology and cognitive science. Ok...too much geek stuff.. . I am not trying to be different here but I am not impressed with the ramen soup base and the noodles at all.  I am actually a little tad bit disappointed. The ramen is on the mediocre side. If I have to hype it up, sure the pork slices are buttery and the egg has a bright yellow yolk. Hrm...that's it.. . Half way through the meal, I gave up on the noodles and started drinking the soup one spoon at a time. I want to get to the bottom of the taste. I want my taste bud to analyze each pork and soy sauce molecule in every 10ml of soup sequentially. I would attempt to smell the soup fragrance before my lips create suction around the spoon. I allow the liquid to reach every corner in my mouth before swallowing it. Yes, while pple waited behind me for seats, I drank every drop of soup. Cos it's simple...I want to know if I have serious problems with my taste bud or something else is something else..... . I came to this conclusion: the soup base isn't rich in taste. I didn't get the flavors exploding in my mouth feeling. The noodles aren't hand-made and felt a little plastic-ky. It is not a horrible meal but it's what it's hyped up to be. All this wait and presumed hunger and hype, and I wasn't even satisfied. . . The big question is will I return to this joint? Let me think, traffic to downtown, finding parking in downtown, wait an for some 30~40mins outside with a bunch of smokers. The answer is no.
