ReviewID: jf_q6XVDVV3vUrcm4s5KsA
ReviewerID: 1CCG0WYSoR8ejdgD5-Gaqg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Actually, this review is not so much for CUT as it is for Sidebar, the ultracool yet approachable lounge right across the swank lobby entrance, where you can get the exact same food but a way more fun overall dining experience.  This place is amazing for numerous reasons - the awesome manager and staff, the hip clubby music that's also very fun to eat to, the overall aesthetics down to all the little details, but most importantly the food that is overseen by the uebergenius Brad Pitt of the culinary world - Chef Lee Hefner.  Here's a run-down of what we got, and what you too must get when you visit this paragon of steakhouses.. . Starters:. - Bone Marrow Flan. - Maple Glazed Pork Belly. - Warm Organic Asparagus. - Prime Filet Mignon "Carpaccio". - Blue Fin "Toro" Tuna Tartare. Top mouth-pleasuring awards go to the Bone Marrow Flan (you will want to push aside your best friends in the world and wrestle them to the floor to take their portion) and the Prime Filet Mignon "Carpaccio" (I wanted to cry when I was done eating it).. . Main:. - American Wagyu Filet Mignon. - New York Sirloin. Get them BOTH, unless you happen to be dining alone, in which case get the Filet, which was as tender as a baby's butt.  Okay, that is a very disturbing comparison but once you try it you will know what I am talking about.. . Sides:. - Creamed Spinach with Friend Organic Egg. - Tempura Onion Rings. - French Fries with Herbs. - Brussels Sprouts, Bacon, Pearl Onions. - Matsutake Mushrooms. Top marks go to the Creamed Spinach (my friend wouldn't stop moaning with happiness as she ate it) and Brussels Sprouts (elevated beyond the realm of amazing with hefty chunks of bacon and rosemary).. . Dessert:  By this time we were ready to burst out of our clothes but we did manage to savor the Orange Creamsickle, which was basically a take on a Baked Alaska but with the most dreamy orange ice cream center imaginable.. . Chef Lee Hefner hooked us big-time and made us feel like we were VIPs.  We were completely blown away by the "customer-service" focus and dedication to beautiful food of the highest caliber.  It is refreshing to see someone so incredibly successful and celebrated in the food world care be so humble and care so deeply about the enjoyment of his guests.  Bravo to you, sir!  Another person worthy of a shout-out is the Sidebar manager Albert Letizia, who went above and beyond to make sure our experience was unforgettable and something we will be talking about for years to come.  We are now fans on this place for life and will be feverishly saving up for our next amazing experience at CUT.
