ReviewID: jgteKijsg0ljy0baTemG6g
ReviewerID: p1G1PLY82zGO-a6eEBtecg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Café Santorini
Category: Greek
I just came here on Sunday with 4 other people, and we all had a great time.  We made a reservation the night before for a patio seat, so we didn't have to wait at all.  . . The atmosphere of the restaurant was just clean and festive.  The patio seating was awesome, especially for a nice warm summer day.  . . The wait staff wasn't good or bad IMO.  After a slow start getting us our drinks and bread, they were in pretty good shape afterwards.   We ate either 2 or 3 basketfull of bread, dipped in yummy olive oil and vinegar.  . . We ordered the shrimp and potato appetizer, which was very cheesy and gooey.  There was a piece of bread on the bottom that was different from anything else I've ever had.  We also ordered the small fried fish that was nice and crunchy.  My sisters and I thought it's funny that the head was removed, since normally in Chinese food, the fish comes whole with the head.. . We ordered 5 different entrees all together.  There was a santorini pizza, which was topped with goat cheese, sun dried tomatoes, basil, and lamb.  It was soo rich and delicious, with the different tastes nicely layered with each other.  We also got a risotto with a chicken sausage that was delicious too.  The chicken sausage was a tad dry, and like any regular ol' chicken sausages, but the risotto had a nice thick smokey taste.  It was one of my favorite dishes.  We also got a grilled chicken penne, which was decent IMO.  My sister loved it, so perhaps it just wasn't that great after heating it up.  There was also a grilled chicken dish with purple mashed potatoes and grilled asparagus.  The chicken was deeelish, but it was the potatoes that I loved.  I wonder what type of potatoes they used.  Lastly we had a seafood salad (high temperature something whatever) that had salmon, clam, fish, and something else in it.  The salad was just lightly dressed, and the seafood was in a nice buttery cheesy setting.  I thought the veggies was a nice balance to all that butter.. . Oh yea.. I'm a smoker, and we were allowed to smoke in the patio.  We sat on the outside toward the alley, and the table behind us was empty.  I like to think that the smoke blew outward into the alley.  Anyhow.. being able to enjoy a cigarette before and after eating without having to find an area that I could smoke is always a plus for me.  For the non-smokers, why not try eating inside?
