ReviewID: jgyemkvTbWwnqvYlDgkWOQ
ReviewerID: zXVdDs3AjlYbBFjs6yeDsA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
My family has been going to Philippe's for three generations now, taking their sandwiches to Huntington Beach, Dodger Stadium, Griffith Park and beyond. . . My parents would buy a dozen sandwiches and freeze them for whenever.. . . Get a sense of how much we like Philippe's now? . . I live in Oakland these days, but every trip I make to L.A. has to include a stop there.  It's loaded with memories which probably go beyond the food experience, but parking in the parking lot(s), going down the stairs, seeing the long tables, sawdust floors, cold cases with frigid waitresses waiting to take your order and money, is the Philippe experience. . . Historically, as you can read in the clippings on the walls, Philippe's is a very old place, and the "French Dip" sandwich depends on long slow-cooked beef and pork as the foundation.  Crisp, old-style French rolls round out the structure, add cheese (if you must) and the piece-de-resistance: Dip the bread in au-jus and your are done!  Voila! . . The meat is great, and quickly oozes into a mass that blends with the rapidly dissolving innards of the crisp roll which is being attacked by the au-jus gravy.  In your hand, this whole thing is alive and disintegrating, kept together by the skin of resistence of the freshly baked French roll exterior - great stuff. . . Ordering is an experience in itself. . . You stand in line behind other customers, and pick a line with the least-intimidating server you can find (my method).  When you get to the head of the line, make sure you have your order ready - questions are not welcome (can you make it Vegan?).  Then they get to work and your lunch (or breakfast, or dinner) is done.   . . The final test to master is paying:  You must put your money on the dark brown Bakelite tray - not in their hand, not on the stainless steel cooler top (I can smell the health department's involvement here). . . The accessories to the sandwich are equally good:  I love the cole slaw and potato salads; I've never had a pickled egg but like looking at them; the actual pickled pickles are very good; coffee here is still cheap as are refills. . . The next task is navigating with your unworthy tray of goods to long tables which you share with other equally unworthy people sitting on stools.  Be aware of your surroundings here:  The place is filthy with lawyers, judges and police. . . Really good, hot hot hot "Philippe's" mustard is on the table, and you gotta use it - lots. . . The best experience, however, is getting some sandwiches to go, or freeze them and eat them later.  Then what you end up with, is the disintegrated result, which is delicious.  By then the crisp outside shell structure has failed, leaving a congealed fatty pile of wonderfully flavored meat, sitting in a mushy beefy infused sourdough interior within an antique fossilized exterior shell - perfect for a Dodgers game. . . Philippe's almost makes it worth living in L.A. - which I don't anymore - and to me, Philippe's is L.A.
