ReviewID: JHSI23H9QbE0zbwZUpcUhQ
ReviewerID: 15nD50SrNJN8E5DYDa0GWQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: HB Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Pardon this review for any mistakes that are about to happen- grammatically or spelling or even nonsensical.  For I am admittedly drunk as I type this out.. Earlier today I got word that I would be a part of a dinner involving non-English speaking people and the wine that they produce.  That's write- foreign wine producers.  In this case French, for which anyone that knows me should not be a surprise, considering I am lucky enough to be married to a pretty well connect French woman.. In the case of this evening, it was all originally due to the lovely Mireille D. a Yelper who isn't able to be super-active, but a wonderful lady nonetheless.  She was contacted recently through her work to help out a duo of young French wine producers to be a part of a series of wine tastings and sales pitches to distributors based here in the US and abroad.  Her job, was to help with translation and interpretation.  . Luckily, the job turned out to be cool enough to be an enjoyable weekend, and due to the trio being busy, my wife was contacted to find a good BYOB place to go to on a Sunday night with not too much time to prepare.  HB came to mind to her immediately.. So, my wife called today before noon and left a message letting them know that she was interested in securing a table for five around 7:30 in the evening.  Within an hour or so, she got a call, directly from the chef de cuisine, Jan Carl (spelling?) in regards to her request.. Remarkably, he remembered us coming in about three months ago for our first meal there.  He even went out of his way with some cordial remarks in French (which from what I can tell is quite good!), and invited us to join them that evening.  . My wife explained that we had some guests that are wine producers, and Jan Carl was very excited about what would be in-store for us.. Upon arriving, our guests brought out a total of six bottles of their wine for the five of us.  The waiter wasn't quite sure how to react to us for this, but realized quite quickly that we were the drunk-ass Frenchies that brought along the producers of supposedly great wine (and selling for up to $450/bottle- it better had been good wine!).  He was attentive and friendly, and made sure that we were well taken care of.. Since our new buddies had been tasting and eating all day long, they made it clear that they weren't ready for the typical American dinner, which by French standards is quite large.  We therefore opted for a series of starters which were all fantastic.. For anyone who doesn't understand the HB concept- it is similar to the many "New American" restaurants out there, but HB is decidedly Dutch.  For example- the escargot that we had was definitely not the French style.  Our new friends had a hard time finding the escargot considering they are already out of their shells and are in a delicious mix of tomato, orange, bread and herbs.  Very nice!  There are also a lot of other Dutch elements to the cooking that make the HB experience quite unique.. We also enjoyed the Gouda plate, which had three different cheeses.  The five-year aged cows milk one from a Dutch woman in Wisconsin was fantastic.  The shrimp and herring specials were very good too.  Herring piled on a rye cracker with slivered onion and creme fraiche was nice in my opinion, and tiger prawns with candied orange rind and a nice sauce was very good too.. We skipped main course (I guess in favor of even more wine- and yes, be jealous, very good wine at that!) and were given no problems by our wonderful server.  Dessert orders were taken much later in the night and were very nice- a bread pudding- something decidedly American and new to our French guests, and a pane cotta (spelling?) that was rich, creamy and delicious.. Like the terrific hosts that they were, HB's staff allowed us to linger for a long time after eating, finish our wine and conversation- and even joined us eventually.  Wonderful hospitality!
