ReviewID: JiSiJ-zPkeqz55S9fP8QOw
ReviewerID: MNgpW2MBhPaNETAkrN3S2Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Boundary
Category: Sports Bars
Another split review.. . Let me preface this by saying that, like most reviewers, I am torn. I want to hate the Boundary for everything it represents happening to UV/WP that I despise - the invasion of the Baby Strollers, the adoption of the Sports Bar, the resurgence of the Polo Shirt, the herds of Trixies, and the building of Crap Condos (which unfortunately brought the aforementioned to UV/WP in the first place). The annoyance factor is high, and I wanted to hate it from the get go. I refused to go for a solid couple of months. And then I got roped in by the large outdoor patio by being a dog owner, having an empty belly, a hankering for a gin + tonic on a hot summer's day off, and a trusted foodie friend who was persuasively standing behind their food.. . And really, I do try to reserve judgment, even when annoyed by these types that make me cringe. They could be the nice people, I tell myself, and I could be the asshole. It's all about perspective.. . Long story short, I'd recommend trying it out for the FOOD and PATIO - once we sat down on the patio and I grazed the menus (beer and food) my stomach cheered and praised the offerings. And once the food arrived, my stomach practically grabbed the plate and licked it clean. The food really is great for a more upscale sports bar offering. It's no gastro heaven like Schwaa, and it's not fine dining in the most marginal sense, but it's pretty damn good when compared to the other neighborhood eating spots. Note: The above statement excludes Small Bar, which holds a dear spot in my heart with their cheese curds and f*cking awesome beer list.. . My friend swears by the fish tacos. I heart the bbq pulled pork. But the item that completely sold me.... . I had a craving for Queso one day and literally walked up and down Division to discover that the Boundary was the ONLY place that served it, and it was damn good Queso at that! The irony of my mission - after checking Picante, Adobo Grill and Angels + Mariachis - was in discovering that the last place I would have suspected was the only place that served Queso. (Noticed the cheese trend yet?) This still baffles me, and I do admit that if I could have found it elsewhere I would have opted there over Boundary, but only based on my suspicions that this place breeds stupid people. . . I will be back to try their brunch, as I've been plied with "No, seriously, it's good" by one too many friends, but otherwise I'll stick to the patio in the summertime.
