ReviewID: JJ2Vr3PSye19iR082loA4A
ReviewerID: YEk-6rfOCLmEA7Cu-u8xmw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Big Star
Category: Mexican
Here's the thing: I'm a good girl.  I'm orderly.  I play by the rules.  I don't cheat.  I'm a generally nice person.  I don't push and shove.  I don't get angry very easily and I'm only aggressive when it comes to my career and playing board games. . . The seating situation at Big Star brought out all of my bad girl tendencies.. . Never before has a restaurant tested my need for an orderly lifestyle.  Upon entering what can only be described as a complete clusterfuck was happening in Big Star.  Because most of the seating is around the massive square bar located smack in the middle of the restaurant with a few stray booths reserved for parties of 4 or more, there's no waiting list for prime bar real estate.  You have to uncomfortably hover around the folks eating at the bar, pray they finish quickly, dive-bomb their seats as soon as they leave and hope some bitch doesn't cut you for a much sought after bar stool.  It makes me tuck away all my nice girl tendencies, roll up my sleeves and get ready to tackle another chick wearing stilettos... and I'll do it because I've been working out AND I'm usually wearing flats.. . Seating woes aside, I did enjoy Big Star.  Their drink menu is whiskey and tequila heavy.  Perfect for me.  I'll stick to a nice Old Fashioned thankyouverymuch.  If you know your whiskey you'll be very excited to see pages and pages of your liquid mistress to keep you happy.  I managed to take a sip of my friend's margarita which was powerful and tart.  Mmm...  Me likey.. . Food.  Food!  Not much variety on the menu.  Um, pork tacos.  Chicken and fish tostadas.  Chips and guac.  Uhh, I'll take a fish tostada and a chicken tostada, please.  At $3 a pop, you can load up on Mexican goodies and not break the bank.  I was satisfied by my two taco meal, but I'm sure the menfolk could easily kill 5 tacos and not break a sweat.  I really liked the flavor of the fish tostada with radishes and fresh avocado slices.  Add the green salsa and you're looking at a winner.. . Maybe not the best place for a large group or stressed out diners.  Big Star is not a relaxing place to grab lunch or dinner. But if you're feeling adventurous (or just very lucky), I would give Big Star a shot.
