ReviewID: JJa0it3cKCxi1HSifMNT3g
ReviewerID: 5HJvYcAM6FLat695V_JF1A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
How did it take me so long to check this place out!?! ? A small group of friends were in town this past weekend from SF for a wedding, so before taking them to LAX to be whisked back to No Cal we stopped at Father's Office for booze and burgers and we were not one bit disappointed. . . I absolutely adored this location. Parking was a synch! There is a lot right off of Venice Blvd which had ample parking even though the surrounding center seemed pretty busy. PLUS the parking was free (2 hour limit) which is always a plus!. . As others have mentioned, FO is first come first serve so just don't stand there twiddling your thumbs. Be aggressive! We were dead set on a patio table which due to the B-E-A-utiful weather was packed when we arrived. We patiently watched and waited and were sat within only 10 minutes. . . I really love the decor here also. The tables and chairs are beautiful, wooden and sturdy. Also, I really liked the restrooms! Very classy for a bar and cutely marked "sons" and "daughters". Oh it's the clever little things that make me smile. . Their selection of beers is top notch. Whether you are a beer coinsure or an armature like me, you will find something you like. As far as the food goes we obviously HAD to try the burger. It's been boasted best in LA by numerous people, so it would just be dumb to not give it a chance. Wowie wow we were pleased. Cooked perfectly with gruyere, caramelized onions, bacon and arugula? SOLD! I can't say best in LA, but one of my top 3 so far. We also got a few orders of the sweet potato fries which were some of the best I have had in a while. They came with a dipping sauce (blue cheese based?) that pared with them perfectly. . . Also, the staff was super friendly and laid back. They were quick to clear empty glasses off of our table, but not once did they make us feel rushed. I think the first come first serve system they have is really working for them.
