ReviewID: JJAmtUipE-ESwAAisou2gg
ReviewerID: 37Nb842bvuOHAYUhiiZ_vw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fox Bros Bar-B-Q
Category: Barbeque
I have heard of Fox Bros., but had never been until today when a couple of colleagues suggested it as a great place with a nice big patio where we could enjoy the first breezy, relatively cool day after a blistering August. The smoky essence in the parking lot promised tastiness and the kitchen delivered. The fried dill pickles were a delight, with a buttermilk batter and a dry rub sprinkle to add a little seasoning but not too much salt, were crisp and not greasy at all.  We got a 1/2 order of the Tomminator - fried tater tots topped with chunky Brunswick stew and shredded cheese. Sounds crazy, but it was great. I would not recommend a full order for a table smaller than 10 people, but for a table of 7, a half order gave us just enough to savor. A definite guilty pleasure. . Since this was lunch I settled on the rib sandwich, four on the bone ribs over white bread, with a side of collards, but I was sorely tempted by one of the specials - The Fox Bros. Burger, sliced barbecued beef brisket with pimento cheese and mayo on a roll. A colleague who ordered it could only eat half, but pronounced it delicious. . My ribs were the perfect portion for lunch and were meaty, smoky, mildly spicy awesomeness. Tender, flavorful, not a bit dry or chewy. I almost wished I'd ordered the half-rack, but I would have been worse for the wear at work after. The sauce is a little thinner than some of the sweeter, more ketchup-y versions I've had elsewhere, but was a nice blend of spicy with a hint of vinegar and sweetness. The collards were a little "al dente" for my taste and could have used a little more seasoning--maybe a lovely smoked bone in the broth from one of their smoked butts. A gifted onion ring from a friends plate was crisp and tender at the same time, with a nice beer bite to the batter.. Despite full tummies we opted for two dishes of banana pudding to pass around the table. I didn't expect much because I'm not much of a banana pudding fan, but I had 3 spoonfuls and would have happily eaten a whole one by myself! Thick and creamy with sprinkling of crushed vanilla wafers on the top and none of the sliminess that can accompany waterier versions, I would recommend taking some of your entree home to leave room for this dessert.. A bit on the pricey side, but they will give separate checks with no hassles, right down to splitting the appetizers and desserts seven ways. . Chase, who I am guessing is one of the owner/chefs, came out to check on us a stayed to chat for a moment about the fine art of pickle frying. A great guy with a great place. I work a block from Dusty's, but I'd rather drive to Fox Bros. any day.
