ReviewID: jjP0H1Zi7R4ZVXmvb8pgCQ
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hashiguchi Jr.
Category: Japanese
Yikes.. with all the 5 stars I was very much expecting great sushi.  The place is cute and small, and there's alot of Asian/ Japanese workers, so it feels way authentic.  The place is so small that you are practically sharing the table with your neighbors.. which was a great thing in my case, since I got to talking to one of the people next to us, and they were very cool, we even exchanged emails, they were from Oregon, liked food, and were going to email me a site called . http://meetup.com. .. Ok so back to the food... sadly the rolls were skimpy and small, the red snapper sashimi was a total let down, so thin, you can see through it.  They also gave me a wrong sushi roll, and I kept thinking wait! where is the eel, in the eel Cali roll? I finally gathered courage to question it, and they gave me the correct roll.. mentioning I would not be charged for the wrong roll given.. well duh.. why should i be charged?   (I guess the mixup might be due to the fact they had one sushi chef, and a full restaurant).. The miso soup was nasty.. could not even taste the miso, hardly any seawood, and 2 pieces of tofu.. and the soup which normally should come out first came out with my meal.  They were good with refilling my tea.. and I swear this might be the gimmick to keeping me full throughout my meal, since everything was so little..  I ordered the fried oyster, and I think this was the only thing i really liked from the entire meal.  I think I will try the udon's and raman the next time I come, and for go the sushi.. because I swear if this is the best "sushi" in which I mean hand rolls, rolls, and sashimi.. I am in for a rude awakening.. and I will deeply miss California.. The California  roll wasn't even right.. no mayo in a Cali roll should be a CRIME!! . I would give this place a 2.5 but since I can't it will be a 3 for now.. I'll give them a 2nd chance for noodle soup dishes.. but for now they remain in my mind a 2.5, a 3 on yelp.. . UPDATE:. I have since given this place 2 stars.. why is my lower stomach having pains? and I feel like vomiting? hmmm... maybe they had a bad night, maybe I had bad soda from the theater.. who knows.. BLAH... . I
