ReviewID: Jjx6q5k86FQVxvPtO5rnjA
ReviewerID: KRLXzow88a6m_ZABejX-Ig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Gastropubs
The Truffle Burger was decadent and just slightly under "cloyingly rich" that despite savoring such a relatively small burger, it was supremely satisfying down to the last lick of the plate.  I'm a big eater, but with so much flavor, one was enough.  In fact, here's the actual dialogue I had with our server:. . "I would've suggested licking the plate clean, but you already beat me to it.". "Mmm-hmm,"  I replied with mouth full of glorious juiciness.. . Imagine a medium rare, inch-thick burger with so much juices, it gently slides down your tongue, only to allow oneself to tell the burger, "Hey Truffle Burger!  I'm not done with you yet!  Please don't leave so suddenly!  We have much to talk about!"  As I swallowed that full bite, I looked in astonishment at my plate, only to find that...  I still had 9/10ths of my burger left!  Woo hoo!!!. . And yet.... . And yet....... . The last of the bun ever so slightly, left a lingering sweetness upon my lips that it became sentimental.  The bun reminded me of New York's Shake Shack Potato Bun, but slightly bigger, less potato-y, and just as sweet, soft and smooth in texture. . . I repeat, I'm not done with you Truffle Burger!  So what is it?  Caramelization?  Soy sauce?  Truffled cheese?  Could it be balsamic vinegar?  A super secret ingredient that only 3 people in the world know about its very existence?  What?!  What is it about you that makes you unexplainable?  ... and so...  so mysteriously alluring?. . Alas, my inability to pinpoint "why" leads me to the following principle:. . Its fifth taste kicked me in the @$$.. . Good thing the burger was so good I wanted to sew my @$$ shut*.  That helped dampen the hit.. . *(Inspired by Wu-Tang Clan's prelude skit to the song, "Method Man" and the TV show, How I Met Your Mother's season 4 episode, "The Best Burger in New York").  . . Footnotes ---. . Condiments and Sides:  . . Ketchup - homemade and crazy delicious, but the small serving in a cool looking non-take-home container was a tease.. . Roasted Garlic Aioli - I wasn't able to notice much of a big deal, other than the fact that it was as thick as mayonnaise and the burger took center stage.. . Onion Rings - I could taste the quality in the tempura batter, but like most onion rings, a bit oily.  As such, I prefer these onion rings over a majority of its competition.. . Sweet Potato Fries - Yup, this is where the money's at.. . Beer:  . . I only had the Leffe cuz I hadn't had it before and I knew what Hoegaarden tastes like.  Leffe is a Belgian beer, I presume?  Light brown in color like medium amber maple syrup, Leffe had a finish that reminded me of cloves or something spiced.. . Ambiance:. . Space 15 Twenty is a fantastic place to hang out.  There's an Urban Outfitters, an Art and Architecture bookstore, a vintage clothing store, an art gallery, so on and so forth, and an interior courtyard surrounded by red bricked buildings and an awkward billboard planted in its square.. . I'd imagine a few hipsters, locals, and curious folk lolligagging around here during the day, but most of the stores were closed so I really wouldn't know.  Fortunately, it's not as pretentious as I thought and one could easily dodge on over to the nearby Arclight Theaters and Amoeba Music Extravaganza of a store across the street.  . . I forgot to say that the best part about this branch is the full bar and cool leather couch.  And did I mention their burgers?
