ReviewID: JK0WJbgcRlFogZ2F7W6Gkw
ReviewerID: UK8DZAr-lhjAtpLQMdmJBA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
Garbage, this place is so overrated and overcrowded, fish is not fresh, likely frozen and chefs pump out orders. . . Sat at bar, witnessed plate after plate of lunch special get rolled out assembly line style, pieces from their actually looked fresher than the ones served at the bar. As a tip it is a safe bet to order either the lunch special (available only for patrons seated at a table) or the fish that is served in the lunch special (tuna). . . Here is what I had:. . Tai (red snapper)- tasteless and watery likely frozen no bite. Ika (squid)- frozen pre cut variety taste was fine . Anago (sea eel) - well cooked overly sauced. Shima Aji (spanish mackeral) - poorly marinated, sloppy skin removal, tasted like mush. Kanpachi (amberjack) - better tasting than other pieces, still missed that snap usually found in the fish. Hotate (fresh scallop) - It was from a live scallop, so you'd think it would be good, instead of sushi was served sashimi style as this is the way it is done here with presentation on shell, so cheesy, anyway super thin slices and use of lemon between each could not mask the poor quality and fishiness that should not present. . Chefs are butchers as I witness an order for albacore passed on to an assistant who proceeded to destroy the fish in creating the order. Gristly pieces were apparent from my vantage point and the assistant also decided it would be wise to cut the fish five different ways when the original manner did not work. NOT GOOD.... . Service was also meh, likely based on the crowds, but tea should be refilled (especially when servers frequent the area and notice the empty glass rather than bumping into when taking orders to table). . . Cooked dishes looked fair, yellowtail collar was a nice portion that looked properly cooked, i.e. not overcooked. . . Sushi here is for those happy to pay half price for mediocre fish rather than spending more for a true experience and proper taste. It also suits the crowd who prefers to drown their fish in soy sauce laced with gobs of wasabi paste, creating more of a chinese spicy mustard dip (commonly seen in at least a third or the patrons here), whose sauce ends up masking the inferior fish served here.
