ReviewID: jkG6nmen9VOcOycX90Q8-w
ReviewerID: 447bDfxUCsBQfUFFbzJ2nQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Things I've learned since dating a Brazilian:. . 1) Brazilians are hot -- all of em. Whatever is in their water needs to be put in MY water. . . 2) Brazilians love soccer. Too bad we live in the U.S. . . 3) Brazilians are passionate. About everything. . . 4) Brazilians love meat. I don't think there is a word in Portuguese for "Vegetarian.". . So, it's a match made in hell when I'm a vegetarian... and dating a Brazilian. Good thing we love each other.. . And it's because I love him so much that I took him to Fogo de Chao for his birthday dinner. Because seriously, the look on his face while eating slices upon slices of Picanha was worth $150 and more. . . And yes, he may have admitted in a moment of weakness that he loved the picanha at Fogo de Chao more than he loved me.... . . jokingly?? right?? maybe??? hmmmm.... ;). . So yes, it's a total meat-fest. Meat coma is sure to follow your trip there. And once we left, my hot Brazilian boyfriend's stomach had grown so much he looked like a hot Brazilian pregnant man. . . For about $60 you can have all the meat you want... and all the salad too... and all the sides.... . And for about $30 you can have just the sides and the salad bar.... which is exactly what this vegetarian did. The salad bar was pretty awesome... but I'm a HUGE fan of Brazilian sides, so I barely visited the salad bar.. . Give me rice, beans (though I didn't eat them there because I suspected meat in them), plantains, mashed potatoes, polenta and pao de queijo (cheese bread) any day of the week and you've got one super happy vegetarian.. . Oh, and the caipirinha didn't hurt either. Super tasty, super strong. $12.. . Once all the food was consumed and he could no longer breathe... one of our many servers brought over the dessert menu... and insisted we order one of them for his birthday treat... We got the tres leches cake, which was tasty, but not OMGAMAZING. But the cafezinho was a nice diminutive(but strong) finish to the meal.. . Oh, and thank you Brazilian meat guys for actually being Brazilian... AND fans of the same soccer team as the birthday boy, so you guys could speak Portuguese and catch him up on all the going-ons with the team... and apparently give us special treatment because he was a fan. . . Thanks Fogo de Chao for making his birthday extra special...
