ReviewID: JlCwE3zaJOijjtVdfAHjeQ
ReviewerID: 5aFBj0emFzoXsUcKbDQZiA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I WANT to give this place 5 stars, but I just can't based off of my experience here this past sunday. My sister hyped this place up so we were excited when we first walked up. There was a long line out to the side walk so this place had to be good, right?! After standing in line for 15 minutes, we finally get inside to place our order. Basically it was a shouting match between me, the cashier, the other cashier, the other people trying to order, and the other people behind the counter handing out drink and dessert orders. I sneak off to the side to get a cup of water only to feel like I was in the way of EVERYONE. People were borderline pushing each other to get to where they wanted to go. We grab our lemonades (which was good and not overly sweet), and make our way outside to be greeted by some one else to seat us. We ended up sitting on the front deck where we had to dodge the servers/table busters since they crammed too many people/seats in that area. After waiting 40 minutes for our food, they got my wife's order wrong. She had to wait another 10 minutes while they fix her order... The manager (i think thats who she was) came and asked us if everything was ok. We explained our long wait time and getting the wrong order...she apologized and said dessert was on the house.. . The food was great! I had the special of that day which was the smoked salmon omelet (tons of smoked salmon) and not overcooked! My wife ordered the chorizo scramble and said it tasted just as good as her mom makes it at home! That's a huge compliment right there... We then received a slice of their strawberry shortcake (i think thats what it was). One word about that dessert....AMAZING!. . This place would get 5 stars from me IF they fix/re-do the ordering system. Make a separate area to either order or pick up drinks and other items, have a separate line just for ordering and make more room so you're not having a shouting match with the person next to you, don't try to cram sooo many people in a small area, make it handicap accessible so people with disabilities and those with strollers can get up and down the main room. (I saw a lot of moms dragging their strollers up the stairs...NOT very safe)!
