ReviewID: JlDidhE8E7ogqoDwF_ONHw
ReviewerID: FMysfy-JWE198b43jTdyxQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Delicatessen
Category: American (New)
For dinner on Friday night, when my friend and I were scrambling for a place to go, I thought of Cafeteria first, because I absolutely love their macaroni and cheese, but didn't feel like having a repeat restaurant night.  Instead, we decided to go to Delicatessen and I was not disappointed.. . I made a quick, last minute, reservation on Open Table (it's so nice that you can do this literally 15 minutes before you eat!) and we met at around 9pm.  The place was packed and even with a reservation it took about 20 minutes for us to be seated.  As stated before, I absolutely hate this.  But, here's the bright side, the maitre d' actually realized the error of his ways and bought us a round of drinks on the house.  At drinks ranging from $12-14, that makes a big deal at the end of the meal.  Before I get into the food and drink I must say this is not the kind of place you go to relax and have a quiet dinner.  Delicatessen is a place to be seen and heard.  Well, not really heard unless you scream, but it's definitely a scene!  The bars, upstairs and down, were both packed, and they clearly know their popularity, and boast it, by posting polaroid-esque photos on their menu and bathroom stalls.  But all kidding aside, the atmosphere is really fun, the decor is beautiful, and even the menus are perfectly minimalist.. . For drinks I ordered the Passion Fruit Cosmo and my friend had the mango mojito.  All of the drinks actually sounded amazing and ours were surprisingly strong without tasting disgustingly of alcohol.  You must get the cheeseburger spring rolls.  They are so tasty.  They are gooey and crunchy and come with ketchup and cheese dipping sauce, and are great to share with someone (there are four rolls in one order).  I probably could have stopped eating at that point, especially because frying a cheeseburger is not really the healthiest thing on earth, but for dinner I had the chicken pillard.  I can honestly say I was taken aback by the size of the portion.  Usually at these hipster joints, where models frequent, there's no point having heaping portions.  This was the largest piece of perfectly grilled chicken I have ever seen, covered in two heaping handfuls of arugula drizzled with a balsamic glaze and shaved fennel and Parmesan............ . I am giving you a chance to stop drooling.......... . Ok, it was really amazing, worth every penny, and I seriously savored every bite that I could take.  I unfortunately didn't finish my whole meal, but my friend who ordered the also delicious mushroom risotto had a bite of mine and totally agreed on the lunacy of this dish!. . Final Analysis:. If you like the bona fide diner that is Cafeteria, you will love Delicatessen for it's one-step-up dining experience.  While I am all for quiet and calm dinners with friends, there's something nice about being in a cool space with lots of people just soaking up their surroundings.  Go in, grab a drink and some yummy appetizers and let yourself escape into this scenesters paradise!
