ReviewID: jLTNM1dibsgsE_OJs0VovA
ReviewerID: j5T8SVckCh_TJ_lUfunrsw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Strip House Steak House
Category: Steakhouses
I was really pumped about eating here and I have to agree with some of the reviews below about steak quality being ehhhh not the best, but not bad either. . . So lets get to some facts first:. . Am I a beef gorging carnivore ? Do LiL Wayne and Chamillionaire suck ass? That would be a hell yes. . Have I had better steaks? Yes - although the best steaks I've had have not been in NYC believe it or not (Boa in Vegas; Bones in Atlanta). . Was this an awesome dinner overall? Hell yes. Our waiter was really good and very attentive, the bartenders were good.. . 4 stars for the overall experience and dinner. 3 1/2 for the steak itself.. . Dinner for 7. - Some booze at the bar. - Seafood platter for 6. - (4) NY Strips, (1) 10oz Filet, (1) Veal t-bone, (1) Ribeye. - Creamed spinach (WOW so good), mushrooms (good), goose fat fried potatoes (good), steamed broccoli (wtf who ordered that????). - (2) 1.5L bottles of wine. - (1) hot coat check girl. cha-ching, a shade under $1200  (for dinner, not the girl). Corporate card: Priceless!. . I'm not a big fan of seafood so I only had 2 shrimp and 2 crab legs. I think that the shrimp on the platter use Brian McNamee as their personal trainer because they were HUGE. Lots of clams and oysters on the platter that others said were good. . . I opted for the rib-eye and it was delicious. I like very salty and peppered steaks so that was great. Did it have the dry age taste that a quality steak should have? Not quite but it was still good, don't get me wrong. Also jacked some of someone else's stilton sauce which was pretty tasty. . . I found their steak sauce to be excellent (not as sweet/tangy as Peter Luger's - but to me thats a good thing). . . Creamed Spinach - Dios mio bendito, que costa tan buena!!!!!. Goose fat fried potatoes - My expectation was something like Stripsteak's goose fat fried FRIES. Dammit! They were still good but  they are homefries style which im not too crazy about. . . I passed on dessert but tried someone's creme brulee and a banana caramel (or was it chocolate) syrup w/ ice cream? Both were pretty good but don't trust my dessert pallet as anything sweet is good to me.. . After dinner (along with 3 beers, 1 bookers on the rocks + lots of wine) we jumped in a cab and headed over to Jadis for more vino...review for that coming soon (yes I am a drunkard)
