ReviewID: JmJ2VxT2V7Ip9gQd5ZKOcQ
ReviewerID: E3WSr4iCCIbKYBiraT9gEw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
Lola, light of my life, fire of my loins. My sin, my soul. Lo-la: the tip of the tongue taking a trip of two steps down the palate to tap, at two, on the teeth. Lo. La.. . So Nabokov got the name wrong, but Lolita is so close to Lola that I can let him slide on that one. . . Lola's: Home of the Martini!. . I've been to Lola's by night and by day, on a date and with friends, for a celebration and just for a catch-up, and every visit has been full of festivity with a comfortable yet upbeat electricity circling the air. . . The number one reason I love Lola's is that there is no pretension. Zero. You know you're leaving Hollywood when the douchey-ness starts thinning out. All the bartenders and servers I've had were all very attentive and down to earth, a real treat for service. . . Lola's has comfortable couches (and tables as well), martinis that are both strong and taste like candy (the winning combination) and delicious appetizers to make sure your alcohol goes down smoothly. I'm sure there was some music but every time I've been here I was having too much fun to notice.  . . The martini menu is off the wall fabulous and will have your imagination running wild. Just to name a few: Cantaloupe, Chocolate (with Godiva chocolate), Caramel Apple, Pomegranate &amp; Lemon, Toasted Almond, and even a Lakers-themed martini!  Wow-wa-wee-wa. Just don't get the Strawberry Milkshake..it tastes like medicine! :(. . Deets:. . **$5 martini and $5.50 app specials 5:30-7:30:. . - Apple martini is the shiznit because apparently this is the HOME OF THE APPLE MARTINI! I love eating the alcohol soaked piece of apple at the end. . - Sweet potato fries: thick cut and BOMB!. - Spinach dip topped with cheese with lots and lots of chips: Eat and share, eat and share!. - Beef empanadas with spicy chimchurri : So flakey and delicious. Must try. . - Mini burger with fries: Meh. . . If you love martinis like I do, you will love Lola's like Humbert loved Lolita. Discreetly, sweetly, oddly...
