ReviewID: jOwdIgCHZDNAUHlW-9Oi2w
ReviewerID: oAf9OkoaeE252ijLydHUqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Honey Pig
Category: Korean
Did you know "honey pig" is the Korean translation for a 6-month old pig? I asked our server for his favorite flavor, and he told me the pork belly marinated in wine. I then asked him if the honey pig version is marinated in honey - he said no, it's not marinated at all and "honey pig" actually means 6-month old pig. Apparently this restaurant gets their pork belly from honey pigs in LA, and most other restaurants serve just "regular" pork belly ... I assume meaning pork belly from "adult" pigs. Meat from honey pigs is apparently more flavorful. Yeah, so I started feeling sad about the little pigs ... but I confess, like when I order veal, as soon as I smelled those meats cooking on the inverted wok ... I forgot where those pork bellies came from. Sorry PETA.. . Tonight was my second time at Honey Pig. I came months ago and had a really negative experience, stemming from very inattentive service from a server who could barely speak English, expecting maybe too much b/c all my Korean friends hyped it up, and then feeling like $17 was too much to pay for pork belly. I also learned afterwards that our server didn't provide a lot of the extras like the fried rice that could possibly make paying $17 more palatable. . . So tonight -- redemption successful. We had fabulous service - our server was very informative with my menu questions, and great with grilling all our food. We got 2 orders of the honey pig which was plenty -- consider you are also getting a lot of sides like kimchi &amp; bean sprouts (which taste delicious when grilled), cold kimchi radish soup (yummy!), and items for your wrap like garlic, mushrooms, thinly slice green onion salad, lettuce, 3 different sauces, rice cake paper, radish slices, pickled veggies ... and just when you think you're done with your meal -- they come by and make fried rice with any remaining leftovers (or add more if there are none), plus fry a squid, a Korean pancake, and bring a bowl of jigae soup. 2 orders of meat is plenty for 2 people, and adequate for 3.. . I would definitely come again - but for health reasons, not anytime soon. Korean bacon, American bacon, ... bacon is bacon. However, i would highly recommend Honey Pig if you want an experience and if you love trying something new.
