ReviewID: JqgSN0XrpoMXRfoCa2lX7g
ReviewerID: vQg24u6SVG_vkgI2MZwQvQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
2-hour wait--really??? I arrived at the location before 11 PM and didn't get the food until a little past 1. I really expected them to close the window right when I walked up, but fortunately they didn't (to my feet's relief). . . As for the food, if I had to sum it up in two words: sweet and savory. After waiting two hours you'd think I'd want to pile up on the food but I resisted that temptation, as I was less hungry than intrigued, and ordered only two tacos: short ribs and chicken. I asked for some lime, as any Mexican food aficionado would do, in which they also gave me oranges and radishes (?). Very strange at first, but as I took my first bite I completely understood the complex Asian-Mexican flavor profile. The sauce they glaze their tacos with is sweet (almost too sweet) and tangy, and the radish really balances out the sweetness. The chicken taco lives up to its name and is refreshingly spicy, albeit still sweet. I'm not a big fan of sweet food, so I can't justify a 2-hour wait time, but if it were readily available (like Chipotle) I'd frequent the place once every couple of months. It's something different than your local taqueria or, say, Del Taco, but hands down my favorites remain unchanged: Wahoo's (enchiladas with t/ spicy green sauce) and Chipotle ('cuz they have the best barbacoa meat).. . I've deducted one star, however, because the line really is that bad! It's chaotic, and people really don't give, well, you know what, about respecting the line. Seriously! Just about everyone (minus myself) had moochers cutting in 10 minutes shy from the front of the line. If it's only a few groups I wouldn't spend so much time ranting, but just about every group doubled (if not tripled!) in size and it really tried my patience (only god knows the restraint I exhibited that day).. . So buck up Kogi newbies, because it's like a marathon--without the running, of course--and so you'll need endurance.. . Vegetarians: Beware, strict vegetarians/vegans need not wait in line. Though they offer tofu tacos, they're cooked on the same grill. Unless you don't mind meat-soaked tofu.
