ReviewID: jQlIo4Dp3tF7eo_20AfNVg
ReviewerID: yyXMzsAAEFfZtIdPIKucOg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Serpas
Category: American (New)
Scott Serpa has finally opened his restaurant - Serpas - located in Old Fourth Ward at the tip of Studioplex (Auburn and Irwin intersection). I've been pretty pumped up about this opening, considering the space is at the end of my street and has been taunting me every morning as I drive to work. Tonight, I saw people and lights, so I went to explore.. . Keep in mind that the restaurant has apparently been open for 2 days at the time of this writing and I'm a big fan of giving a place some latitude when it first opens. That being said, I'm impressed. The staff seems well trained and friendly, service was responsive, the food came out promptly and was pretty delicious. But let's get down to business.. . Studioplex has long had this large outdoor patio (for lack of a better word) that has been turned into retail and restaurant spaces over the past year. Serpas is at the point of this triangular area which means that it has one wall that is old school exposed factory brick, one side kitchen, and the longest wall is a picturesque line of windows looking out into Old Fourth Ward with the Atlanta skyline in the distance. I realized tonight that I am not aware of any other restaurant that has such an emphasis on blending the business space into the surrounding neighborhood. Of course, I still think they should have included an outdoor dining area, but what can you do?. . The interior design is great. Clean, and simple, good textures, and a big boisterous space that makes the space come alive. The bar area is respectable and is divided into a traditional high counter bar area and a table level bar area - it's nice to have a choice. I think that the tone of the bar space fills a missing need in the neighborhood as well. Johnny's (Jack's) Pizza is the local dive bar, P'Cheen is a little more of the suave bar/music scene, Rathbun's Steak House is the fancy schmancy scene and Serpas is the somewhat upscale, but grounded scene - the servers are all well dressed, but wearing low top Chuck's!. . The main dining area is open, but not too crowded and the tables by the expansive windows seem cozy (we sat in the middle of the room). There is a good energy to the design.. . OK, so what about the food? Here is what I've tried:. . Eggplant Hush Puppies - yeah. That's just all kinds of stupid good. Lightly breaded, perfectly crisp with gorgonzola (?) and a marinara sauce and a bit of subtle heat. MMMMMMMMMMMM......... . Double Beef Patti - a double patty burger with Cheddar cheese and that fancy bacon that's thick cut and tasty. The buns were buttered and toasted and the burger was cooked perfectly (medium-well). It should be noted that you can apparently get a single patty burger and you should (I was trying to be a tough guy). I did have a problem with the bottom bun being a little soggy, but when you have a perfectly cooked burger, that's what happens. Overall, not so bad.. . Fries- the fries were good. Fresh cut, slightly crisp. good.. . Cast Iron skillet potatoes au gratin - as my friend's know, any food item associated with "cast iron skillet" makes me pretty happy. The idea of cast iron breakfast skillets makes me do the robot, so I was excited about this side item. It was fine, I suppose, but after the other dishes, I was expecting a taste explosion. Alas, it was potatoes with some cheddar cheese on top in a skillet. Potatoes are a great carrier of flavor, I just wished these potatoes had a greater load to carry. BUT AGAIN, I ATE HERE WITHIN THEIR FIRST 40 HOURS OF OPENING.. . Overall, I like it. The rest of the menu is creative, but doesn't go off the deep end. I think Serpas might have struck the right tone to be both a destination restaurant as well as a place that is accessible to the changing neighborhood. The space is great, the staff if professional, the execution is well done. My guess is that we have a keeper.
