ReviewID: JS6ctzJ3cRx6tPEoZed8bw
ReviewerID: VDTvXteVDWfWtKyXCnFY3w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I've been anticipating this visit and I got a 10:30 reservation the day of on a Saturday. We arrived on time and we directed to the usual, "Please spend some money at the bar first." Saw Nancy Silverton working the mozzarella bar with a smile. The wine menu was confusing for a novice and I couldn't figure out where the reds and the whites were as everything was in Spanish. They come with a little carafe on the side so I think it warrants the $18 price tags. After about twenty minutes we were seated.. . As we looked over the menu, the dumb bitch told us we had to order the starters and the entrees together, however, she took her sweet ass time with our drinks. When asked about the best dishes, she said they were all good. Ok, thanks, you're about as useful as a condom inside the Vatican. . . Another weird thing is that they play rock 'n' roll music. . . As usual, the dishes are rated 1 - 10 (10 being amazing). . (2) $0 Chef's Complimentary Dish. Stuzzichino, mozzarella with sweet basil leaves, dried tomato and olives and olive oil. Nothing special, but a cool dish to try.. . (3) Burrata braised artichokes, pine nuts, currants &amp; mint pesto. I wouldn't have ordered this had I known Nancy was going push her mozzarella bar like a drug dealer. I would try one dish from the bar at the most.. . (5) $18 Tortellini e brodo. The pasta was good, but it doesn't belong in a broth. I would pass on this dish.. . (10) $18 Fresh Ricotta &amp; Egg Raviolo with browned butter. My favorite dish of the night. As you slice it, the soft egg comes running out. Very tender and great with the oil and ricotta.. . (9) $18 Orecchiette with sausage &amp; Swiss chard. They sprinkle on breadcrumbs that gives the dish a great texture. The sausage had a rich flavor with fennel and a little spice. It was also a favorite of my friends.. . (9) $18 Goat Cheese Ravioli with five lilies. Its so hard to go wrong with cheese and pasta. The ravioli was so tender, I wish I could do the same at home.. . (9) $18 Tagliatelle with ragu. So, so tender and a great light meat flavor to complement.. . (4) $26 Grilled Beef Tagliata, rucola and Parmigiano with aceto balsamico. Nothing special, meat was good, but not the reason I would go here. I thought this was a little over-priced.. . (6) $29 Grilled Lamb Scottadita with insalata di fregola sarda &amp; yogurt . Nothing special again, just lamb chops. They were tender, though.. . (7) $26 Beef Brasato with polenta &amp; horseradish gremolata . I thought this was the best dish from the entrees, but braised beef is usually consistently good.  . . (5) $26 Sweetbreads. I love the unique texture of sweetbreads, but laying in the sauce it lost a bit of the crunchiness that makes sweetbreads so good. I did think the lemon sauce went well with the dish.. . The other servers were good, but I still limited it to 10%. When asked about the best dishes, she should have said the pastas as they are the best I have had in this city in years.. . Other reviews complained about the price and portions. I disagree with both. Their menu has accurate prices, so don't go if you're broke. The four of us had ten dishes and it was $300 out the door. And the portions are fine, just look at the pics. Also, this place is a lot better than the Pizzeria. The pizzas are so bland. Its obvious Mario had more influence on the Osteria.. . My recommendation would be to order all the pastas for the table. Pass on everything else, but I do want to go back and try the tripe.
