ReviewID: jSYAc4jA26m1UMcOY9cH3Q
ReviewerID: ucdG-dKK38jAIMwXZfpbyg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Glenn&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
Glenn's Diner has been on my restaurant "to-do" list for quite awhile. Finally made it, and have decided it's my new favorite restaurant. I guess their breakfast is a big deal, but I haven't tried that, yet. I was more interested in their seafood selection, which is impressive. . . On Saturday night, they're busy. It's way smaller than I imagined. Host guy gave us the option of chairs at the bar immediately, or waiting over 2 hours for a table since we had no reservation. I was ready to walk to a different spot on this charming stretch of Montrose, But this guy's charm triumphed. I couldn't see the chairs he was offering to us at the bar, and he suggested that was because his," Big, fat, Polish head was in the way." Awesome. Couldn't say no to this guy, even though I prefer to sit at a table. The staff was incredibly friendly and sincere, and we were were asked a few times by different people if everything was ok. The scallop appetizer was simple, but amazing. 4 scallops sauteed perfectly, with a little cup of some mustard sauce with a kick to it. Delicious. I'm assuming their fish selection changes regularly. After much thought, I settled on the trout, with a butter sauce with pecans. Excellent. Served with some small red potatoes and zucchini, yellow squash, tomato, and onion all julienne sliced and perfectly cooked. The catfish with shrimp and cornbread stuffing and spicy hollandaise was also excellent. The hollandaise is potently spicy! Decent wine and beer selection, but limited liquor selection. They're also BYOB. I seem to recall this place was featured on The Food Network's Diners, Drive-In's and Dives awhile back.  . . Can't wait to get back to Glenn's. My intent was to go for Tuesday all you can eat crab legs, which I still hope to do. Not sure how busy they are on weekday evenings, but it's probably best to make reservations on weekends.
