ReviewID: JTbVk2PDBHcTD-CUrbqJhQ
ReviewerID: 2KzNxNPZyaSGh-Uf4FqNSA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
I must preface this review by saying that I actually really enjoy roscoe's chicken and waffles. I just hate the original Gower St. establishment.. . I have been here twice now, and both times they made us wait so long that we decided to leave.  The first time it wasn't their fault.  It was Sunday at noon, and there was a whole church crowd lined up to eat their chicken.  Fine, we'll just order to-go.  Many orders of chicken, waffles, eggs, gravy on the side, and all their other goodies go in, and in maybe 15-20 minutes, the food was ready.  Cool, I thought, they filled our order pretty fast.  I was very excited to go home (or in this case, to my friend's nearby apartment) to break open the chicken.. . We get "home" and hungrily start to dig into the food when we realize that they forgot what I consider to be the most important ingredient: the gravy.  Now, of course their waffles and chicken are good without it, but to me the gravy is what makes them GREAT.  And I'm positive we asked for gravy (in fact we may have asked for extra gravy).. . Strike one for this Roscoe's.. . A few months later, we decide to come here again, this time in the middle of the night (they do open till 4), after a bar or something.  We get there and are told that there's an hour wait.  Kinda long, but everyone wanted chicken so we all gladly waited.  Our name goes on a list and we sit down and wait with all the other 4th meal goers.  Not 15 minutes later, two scantily-dressed girls strut up to the host and ask to be seated.  To our utter amazement, he takes them in and sits them down at a table.  What happened to the waiting list?!  Will showing my cleavage and maybe a thigh and half a cheek shorten my waiting time?  Is that how they roll?  We decided to wait it out still, because girls get away with things like cutting in line all the time, and it seemed like they were still seating all the "normal" people in a timely manner in the order they arrived at the restaurant.  We wait about an hour and a half when the last group before us on the waiting list get seated, and by then our stomachs were growling and our mouths watering for some of their chicken.  Then, when the next table opened up, the host actually had the gall to seat another group, even though we all saw them arrive about 20 minutes after us!  We went to ask him what the heck that was about, and he just gave us attitude, and basically asked us to leave.  !@#$#$#@~~@#!  We waited our turn like everyone else!  If we knew the host was going to hand-pick who gets to go in and who doesn't, we would have taken our business elsewhere without wasting 1.5 hours waiting in the streets of Hollywood!  What the heck kind of service is that?!. . So anyway, to me this Roscoe's does not exist anymore.  If I want Chicken and Waffles, I go to the Pasadena one.  Sure, it may not have as much character as this one, but at least I get to eat without being discriminated against.
