ReviewID: jtL5U5MuusNnlTABi0vnpg
ReviewerID: 3yVoLX19pKAIPKFDjR3pqw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Nacional 27
Category: Latin American
I needed something to take the edge off from my full-time job as a girl detective (a Yelpencyclopedia Brown, if you will), so good food, drinks, and company were just what the doctor ordered. . . We got a 9pm reservation for dinner and after bidding our cab adieu, were greeted by a cacophony of infant wailing and screeching tires.  My date and I spun around to see a pram rolling across the boulevard while a racing Karmann Ghia sped towards the tot. Without a thought, I darted out into the road scooping up the carriage with one arm, while doing the Heisman stiff arm with my right. The car stopped, duhviously, from my formidable strength. Running back, I saw the bumper was unfortunately dented by my force, while I reunited the baby with its mother on the curb and myself with my date. Within seconds, we heard the caterwaul of sirens. The Five-Oh informed me, as they cuffed the driver, he was a runaway car thief and not to feel too guilty about the damage I inadvertently did to the car, the owner is a known bigot. They confided they were already aware of my talent and good deeds, and knew my skills were being wasted in menial duties. They shared there's a job for me as an operative; involving clandestine, undercover work (with maybe two others), as a model, pageant contestant, or cocktail waitress for big wigs solving crimes and using kung fu. Moreover, a key for the City is mine to be had. I admit I was tempted and even thought of the catch phrase for me ("Book em' good lookin'").  But siren song of dinner harkened. . . While my date talked to the charming hostesses and put our coats in the complementary coat check, I look up and see Dr. Peter Venkman.  He started hitting on me ruthlessly- hey! He's funny and hot, but go chase a ghost, gopher, or groundhog, my dance card is full!. . We were sat by the lighted circle thingy in the dining room.  I wisely chose to sit adjacent, while the companion was backlit by the fixture, and we ordered the house marg and "look better naked" marg, both without salt. They came with salt anyhow, but we had straws and they were delish.  The drink and beer list is long and inexpensive. The free chips and salsa were unimpressive (the green salsa was mild and portion small, my date liked it though). The "caliente" shrimp &amp; scallop nachos appetizer were super meaty and flavorful, hence, made of win.  . . Our server shared charming, memorized, origin stories of the specials; her effort was cute and appreciated. My date, it being Lent, and refined to boot, ordered the crab stuffed halibut entrée.  I ordered as an entrée the n27 combination platter - smoked chicken empanada, boniato and plantain croqueta, bbq'd lamb taco, shrimp skewer. Yikes, it was ok, but please be advised, do not order it as an entrée! It was mucho small and we ignored the empanada and boniato creating sad face. Luckily, I ordered as a disappointed afterthought to my ill-conceived first choice; the farm raised chicken mole verde, which to our delight came out pronto!!! We loved it. Upon leaving Murray tried to jock me, but we climbed into our cab going home happy and with leftovers.. . And then I woke up.. . Psych! Ha, actually all the above set forth were true, except I had four drinks and the car was a Camaro. . . And you don't have to be a sleuth, no secret- Nacional 27 is a phenomenal destination, with amazing food, drinks, service, and ambiance.. . A dream come true!
