ReviewID: JuO2qikUlAzR_AoxdJhpxw
ReviewerID: M3Zv8TXcW4Lg3UlGowMkog
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
Okay so I give this place a four. It is absolutely a favorite of mine but here's a little back story on me so you know where I'm coming from with this one.. . I used to work at a Legal Seafood's for 2 years on the east coast as a bartender making drinks and shucking oysters. Backstory over.. . The Food:. So the place is a little pricey and the menu is not what we're used to, in terms of quantity. So what does that tell us? The quality is there. What they have they do very well and they do rotate their dishes frequently, but any regular knows which are the staples depending on the season for a seafood restaurant. Believe me when I say you will find yourself trying dishes you normally wouldn't based on the quality and reputation of the place. Sometimes, that's how I define a good restaurant.. . Anyhow, I can't not mention the pug burger. It's heaven (can't believe I used that word). And for the most part their selections of cheese with accoutrements are well paired (see, they have something for non-seafood eaters).. . The Drinks:. This is where you will most likely notice the pricey side of this restaurant, especially if you're like me and like to indulge. However, they contain a happy dose of the vitamins we expect from a balanced drink without tasting anywhere near the word sewage.. . Service:. The service seems to consistently strike that fine line of perfect  professionalism vs. cool casual. It never misses a beat and (important for any newcomers to seafood or exotic drinks) the staff always knows to explain ANYTHING or answer any questions, so definitely take advantage and ask if your curious (i.e. if halibut tastes like scrod (hmm) or bluefish like catfish (right)). Same goes for the ingredients in their drinks.. . Conclusion:. The physicality of the place was small but they expanded the place recently (to include a raw bar) and now it's much larger.. . Anyhow, the atmosphere is un-intrusive with just right lighting but could use some more comfortable chairs and a much warmer feeling atmosphere on the inside.. . Ramble over.. Let me know what you thought of the place tho? Agree/Disagree? I want to know.
