ReviewID: jUpRJoaqIuUocRveP0V8Ew
ReviewerID: n5kvRbPZ_S2E2_DYNOEfyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
perhaps my ass has more cushioning than previous reviewers because i've never experienced an ass bruising from sitting on the wooden block stools there.. . i was taken there by a small group of friends on my birthday a while back and i fell for it. yes, there are expensive high end options for people, but there are also exquisite entrees in the twenty dollar range that are a nice option for those, like me, who want to experience fine dining but can't afford to truly indulge.. . as in most hollywood eateries, i think the service here varies tremendously. there are pretentious types who lower themselves to serve you, but there are others who will run to put in the order of chorizo stuffed calamari because she knows there's only one order left and she wants to make sure you get it. damn me for forgetting her name, but the 5'6"ish brunette waitress with her hair pulled back in a ponytail is a precious, considerate and lovely individual.. . i've ordered or tried the following dishes: . seafood salad: pieces of fresh crab and scallops (if i remember correctly) tossed with delicious greens, corn kernels off the cob and a phenomenal vinaigrette type dressing.. soft shell crab salad was perfectly fried and crisp.. clams and chorizo. too salty, but really, what did expect when i ordered chorizo? the grilled bread that came with the dish was a great complement.. black cod in a white wine sauce with mashed potatoes. i almost stole this dish from my friend.. salmon (i think) crudo with vegetables and capers was good but really didn't provide enough food for the cost.. clam chowder was hearty and there was some magical ingredient in it that set it apart from others i've had. the crab cake is insanely expensive-- comes out as one giant fat crab cake but i definitely enjoyed eating it.. . there are complaints about small portion sizes, but i feel that varies depending on the dish. the mussels and chorizo are definitely filling, but i found it helps to order an extra dish to share with others in your party.. . the staff was also nice enough to overhear that it was my friend's birthday and they brought out a piping hot chocolate bread pudding without us asking for it, also very considerate.. . i've ordered the king estate pinot gris and pike's riesling which were both well paired with the food and also did not break the bank. eventually i will try the raw bar menu, but until daddy warbucks comes along i'm going to have to hold off.
