ReviewID: JVtEt0IY4oGF5qI8bB_2YA
ReviewerID: lufa4bHQd3XLYQE1zXis0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
"Wow,  I've never heard of duck prosciutto before, have you?". --"Nope!". "I thought prosciutto was only made from ham". --"Pig". "What did you call me???". --"....prosciutto". . In between all of the weird insults and commentary, we had an interesting dinner at Ford's.  We started off with a curried lentil salad that had greens, goat cheese, walnuts, and of course, duck prosciutto.  I was not a huge fan of this latter ingredient, although it wasn't terrible either.  The salad itself was flavorful, but we all had difficulty transferring the last remaining bits of our lentils to our mouths.  They are, as Julia Roberts would say, "slimy little suckers.". . For the main course, I ordered the polenta cake with a side of chicken.  The polenta cake was delicious with the the mushrooms and the sauce, and the side of chicken was tender breast meat with a light and crispy skin.  It was very very good!  . . For dessert we shared the banana split.  I thought the bananas were supposed to be caramelized, but they were only covered in a burnt and hardened sugar (think creme brulee crust).  Although good, it was not what we expected.  The berries were fresh and sweet and the ice cream itself was wonderful!  Especially the dark chocolate.  Supposedly they make it in-house with a Toblerone base.  Yum!. . We also shared a bottle of Cab, which was very nice.  Oh, and the garlic roll at the beginning of the meal was very tasty as well, but I wish we had been given more than one.  Probably would have spoiled the rest of the meal, but it might have been worth it.  :]. . Other things to note:  The salt and pepper are in separate little bowls on the table with their own little spoons.  However, our salt was missing its spoon, and my friend used her fingers to grab some for her food before we all chastized her.  So, be careful with the condiments.  You don't know who, or what's, been in them!!!  There's also mouthwash in the bathroom, but we all decided that we're not the kind of girls to put random mysterious blue liquids in our mouths.
