ReviewID: JwhM4hjzoH0JC9Ciap3Acw
ReviewerID: ZoLDVY1mlbIqJ-LFtDBLAQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
A fabulous neighborhood restaurant that's always available for your dining pleasure.  From brunches to dinners Taste offers a new American cuisine with a hint of Mexican influence.  The perfect spot for two friends to chat over brunch and an even better first date setting.  Dimly lit with two separate dining rooms inside for a more intimate evening or a lively patio outsides where you can have a smoke while sipping on delicious wine.  Have some house guests you want to impress but don't want to empty your wallet?  Head over to Taste where this eclectic menu has something different for everyone!. . Having had brunch here multiple times I have narrowed it down to two favorite dishes.  The Breakfast Panini is outrageous !  Packed with scrambled eggs, applewood smoked bacon, creamy goat cheese, caramelized onions and oven dried tomatoes this panini is pressed perfectly the way a panini should be.  Not a bacon lover? No problem! Taste doesn't mind leaving something off or adding a tasty treat on.  The Crab Cake Benedict is another must!  Yes benedict's are on the heavy side but this is well worth it. Toasted brioche bread topped with homemade crabcakes, 2 perfectly poached eggs burst open with oozing yolk cascading over all the right parts of your dish!  Switch the breakfast rosemary potatoes for some mixed greens so you don't feel overwhelmed with carbs. Don't forget to ask your server about the Bottemless Mimosas!. . After a long work day the last thing on your mind is cooking.  During a much needed lunch break give Taste a call and make reservations for that night, you wont be sorry.  Weather it's a hearty meal or light snack Taste is here to please.  Charcoal-Grilled Artichoke with White Balsamic-Tartar Sauce is the perfect start to a meal (however I wouldn't recommend this for a first date as artichoke may stick around in a random tooth-a quick trip to the restroom to make sure your pearly whites are still pearly is always a good idea).  The most scrumptious is the Ahi Tuna Tar Tar.  Piled high on your plate this Tar Tar is mixed with fresh Dill, chopped Avocado, diced Jicama and held together with a Spicy Aioli.  Have a glass of water next to you because your tongue will need a refresher after this dish.  Recently dining here with a friend in town we chose the Fresh Vegetable Pizzetta with plump Tomatoes , seared Peppers, Mint Pesto on toasted flat breads.  Washing this fab appetizer down with a bottle of Terrezas Malbec was the perfect compliment.  Moving on to dinner I went with a favorite of mine- The Blackened Salmon Salad.  Mixed Greens, scattered with Capers, Fresh Herbs and Slow Roasted Tomatoes are lightly tossed in a White Balsamic, which I'm considering my new favorite vinegar.  Angel chose the Ravioli which changes daily and is always a tasty choice.   The perfect helping and beautifully presented, this Ravioli had a Mexican twist.  Stuffed with shredded chicken mixed with Queso Fresco a light Pesto is drizzled on top and avocados strewn about the plate.  This Southwest dish dances on your tongue making you realize how fabulous fresh hand-rolled ravioli is !  When dining with Stony the Macadamia Nut Crusted Mahi Mahi is a favorite.  A tasty white fish lay atop Wasabi Pureed Potatoes, Julienned Vegetables and a Citrus Miso Sauce.  The macadamia nut and spicy wasabi mixed perfectly with the flaky white fish, your taste buds will be hightened. . . Fresh fish , homemade pastas with Kobe meat balls, salads and brunch eggs to die for, this restaurant has it all! . Taste on Melrose     8454 Melrose Avenue. West Hollywood, CA 90069. p: 323.852.6888. .     Mon. 5:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.. .     Tue-Thu. 11:30 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.. .     Fri. 11:30 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.. .     Sat. 10:30 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.. .     Sat. 5:30 p.m. - 11:00 p.m.. .     Sun. 10:30 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.. .     Sun. 5:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.. . Helpful Hints. . * Make reservations for breakfast or brunch. . * Happy Hour Menu available. . * Valet parking. . * You can bring your own wine for a corkage fee. . * Full bar available
