ReviewID: jwz7cQJ4syYadIeEjR8d9Q
ReviewerID: QG4woWg7xagorSImgjg3_w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Marlay House
Category: Pubs
We visited the Grange (now Marlay House) on a rainy night over the weekend.  I called ahead to check on the wait and was assured no more than 10 minutes.  It turns out there was no wait at all and we were being seated by the time the wife's martini was ready at the bar (within minutes).. . Public Service Announcement:  . If you're in a relationship where the majority of your heated "debates" are over the redeeming factors of restaurants and which to patron (aka super important topics that affect all aspects of humanity) i will strongly advise you not to park in the back parking lot in the rain.  There aren't a lot of parking spaces to begin with and the rain makes it impossible to see the faded asphalt paint.  My marriage was touch-and-go for about 4 minutes until said martini was firmly in her grasp.. . The inside is typical pub.  And by "typical" i mean appropriately Irish, as you would expect.  Not like Disney-style Fado of today, but more like Fado of yester-year (remember those tucked away booths and semi-private dining spaces?).  Authentic, non-theatric, dark wood, Guiness-pouring, Irish.. . We were seated around back of the restaurant, much of which is engulfed by the bar that runs squarely around the inside of the entire dining space very much like Hand in Hand.  After taking our seat next to the fire (cool!) i looked over the appropriately portioned beer menu and decided on a snakebite.. . Our food was delicious and very upper-crust pub fare.  We ordered an app off the specials list (something like super-tasty pigs in a blanket), as well my TCB sandwich (Turkey, Cranberry, Brie, ZOMG!) and her Caprese salad and side of fries.  Pics have been uploaded if you want to peep them on the main resto page here on Yelp.. . Our service was very good - attentive enough to keep my beer glass full but not overbearing.  The restaurant was relatively busy but not overly loud.  I really like it and plan to return (so long as the rain holds out).. . Side note - if you have a group of about 8 or so try to get the semi-private big table in the back.  There a big U-shaped seating area that is quasi-private and super intimate.  In a manly, Irish way, of course.
