ReviewID: jx6ikOX81zBW0ZNAAlADpA
ReviewerID: SWJc4hxNvkM4Nlh6Jczjgg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hamburger Mary&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
Living in the neighborhood, I've been to Mary's probably ten times.  The food is usually good, though the service is sometimes lacking.. . On Sunday, seven of us went there for brunch to kickoff the very long Saint Patrick's Day weekend.  Three of us had been there before, the others had not.. . Apparently, we weren't the only ones starting the celebration early.  The place was packed. We Waited probably 15 minutes for a table.  Not bad I guess.. . The food, as always was good, nothing over the top, but good.  Most of us ordered from the brunch menu which included a free mimosa.  My meal, eggs and pancakes, was fine.  Not hard to make good eggs and pancakes.  My friend, who had ordered a cheeseburger, was not too impressed.  Not as good as Kumas and he complained his fries were cold. Another friend combined brunch with lunch ordering the burger/egg combo.  He loved it.  You use the hamburger bun as toast. Overall, all were happy.. . The service is often lacking, but on this day, despite the crowd, it was much more than adequate.  Our waiter was not just attentive and efficient, he was actually nice.  Usually we get one quality or the other, but on this visit we got both and we made this guy work,  Every time he came to the table someone wanted something.  It kind of became a joke...he'd bring something to the table, we'd ask whose turn it was to ask the waiter for something.  He handled us well.  Kind of flirtatious too which is unusual here because as a woman, it's usually my male friends who get flirted with not me.  Today it was they who were jealous.. . Upstairs is Mary's Attic.  It's not open during the day, but it's a fun place featuring drag queens, dj's and kareoke.  Had they thought to open the upstairs for Sunday afternoon partiers like us, we'd have spent the day there.  It is fun at night and I do recommend you give it a whirl sometime.. . Overall, Hamburger Mary's is a good place.  Better food than Charlie's Ale House down the street and more fun to boot.
