ReviewID: jXAUG30qr3ioVgdE_KyHiQ
ReviewerID: LhLJgz5-vJnf0lCk1R7oew
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
You come here for the steak and that's what you get!  Note, it's not like Mastro's in that it's not a traditional steak and seafood house with the dim lighting and the velvet seats.  It's modern, a little more casual, lights are teency bit brighter and the overall atmosphere is quite different.. . We came here for our one year anniversary since we knew the meal would be $200+ for the two of us.  The rundown:. -Skipped appetizers since we knew the bread, steak and sides would be more than enough.. -Yelpers are right, the pretzel bread is GREAT!  I think we had three rolls each... it might have contributed to the ridiculously full feeling we had in the end.. -Hubby ordered the American Wagyu 10oz ribeye, medium-rare-plus.  It was delicious! Really tender, with a slight buttery taste.  Took Yelpers advice and went for American Wagyu instead of the Japanese.  And when they come around and show you the difference in the meats, you can see all the fat marbling in the Japanese one.  It would have definitely been too much, though next time I think the hubby will want to at least sample it.. -I ordered the 8oz (or was it 10oz?) Nebraska corn-fed New York sirloin. (On the menu its 14oz but you can get a smaller size for about $12 less).  Got it medium since I'm preggers, but would normally go for med-rare-plus.  It too was very good, and IMHO, better than what I had at Mastro's.  I think the seasoning was better!. -Sides: brussel spouts (we loved the big chunks of bacon, minus the fatty pieces, and the pearl onions!  brussel sprouts were cooked PERFECTLY!), creamed spinach with fried egg (DELICIOUS), and the mac and cheese (I'd pass on this.. it's more expensive at $19 instead of $12 like the rest, and its so salty and very filling).. -Couldn't do dessert, we were just way too full.. . In the end, I'd definitely go back.  You don't get Wagyu at Mastro's!  Plus I think I'd feel comfortable going in jeans, heels and a nice shirt since it feels a little less formal than Mastro's.
