ReviewID: jxFlz8skmyNnLCzEnzDGwg
ReviewerID: SIl3M335--lcq7Y2Xrxf_g
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
Pretty much looks like a brothel from the future up in here, dark and red, like something from a bad, futuristic Will Smith movie or something.  Not that there's anything wrong with that.  No, they saved wrong for the rest of the experience.. . Have you ever been to a salon to get your hair done and they stick you under the dryer and when you come out it's Thursday and you're family has filed a missing person's report and you're scared and disoriented? . That's kind of like what the service is like here:  "I'll be right back." - total lie.  One person's drink came and then 10 minutes later the next one came and then like 10 minutes later the next one came.  And you're going to have to search for your check, and start making up lies about how you've got to be somewhere, so "Do you think you could please get my check for me please."   And our waiter was pretty bitchy.  Lots of judgment about whether each person had ordered enough food - so bitchy that then my man started acting all bitchy, too, refusing to order anything else, so then I was having to deal a bitch-a-thon up in this bitch.. . Given the time we had to wait and our vantage point of being able to watch some of the prep work didn't help matters at all - I saw someone pick some food off of the counter with their hands and then put it back on the plate and then take it out to be served....When food did come to our table, all haphazardly spaced, most of it was decent, some of it was great and some of it was school cafeteria bad.. . The Black Tie Sesame Shrimp coated in black and regular sesame seeds was a standout. But they better had been, since an appetizer of eight medium-sized shrimp costs $17. The crunchy and flavorful morsels were the highlight of the janky evening.  Lobster rolls were all Panda Express-ish, and if you can prove to me that there was actually some - any - actual lobster up in the ones we ate  I will straight up give you a dollar.. . My daughter got something (not even memorable) that came with what were supposed to be wasabi mashed potatoes, but was instead a cold and flavorless lump of blech.  We sent them back and the waiter came back to tell us that owner/chef Jackie Shen was also unhappy with them and that they wouldn't be served for the rest of the night.  But there was still no comp of that entree, no substitution offered, just nada. Like, now your diner doesn't have a side dish and will still cost more than $20.  Why didn't the waiter just come over and call me a bitch, too?  Because that would have made just about as much sense.. . And after all of that - the bill? High.  Way too damned high. It has been said before, and it will be said again (especially by me)  but "fusion" is just code for "expensive".. . Come here if you are a glutton for ho lights and painfully bad service with a side of yummy shrimp.
