ReviewID: jXqCSlEAhV480nO6Kjyxow
ReviewerID: A4HNP067h3HAjDsTm5XN1w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
For a special Yelp-world event (my 200th review AND my 30th Birthday!!!), my wife and I scored a great table in the quiet back section of Osteria Mozza to celebrate my entrance into that magical and scary realm - my 30s!. . Started with cocktails at the bar - I had a gin/cucumber concoction which was refreshing, bold, balanced, perfect - my wife had a prosecco cocktail which was also lovely, accented by a lime zest twist meant to tease and tantalize your nose as you sip.  . . After a short and incredibly pleasant wait, we were shown to our table.  and let me just tell you this place really knows the meaning of service.  Professional, pleasant, courteous, personal.. . We brought with us, to commemorate my birth year, a 1978 Cos d'Estournel, but ordered several other tastes and quartinos to accompany our meal.  The Cos d'Estournel was a revelation - we'd had several 1978 wines over the weekend at my birthday party the night before but this was on a whole other level.  It's amazing that a wine harvested 30 years ago is just coming to it's peak.  Remarkable.. . The food here can only truly be described as hedonistic.  The mozzarella tasting menu accompanied by huge slabs of scrumptious garlic bruschetta is just other worldly good.  As is the burrata with leeks and mustard bread crumbs.. . The pasta dishes were also brilliant.  I had the gnocchi pomodoro which was light, pillowy, beautiful.  Perfectly sauced and draped with julienned basil and grated ricotta.  My wife had the raviolo with brown butter and sage, which was again, the epitome of hedonism.  Lush, rich, dense but not too much so.  . . The desserts were glorious.  Bombolini, little pastries, with berries and vanilla gelato, was the perfect combination of textures, the olive oil cakes with a buttery gelato with a rosemary crisp was so odd and revelatory that it was almost as impossible to comprehend as it was to finish, but in the end both were accomplished.  The moscato d'asti we had with our desserts was the perfect balance of honey, apricot, and confectioner's sugar - a lovely sparkler to end a lovely meal.. . It was quite possibly the best meal I've ever had, and certainly a series of dishes and wines that I will never forget.
