ReviewID: jZV7AaqOj5jbPHxGDmsmLw
ReviewerID: hLZhIcq9qupYTeW5FHInEA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Celebrities....a simple name....and customization.. . These are the elements, this small place in LA has been thriving on for years. As a hot dog stand, and as much "overrated hype" it has built surely there's a reason its been in business for so long. The readers of this blog, I shall introduce to you my adventure to Pink's Hot Dogs. Yes, I've finally succumbed to coming into this place and losing my food virginity to such a spectacle. One can only imagine, if Mr. Pink from the Reservoir Dogs bought this place, then truly it can live up to its name.. . In any case, on a hot Sunday Afternoon Mr. Steve N. (aka foodie/Bboy/Fraternity) extraordinaire, brought me up for a ride to the world famous international Bboy Competition Freestyle Session (or FSS 11th year anniversary). There was no line, but they weren't allowing anyone inside the venue yet since the promoter was still setting up, so we wondered what places to eat while we awaited for such event. Then, my jaw dropped as Pink's came into the picture.. . Surprisingly, he never thought after all the places I've been to Pink's hasn't been one of them (then again I rarely have a reason or time to venture out in L.A. county as much). So we dropped by the place (it was already 12:45pm) and the line started extending as soon as we made it in *whew* what a relief. We placed our customized orders as the following:. . -1 order of Customized Ozzy Spicy Dog (consists of):  Spicy Polish Dog, . Nacho cheese, American cheese, grilled onions,. guacamole &amp; chopped tomatoes w/ additional ingredient modification by Steve (which I cannot recall what he placed).. -1 order of Polish Pastrami-Swiss Cheese Dog w/additional ingredient modification by me (which are): relish, mustard, bacon, bbq sauce, mayo, and some other stuff I cannot remember. -2 side orders of Chips. -1 order of fountain drink. -1 order of Yoo-Hoo. . Steve, gorged on his dog though it was a bit unwise for him later on considering he couldn't handle the spicy sensations in his mouth (hot wax anyone?). Then for myself, it was the ultimate dog to give anyone a triple by-pass surgery (if it became apart of your daily diet). Everything tasted so oily, fatty....and filling, I loved it. The freedom to customize, and make your own dog is the novelty here, and its something more places should have as offerings to their restaurants. . . We spent about roughly $23.00 altogether with tax included. I would believe it to be one of the best hot dogs, I've tried in a very long time. Then again I don't go out to NYC, Chicago, or LA often to try the variety so perhaps I can be proven wrong much later on. However as a side note, considering the indigestion (after Bboying in Freestyle Session) and the hangover spell (drinking loads of alcohol the previous night). The meal did not stay in my stomach too long, and let's just say I got sick a bit right after the ordeal. So don't eat this stuff before working out (or Bboying out), otherwise you'll suffer the consequences.. . All in all a good time.
