ReviewID: k-8yQiVd_i6-766hhq0CtQ
ReviewerID: aD-rsDe2S0e7jTkYD6ULaQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Unique dining experience mixing art with food: in the decor as well as the actual meal. Tiny bites but big flavors. 4.5 stars. Was holding out on this last Chicago one for my 500th review of my first 15 months as a yelper. 8-). . Cost to worth it rating: 3 (~$300/person for 12 course tasting menu, wine pairing, and gratuity) . . Eve award: best version of A1 sauce. . . Pics: . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Highlights: . - Atmosphere: upon arriving at the location, the experience begins. The actual door is a bit hard to find, then you walk down a pink lit short hall with no sign of an entrance, only to have the elevator-like doors to the left automatically open up. Part Willy Wonka, part Sci-Fi, and part modern art... kinda like the cuisine. Dining room is very minimalistic, set up as the canvas for the food to come. . - Instruction: it's a step away from the norm when you receive verbal instructions on how to eat the dish when you're presented with each course. Ex. eat the spoon of Thai flavored jelly and then the rest of the plate, pull these things off the pin and let it drop before eating, suck in the cigar shaped tube with 3 layers of gelatin substances to taste like bubblegum, open wide and shoot a big hard-shelled white circle filled with fluid, etc.. - Scent: a few plays on this sense in the aroma within the slowly deflating lilac pillow our plate was sitting on top of to the mysterious black vase which later spouted out smoke volcano style that provided the essence of a backyard grill. . - Steak and potatoes: their version was one of the highlights. A small piece of succulent wagyu beef paired with a pureed potato encrusted in salt and vinegar potato chips. The fun here besides the bbq smoke was the deconstructed A1 sauce: they took all the random ingredients that make up this iconic steak sauce and reverse engineered it to recreate it in powder form and presented it in a plastic pouch. This was freaking cool.  . - Bacon: slimmest crispiest piece of bacon I've ever had with a touch of sweetness from butterscotch and a sliver of apple tied around it, all presented hanging off of a silver arch we pulled it off of. . - Butter: dish highlighting Paula Dean's best friend. Lobster and popcorn with a jelly cube of enclosed clarified butter. . - Sweet potato: brown sugar cinnamon crispy exterior reminiscent of that fried taro semi-spiny looking ball at dim sum covered the potato on a stick. My favorite sweet. . - Coconut bread: of the 3 breads we tried, this was by far the best. Toast with a bit of coconutty sweetness.. - Pork belly: I've never had it before and was a bit scared but the taste was part bacon and part pulled pork. This was surrounded in a Thai curry sauce and eaten after the spoon of Thai flavors of fish sauce, lemon grass, etc. in a clear jelly format. . - Pepper ice cream: I liked ground pepper so this worked for me--even when paired with asparagus. . - Wine: great pairings but even better was the extent of the description that accompanied each pour. Not only did you get the varietal and producer but region and story behind it all. As a wine-lover, I dug this. La Sirena syrah was incredible... the famous winemaker that has received a perfect 100 point from Robert Parker in previous creations and this particular winery is in Napa--yeay! . - Comfy seating: we were upstairs and I sat on the booth side of the table that was so soft, luxurious, and comfortable. . - Service: lots of help, as a different person seemed to expertly present each course to us. They noticed we came in a cab and without us asking, made sure one was waiting for us at the completion of our meal.. - Menu: after you're done, they present you with a printed out menu in a folder (including wine pairings), joking that it's your diploma. I was impressed, as the hub's had his non-seafood items included so it was personalized and not just cookie cutter. . . Midlights: . - Lengthy process: prep yourself for a 3 hour meal even for the half menu of 12 courses. Get comfy and enjoy. 3 courses actually came at the same time which was nice, as we were getting tired half way through even the shorter menu. . . Lowlights: . - After a few tables sat next to us who ordered the full 24 course menu, our main waiter rarely stopped by our table any longer and was more quick to pour our wine and go. . - Chocolate dessert: blanket layer of waxy chocolate covering prune, olive, and pine flavors was not for me. . . Interesting experience to say the least. Took a bit of reflection upon the evening to appreciate the extent of it all, but since it was so memorable and I notice myself telling everyone about it, I'd like to do it all again. :-)
