ReviewID: K-QexU_8TX1u0aNWs_2-PQ
ReviewerID: MHmKe1NQ1pCpIrbK4XREDw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Grindhouse Killer Burgers
Category: Burgers
This is the first time I was ever really let down by my experience at a restaurant after reading reviews on Yelp. . . I couldn't agree more with Eric S's review. Like Kathleen, I'm fond of avocado on my burger. So I stuck with my plain an simple, single beef patty with american cheese and avocado. I also ordered the malted vanilla shake and sweet potato chips. I left bar with an overwhelming feeling of... MEH. . . The burger was fine. Certainly much better than most burgers out there- but nothing to pour many compliments over. Five Guys outdoes these burgers by tenfold. The malted shake was delicious, but again nothing special. The sweet potato chips were odd. Some where chewy, and some were fried to a crisp. Either way, I could even taste sweet potato in them, they were oddly mute of flavor. We were given a HUGE bag and left pretty much 3/4 of the bag untouched. . . The worst part of Grindhouse was trying to find it. We drove up and down Edgewood a few times with no signage or mention of Grindhouse. I'd never been to Sweet Auburn Farmer's Market before, so I had no clue it was actually INSIDE. So, the farmer's market is ON Edgewood, but Grindhouse is inside of it; you need to turn down the side road to the parking lot. Unfortunately for us, the parking lot was slammed and we had to find the overflow parking and walk a short distance to get there. . . Service was fine. The line moved quickly enough for me, but the food did take longer than expected. With the getting lost,  parking situation, and long wait for food, I was surprised that we were able to get back to the office only 5 minutes after our 1 hour lunch break was up. . . Perhaps I had great expectations... the pictures on here had me thinking the location was something totally different than what it really is (it's not it's own little store) and it's not as exciting as the pics make it look. The burgers were good, I guess, but nothing to ever go out of my way for again. It pains me to give a place so highly rated 2 stars, but to me it just wasn't that great.
