ReviewID: K0M1kFwOMOxaYRNMyjGQGQ
ReviewerID: igNaD428s_j6XnoNDjgwAw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
So this was the first meeting of the reinstallment of the Supper Club.  I really have to say that so far this was the best steak experience I've had.  I decided to splurge and get the New York Sirloin tasting for $135.  This included 4 oz of the USDA Prime Illinois corn fed 21 day aged beef, 4 oz of the American Wagyu/Angus "Kobe style" beef from Snake River Farms Idaho, and 2 oz of the true 100% Japanese Wagyu beef from Kagoshima prefecture, Kyushu Japan.  The Japanese wagyu really is worth trying at least once in your life.  It is noticeably different from regular beef in that it is highly marbelized and rich tasting.  It is a bit too fatty though if you have too much of it.  The American Wagyu/'Angus was the best I thought since it's a mix of two breeds and is more marbelized than most normal cows but not as marbelized as the true 100% japanese wagyu.  It was the perfect combination to me.  The USDA prime aged beef was while not as good as the previous two was still pretty darn good.  I tried the last steak with the three sauces that they gave me.  One sauce was the BBQ sauce which was so so.  They also had a mustard sauce that was ok too.  The third sauce was the Argentinean chimichurri sauce which was pretty interesting to try.. . I also had some of the bf's USDA Prime Nebraska corn fed 35 day dry aged rib eye and I would have to say that was about the same as the rib eye we had at Mastro's.  I think with rib eye you do have a bit of variety on the cut you get and is not always consistent.  The piece we got had a lot of big pieces of fat that had to be cut out and this really detracted from the overall taste of the steak.  I think you need some fat to give the meat a little more flavor but it needs to be marbelized in thin veins and spread throughout the meat for it to be good. Otherwise you get too much of the fat taste and it ruins the taste of the meat.. . We also had two bottles of wine.  The first one an Australian Cab "Friends" was really good.  The second Merlot from Napa though wasn't that great.  I also really liked the breads that they give you.  They had a long thin cheesy breadstick that was really good.  They also had this other pastry type bred and a pretzel that was delish.  The sides I thought were just ok.  We shared the mac and cheese, creamy spinach,  potatoes, and some other ones.  I thought it was cute that the place was decorated with large photos of Hollywood actors...we sat beneath Robert DeNiro and I had a nice view of Brad Pitt's handsome face.  The menus also had pictures of different stars on them.  . . Overall the service was pretty good as well.  Definitely what you would expect for a nice steak place.  Although I probably wouldn't order the Japanese wagyu again mainly because it's too expensive, I would say that this place truly earns the 1 star Michelin that it got.
