ReviewID: K1pV5Hvbyjshjfz-dNNtZA
ReviewerID: 5X-9FzpM_fwMterDEKx-Ig
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I grew up eating food like McDonald's and KFC. Back then, I thought there was nothing more high class than dining at the rotating restaurant on top of the Holiday Inn. Now that I'm an adult and I've moved to the big city, I still feel like a bit of an impostor when I go to a really expensive fine dining restaurant like Craft. As the son of hard-working immigrants, I can't help but feel slightly embarrassed by the sheer opulence of the place. I kind of feel like I don't belong in a place like this. It didn't help that the mouths of the affluent patrons fell agape with horror as I strode into the restaurant. I know exactly what they were thinking.... . "What is that dumpy Oriental loser doing here? For god's sake, he's wearing SNEAKERS!  And why won't he stop scratching his crotch?". . Filled with apprehension, I was tempted to flee, but I wasn't going to let them control my destiny. My parents toiled away in rice paddies to send me to an overpriced, second-tier liberal arts college and I would be damned if I would let these well-heeled philistines pass judgment on me, who was clearly their intellectual better. Thankfully, the staff at Craft sensed my innate superiority and lavished me with the attention I so richly deserved.  The service and food were absolutely phenomenal. You can really feel the staff's enthusiasm for the restaurant. They seem proud to work here and conduct themselves accordingly. We had a great time and I would heartily recommend this fine establishment.. . I did see Chef Tom Colicchio working the crowd a little bit. Part of me wanted to introduce myself while another part of me wanted to punch him in the face as hard as I can.  Why, you ask? Because then I could brag about how I beat up someone famous for the rest of my life. Chef Tom looked like he could probably take a punch and deliver a pretty good one in return, so I decided to keep this urge in check until I ran into a more wimpy celebrity.  Your day will come Colicchio...
