ReviewID: K4UVq__A62NYB_SBl1ZjKw
ReviewerID: qzSWXMjJmfnIRm_dOZbazA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
5 stars for a pizza place you wonder?  Well let me preface this by saying that this is LA and this is not your your run of the mill pizza joint.  Let me also say I am thin crust man, while deep dish has its place, I care more about the sauce and the ingredients and look for the dough to be a texture in the overall experience.  For reference, I have had Joe's and Grimaldi's in NY and several other outstanding NY dough slingers,and I have had limited (70% of a NY eatery) success here in LA (cassa bianca, Caioti, Albanos, etc...).. . Here is my personal analysis for the ideal pizza. 1) Crispy thin crust all the way to the center, with browned bubbled edges 2) Light to moderate coating of sauce with a good garlic and herb flavor profile. 3) quality cheese (beyond your basic Mozz I like Bufala and fontina,)  and 4) topings (fresh herbs, thinly sliced meets, farmers market veggies.). . Now that you know where I am starting here are the selections I have enjoyed during my 3 visits to Pizzeria Mozza. . Mozza Caprese - a must for anyone, this is the freshest and creamiest burrata topped with a rustic basil pesto in an intense extra virgin olive oil, oven roasted vine (still on the vine) ripened cherry tomatoes, dusted with the leaves of what looks to be a branch of imported italian oregano that I have seen Nancy herself beat over the dish.  I recommend ordering the Pane bianco w/ olio nuovo (their version of grilled garlic bread) to go along with the caprese.. . Arrancine alla bolognese - These are tasty little fried rice balls stuffed with a meat bolognese.  Delicous. . Fried goat cheese and lentils -  I have never been a huge fan of lentils, but I enjoyed this dish because of the preparation with the goat cheese.  The lentils were tender and flavorful cooked in a variety of herbs.. . Nancys chopped salad - again the freshest of ingredients, nice mix of salami, garbanzo beans, cheese,  radicchio and herbs.  A great balance of vinegar and oil.  A must!. . Pizza's. Funghi misti, fontina, taleggio &amp; thyme -  and excellent mushroom pizza bursting with flavor.. . Coach farm goat cheese, leeks, scallions &amp; bacon - A personal favorite, strips of thinly sliced bacon (almost like prosciutto) crisped arrond the edges and offset with the creamy goat cheese.. . Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage - Their version of the 3 cheese pizza, the sottocenere is an italian cheese that is made with truffles mmm good.. . Rapini, cherry tomatoes, anchovies, olives &amp; chiles - A great pizza if you like broccoli rabe and anchovies.  This is a unique flavor combo that is higlighted with the spicieness of the chiles (not overpowering, just right).. . If you are reading this wondering if I have had anything that wasn't outstanding, let me tell you... NO!  There is something to be said for simplicity and fresh local ingredients, chefs around preach about it, but it seems few can follow through on execution.  This place is a lesson in simplicity and outstanding ingredients.  The wood fired oven lends its helping hand in turning out the unbelievably crispy yet tender dough that we have come to know Nancy through at La Brea Bakery.. . Service and ambiance - booth are excellent and appropriately go unnoticeable in this foodgasmic experience. . . Tips... lunch is easier to book than dinner but still requires weeks notice.  If you want dinner be sure to call exactly 30 days in advance when they open.  The times I have been the wait for the bar is manageable and worth while.  Always order extra if you want to take home because they don't do take out.. . Verdict: The dynamic duo of Silverton and Batali have shifted the domestic pizza mecca from NY to LA without transporting the water.  Oh and the pizza isn't the only thing that transforms the taste buds.
