ReviewID: K5vJ6Y_n82MIV7o9r2-6sw
ReviewerID: NWq6eAjK4SFKHBtEq5BZjg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
This place is always packed during lunch on the weekdays so I skip it even though I work a few blocks away.  Finally had a chance to stop by during the weekend for brunch.  . . First of all, you can't miss this place if you're walking down 7th Street.  It's like this big, white, gleaming tower in the middle of a sea of drab.  Once inside, you feel like you've stepped into a whole different world.  This place definitely has a European feel and it was bustling with lively conversation, waiters moving about to serve customers, and chefs cooking up a storm behind an open kitchen.. . We waited about 10 minutes for a table.  While waiting, I was watching a chef prepare tea sandwiches. It is basically three small sandwiches held together with a long skewer--quite cute!  I couldn't resist and ended up ordering the tea sandwiches.  It didn't look like it was enough food but it filled me up, even with the bf taking bites to sample each one.  We also tried the Napoli pizza.  It was cooked in a stone oven that sits in clear view of the dining area.  The pizza was good, though I'm not a big fan of thin crust.. . Besides the good food and fantastic atmosphere, service was excellent. Our server was very attentive and stopped by many times to check on us (though he was not intrusive).  Bottega offers complimentary sparking or still water.  The bottle of water sits at your table so you don't have to wait for the server to refill your glass.  Our server made sure our water bottle was always full and kept refilling our glasses.  I had to be quick if I wanted to pour my own water. Also, I was impressed that the manager walked around the dining area and asked each guest if everything was alright. . . We decided to pass by the pastry counter on our way out. What a tasty mistake!  We ended up getting a fruit tart and Tiramisu cake. It was a difficult choice considering all the desserts in the display were all snack size and so adorably decorated.  It was tempting to get one of each but we didn't have room in our stomach.. . Overall, it was a wonderful dining experience.  The only thing is that the weekend menu is somewhat different than the weekday so I guess I'll just have to stop by during the weekday now.  Poor me!  ;)
