ReviewID: K62FNktvLUVw70sQzmIUnQ
ReviewerID: s4NgvdIfBH3UQdccWCyARg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Carver&#39;s Grocery
Category: Southern
"Slap Your Mama" Good. . My, oh my. I hardly ever eat "like this" - especially since my dear grandmother who made the best creamed corn that's ever passed these lips left us a few years back - but yesterday, I did. Carver's is like going to your favorite older relative's house for a REAL Southern meal, talking all about how your mama and them are doin', being reminded of what's truly important in life - and having it all washed down with iced tea!!. . It is so good to know that a place like this is still around, and doing well.. . A friend decided we had to try Carver's - it was time for an old-school meat-and-three kind of lunch, he said - and we picked late on Friday, around one. I got the Dolly fried chicken breast - no lie, it's about the size of Big's head!! Delicious. The crispiness and flavor of the skin are amazing; the only thing I'd change is to go earlier, because I think it might have been a tiny bit drier than intended by the late hour we arrived. I picked green beans and creamed corn as my sides (they were out of the famous mac-and-cheese! soo disappointing....but then again, I must return if only for that reason!) and the beans were probably the very, very best I have ever had. The creamed corn? 95% as good as my grandmother's - and I have never given that kind of compliment before!! My friend got the catfish, and shared some with me - absolutely amazing! It was my first time trying this Southern-fried-classic, and I am totally sold. We both got tea (though, I confess, mine was unsweet. Shh! Don't tell anyone!), and I left with plenty of leftovers for dinner.. . Mr. and Mrs. Carver were visible and working hard as usual, the staff was super-friendly and on top of things, and the only thing we missed out on during this first experience is getting to try the Coca Cola chocolate cake since they'd already sold out! Next time . . .
