ReviewID: K6v16HYWkC6KpCa3zwTgbA
ReviewerID: LQ_woP6Lt0vOj3BBGgp1Ow
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
I get it. And I don't get it.  . Within five minutes of being in Los Angeles, even a three year old understands that this town is all about hype.  And that we citizens willingly drink from the copycat chalice, that we follow the lead sheep like UGG-clad lemmings.  And I could go on with the metaphors, but I won't.. . Joan's is kind of in my hood, and definitely near my almost-daily staple of Swerve (my yoga booty ballet/ballet ballet addiction spot). So it would make sense that I would, could stop in after a rigorous class with Patty, or Mike, or Miss "Whoop Yo Ass" Jesse S.  So why haven't I, much?  Well, for one thing, Joan's ain't all that.  I mean, if you want to look at incredibly pretty people, and the occasional celeb (Leonardo, Jake, and in one very happy instance for me, Adrien Brody), by all means hang there.  And there's lots of choices of food (in fact, there's so much on offer that I get that panicky "too many choices!!!!" feeling when I'm there).  It's just...it's one of those places where you wish you'd chosen something else. Always.  The food looks good behind glass, but then when you get it you say "meh."  And "meh" just isn't good enough when said food is waaaay overpriced.  . . I'll put it out there, and then maybe you can report me to the trendoid-police: I don't like cupcakes.  Shhhh.  They're too cakey.  I like mousse-y.  I like creampuffy.  Cupcakes....whatever.  So, I miss out on one of the most popular staples at Joan's.  But c'mon! C'mon!  Every other pastry I've had there has been okaaaaaay (said with a drawn-out tone and a gallic shrug).  Their salads are good.  Sandwiches---good, but they're sandwiches. Coffee--it's just coffee.  . . Maybe it's the gourmet goods?  But the other day I picked up a panettone to have for a dinner party, and then put it right back when I saw it cost $48.  Cost of a delicious panettone at TJs?  $4.99.   I need not say more.  And their wines are ridiculous!   Whoever Joan is, she's got more balls I could ever have.  That kind of overpricing requires a good amount of chutzpah, and I'm kind of chutzpah-deficient when it comes to, oh, pricing hypocrisy (especially when you can go to a little Vietnamese bakery and get really nice baked goods for so much less).  But I guess if you're dropping $1900 for a pair of gorgeous but practically unwearable high-heeled sandals at Satine across the street, $48 for a panettone is peanuts.  . . I'm giving Joan's two stars instead of one because some of their items are tasty, and it's a pretty fun place to hang out and people-watch.  I go there primarily to see if I can spot Adrien Brody again (not really, but it wouldn't hurt) and because it's convenient.  And I doubt that the copious busboys (no waiters) are getting paid high wages subsidized by the high prices. I just think Joan has figured out that the lemmings will continue flocking, no matter how much she thumbs her nose at us.
