ReviewID: K7CJVtrfTL4TA0HhUHs0ag
ReviewerID: qjkOmSEFFEeWVTtsIl0aAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tank Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
1/2 price maki weekends are the shit.  Seriously.. . I went to Tank in a group of 6 for an early dinner around 4:30 this Saturday and we were seated immediately, which was nice considering our party size and the fact that it was still 1/2 PRICE MAKI TIME!  Our server was friendly and exceedingly patient with our slow, indecisive bunch, served us our drinks and then let us figure out what delicious makis to order.  The fellas all enjoyed some warm sake and Sapporo, but I stuck with the delicious Kyoto Lime martini, made to taste much like a refreshing key-lime pie with vanilla vodka, simple syrup and lime juice.  Maria C. enjoyed the pomegranate Red Octopus martini and her friend Helen seemed to get on well with her Geisha martini as well. . We finally went around the table and named the two rolls we each wanted to sample, adjusted for overlap and placed our order, doubling up on the spicy tuna, "just in case."  There was no need for a safe back-up roll as everything we sampled was delicious.  The avocado tempura roll was mild, had a nice crunch from the accompanying asparagus and was a perfect follow-up to the spicier Latin Heat roll with jalapeno and chili mayo.  The "safe" spicy tuna got rave reviews, everyone loved the Empire maki topped with tuna and avocado, the unagi maki was very tasty and, while it still resembled deep-fried spiders, the soft-shell crab maki with ponzu sauce received high praise as well.  My personal favorite was the Kani maki - spicy crab and sesame seeds topped with cooked ebi, black tobiko and wasabi mayo - Deeeelicious and so artfully presented.  I loved the contrast of black tobiko against the shrimp, much as I appreciated the composition of the Latin Heat maki with scales of avocado topped with bright red chili mayo.  Each maki was extremely well-made--no delicious insides falling out of these rolls!  The flavors were fresh and mild, which is probably why I preferred the spicier, more flavor-explosive makis.  . When each last piece had been devoured and the group surveyed the bill, we were more than satisfied.  It's not too often you get to sample such a vast selection of well-prepared maki AND enjoy some drinks AND have money left over for dessert at Cafe Selmarie.  1/2 price maki from 1:30 - 6pm on Saturdays and Sundays is totally the way to go.  Our server was even kind enough to check in with us around quarter to 6 to see if we wanted to grab anything else while makis were still half off.... I'm giving 4.5 stars because while the 1/2 off deal is stupendous, I don't know that I would spend full price on regular days at Tank.  But you'll certainly find me there for more 1/2 off maki days in the future!  Bring on the kani maki!. . *Edit 3/15/07*. Went for 1/2 price sushi again last weekend and finally had the Ocean Sundae and Tank Makis--and they're fantastic.  I really loved the Ocean Sundae (although that last piece was enormous!) and the strawberries on the Tank Maki were a very tasty, interesting addition to the roll.  And the Latin Heat was even better than last time--who knew that was possible?
