ReviewID: k8p2CxKIZTLuk8I_UVA1Pw
ReviewerID: qIN5y32FjfIRMLpgsK4LOw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
All I have to say about this restaurant is it is OHBAR: overtly-hyped beyond all recognition. Seriously, between browsing the extensively exceedingly glowing reviews for this joint on Yelp and through a deserving recommendation from the lady's co-worker and actually trying the food, I was sorely disappointed. So disappointed that imaginary disappointment maggots are feeding off my imaginary sore. The lady wasn't so far behind.. . I ordered the mahi-mahi dish which consist of a semi grilled piece of fish about 3.5"x6" and mashed potato. One of the nastiest, fishiest, unfresh sea food I have ever eaten. I could barely get past the perimeter of this fishy meatlog, because the fishiness was so overbearing. At the center though, it tasted really good. I couldn't finish the remaining 3" block of it because the fishiness returned to haunt my night. I asked the lady to try it   since she is an avid seafood lover, thinking my palate was playing tricks on my olfactory senses, but to my surprise, she agreed with me that it was even too fishy for her and her tolerance is much higher than mines!. . The lady ordered a fried steak (I think it was the champignon steak, could be wrong), again, a none event. It tasted like something we could've prepared over a batter at home! Seriously?!. . The sangria was below average tasting. It tasted stale, like a mixture of cheapo red wines collected from unfinished bottles, tossed into a cauldron and then cooked with the citruses.. . When I ordered a Rum &amp; Coke, I got a rock glass filled with clear liquid and dappled with caramel liquid floating about. When asked what's up with that, the waitress said it is actually soju &amp; Coke and LaLa doesn't have rum. I happen to like soju, so it wasn't a big deal for me. But still, how misleading is that?. . The good thing going for this place is the interior and outside patio presentation. Its lively and welcoming ambiance is a plus. The bread and sauce dip at the beginning is great. Dinner experience on the other hand is way over hyped. "Best selection when it comes to variety in cuisines"? "The food here is freaking delicious!"? I seriously question the type of restaurant(s) some of these LaLa's acclaimers at Yelp frequent at. For the price we forked out (circa $80.00, not including tip and valet), I had a more enjoyable food experience at Norms Restaurants. True story.
