ReviewID: k8PJ0WqhmZYuEWIdU630UA
ReviewerID: ueClFWN0WePrtUSayd2FaA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Geisha House
Category: Sushi Bars
I guess I just went on a good night :). . It seems to me that people are not big fans of Geisha house, but I've gone a number of times now and I really seem to enjoy the place, for the most part lol.  Of course, I usually go around 6 or 7pm so that might weigh in to this review.. . So based off of what others are saying, I would first like to say the best time to go is apparently when I went, which is any weekday around 6 or 7pm.. . The place was full enough, but we had no issues getting our table.  The decor is excellent and the staff was extremely friendly.  The two stars off is due to two staff members in particular and one of their rules, but I will get to that in a second.. . The food:  excellent!  I have yet to have a problem with the food here, and I'm happier for it!  My favorite so far has been the Udon w/shrimp, the Ocean Dragon, and the White Samurai.  All very tasty!  . . Also, if you go on Mondays it's ALWAYS %50 off!!  that's always a good thing.. . The manager is awesome.  She is always on point making sure I am happy.  Love her.. . So the one star off.  It is for two reasons.  On my very first visit, my waitress and waiter that ended up helping her kept bringing out dirty glasses, and one time "the first time in particular" brought out a glass of dishwater!!!! DISGUSTING!!!!!. . However, that awesome manager came over and offered us free bottled waters for the rest of the evening as well as free dessert.  She also promised me to deal with that situation swiftly, and she did.  Kudos  to her for taking care of the problem.. . The other issue I have is the automatic addition of gratuity from to your bill.  If someone messes up that bad, I do NOT want to give him/her a full tip!!  I should have an option of tipping how much I decide to tip.  I HATE places that do this.. . Anyway, I think that they are worth going on the right night, and %100 worth going on Mondays, when they are only %50 of menu price.  This tends to make the bill balance out to it's normal self after that stupid gratuity rule, even if the waiters don't deserve it.
