ReviewID: k9oVoWtpVw_e3MltiPtGsg
ReviewerID: yiRZCGwzebRM5mnLpYfFqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
don't get me wrong. i love my red meat. and i love my steak. here you get all the meat you want!! however, being that it is a buffet, i get so wrapped up in getting my money's worth that i don't feel like i enjoy the meat as much. this place is quite pricey too! almost $60 (the one in denver is almost $40- sigh premium for being in la) plus it gets more pricey since i like to have a red wine with my meat. however it is a must try if you havent been. . i tried this place in brazil the first time i ate at a fogo and stuff myself by trying every piece of meat available. this second time around i was a bit smarter. one person on our table was from brazil so he recommended the best slices of meat. they usually have a picture of a cow which depicts where each part of the meat comes from and which are the best pieces, however i didn't see it at this location. this might help those who can't eat as much or is more selective about their slices. . now i stick to: . - picanha - medium rare - the meat and the flavor AMAZING . - top sirloin / bottom sirloin - both good . - garlic beef - who can say no to garlic??. . salad bar- i cant ALL meat the whole night so i like to balance it out with some veggies. they have all sorts. salads, asparagus, mushrooms, cheese, etc . . side orders . - cheesy rolls - my table loved these. but a bit too filling for me. have to save room for the meat! but i allow myself to eat one or two . - fried polenta - YUMMM must eat; this was probably the dish that got replaced the most - fried bananas cant get better. - mashed potatoes - nothing too special so i usually skip it. - plantains - maybe because by the time i tried it, the dish was cold but i didn't like it. . dessert . - signature PAPAYA CREAM - usually i don't like papaya but i got it because 1. its their signature dish 2. the waiter said it helps you digest your food (totally true) 3. its mixed with ice cream, even more yum; must must must get!!! super refreshing after the meal . - South American FLAN - second signature dish. BEST FLAN EVER. if you love flan, you will love this dish. . . fogo is the only brazilian steakhouse i will go to. there are cheaper priced ones but their service and their steak is not as good. you might as well spend the extra bucks on a better meal. plus you dont eat like this everyday, so you can splurge once in a while. also i dont think you can find another restaurant where almost all the waiters speak portuguese...
