ReviewID: K9oXy-7ojw4ksh3GxDXwXQ
ReviewerID: NXUdf0i5qOBo45JgXPMBTQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Eat It OR Beat It??. **EAT IT!**. . So after hearing all the commotion about the famous Pink's Hot Dogs, I figured I just had to try this place. The first thing to notice about Pink's is the massive line in front of the place that can be seen from the streets on La Brea! The first time I went there, it took us close to an hour before I received my food! Nonetheless, I've been here a number of times to try their variety of different hot dogs that average at about $5. The place is quite small but there is plenty of seating in the back section. Along the walls are many photographs of celebrities who've come to Pink's and some of the hot dogs are actually named after famous celebrities and movies! The following is just some of what I have ordered and recommend:. . Giant 12'' Jalapeño Dog w/ Mustard, Chili, Onions: . When they say 12-inches... they really mean 12 inches! So if you like big sausages and have a big appetite and have a knack for spicy food, this dog's for you! The inside of the hot dog has bits and piece of jalapeños inside of it. Great taste, and great bang for the buck! . . Poli Bacon Burrito Dog . (Big flour tortilla wrapped around 1 Polish dog (mild or spicy) Chili, Onions). This hot dog was deliciously disgusting! Not only was it very filling and stuffed with a thick polish dog but it turned out to be a little bit on the greasy side. . . Wendy Williams Show Dog:. (12" Jalapeno Dog, pastrami, bacon, lettuce, &amp; chopped tomatoes). This hot dog is by far my favorite hot dog and is always what I get each time I come to visit Pink's! It's a perfect amount of food for a big eater such as myself. . . Chicago Polish Dog:. Mustard,mild or spicy, mustard, relish, onions, . tomatoes, lettuce - NO CHILI. This dog is simple and light! Each time I need to go for something on the "healthier" "lighter" side, I always go for this dog!. . Fries &amp; Onion Rings:. A first timer? YOU MUST TRY THESE! They are amazing and so are the old fashioned soda pop's they have there too!. . CONCLUSION:. Overall, the sausages and dogs at Pink's are of great quality but other than that, it's not that big of a deal besides putting a bunch of random toppings on top of a hot dog. One thing I've learned about sausages and hot dogs is that you should always be able to taste and hear the "snap" when taking a bite! Pink's definitely does this and I recommend ordering the polish sausage dogs (spicy or mild) only because the portions are much larger and hell, if you are going to wait in line for at least 40 minutes, you better get your money's worth instead of those small weenies on a bun... SO I SAY, "EAT IT!!".. . NOTE: BEST TIMES to hit up Pink's: . Before 12pm afternoon and between the hours of 3-5pm. You are sure to wait 30 minutes or less, if you're lucky!
