ReviewID: k9sQTtqrszROtL_MiTEuLQ
ReviewerID: Qb5zbzvIeyWPxtysZKVJFg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Meat lovers unite and rejoice!  Fogo de Chao is a Brazilian churrasco style restaurant specializing in meats grilled on metal skewers over charcoal. It has its roots in a South American gaucho tradition. . . Churrasco style dining has a single fixed price for your dinner "starter" and entree courses on an "all you can eat" basis. (Drinks and desserts are "extra."). . The "starters" are provided at a self-serve "Salad Bar" In addition to an array of expected salad basics, we found items that we're not used to finding at a "salad bar"!  Large bowls of asparagus spears, artichoke hearts, sun dried tomatoes, small chunks of Parmesan cheese and more salad add-ons sat next to equally big plates of Italian prosciutto and smoked salmon. . . The main course is a different kind of adventure. A bunch of dudes (dressed in gaucho attire) roam the dining rooms with yard-long skewers of meat which they offer as they pass your table.  What you thought was a red coaster on the table turns out to be a signaling device that lets the gauchos know if you might be interested in sampling their meat. The "red" side up tells them to politely go past, but flip the coaster to the "green" side and suddenly they will start stopping by your table. In addition, three side dishes--mashed potatoes, fried bananas, and crispy hot polenta--appear at the table along with another helping of the special rolls. There are over 5 different grilled meats--beef, lamb, pork, chicken and sausage--to pick from. While things can look chaotic with the gauchos roving about and people coming and going from the salad bar, the process works better than you would ever expect. We turned down one offer of pork, mentioning we want to try the lamb and it appeared amazingly quick! (Both the lamb chops and the sliced legs of lamb are excellent.) Similarly, we ask for more potatoes and they appear in just a minute...and piping hot!. . From an assortment of desserts we chose to share a "Strawberry Creme." This turns out to be a tasty blend of strawberries and ice cream with a shot of Currant Liquor on top.  Overall, the abundance of delicious food and exceptional service exceeded our expectations. While expensive, we felt that "Fogo" provided very good value for the price.. . This can be a cool place for a special occasion dinner. Come hungry friends!!
