ReviewID: k9v8jqUXxiIGUS3wgjG3jg
ReviewerID: FLtEz9SaHJB-6jiAzIX0UA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Five Seasons Brewing
Category: Pubs
Me and my crew dined on a Thursday night as first timers thus this review...  I'm going back so a follow up is in the future.. . Summary of Five Seasons Brewing.. . Food Summary = 4/5.. Each of us had a different entree.  All dishes were very well prepared and presented.  Portions were a bit smaller than I'd normally like but with the apps (cheese plate and fried squid/bait) and small dessert we were satisfied.  . . Food Detail.. --I had the bone in pork chop. . EXCELLENT flavor..!  I like my pork chops with a bit of saltiness crisped on the top and this was as good as I DO IT.!   Sides of collards and apples were good  Younger, not ever frozen, collards would have been best.  Nobody can best me in collards so I give breaks here.. --Crew#2.. A daily special of hanger steak w/chicken and shrooms.  GREAT FLAVOR on the steak..!  Hanger is quality meat if you cook it right and it was good.  Nice meal.  I'd order this gladly.. --Crew#3.. Roasted chicken.  Nice flavor.  I'd order this item.. --Crew#4.. Scallops.  There were three on the plate which is disappointing but tasty.  . . --We shared a flourless chocolate cake/ice cream thing.  It was tasty.. --Drink prices were fine. About what I expect to pay.. . Service Summary = 3/5.. Would give a 4/5 here but there was an obvious lack of understanding of English.  Awkward..  However, attentive to each person, answered questions, and no drinks were dry.  Trained nicely at some point in time.  . . Facility Summary = 3/5.. Somewhat darker than I'd like but not awkward dark.  I can't help that I associate dark = 'not real clean'.  Terrible but can't help it.  Needs a few more lights.  The oil candles on table in beer mugs is cool however, a bit dangerous as I almost grabbed one for some reason..??  Looking forward to return to evaluate seating at bar and outside.  . . Final tally.. I'm giving it a 3/5 but am looking forward to returning to sample the beers and traditional bar-type food.  I measure most places on hamburgers so I need to sample.  Good first visit and I'm going back.  More later..
