ReviewID: KbpXKhBTHc0wToeztkdjyg
ReviewerID: rb6vMqFYgNvWduP5iMxsPA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Desta Ethiopian Kitchen
Category: Ethiopian
A friend of mine gave me the "newbie's tour" of Desta last night.  Technically, I have eaten Ethiopian food once in Washington, DC, but it was about 17 years ago and I was a teenager at the time.  I think my parents chose what we ordered (or maybe the server recommended something) and all I really remember is the part where you use the bread as your utensil.  I've killed a lot of brain cells since then.. . My friend recommended the Beef (Tenderloin) Tibs with Shiro and the Vegetarian Combo.  She also explained to me that while a lot of Ethiopian food is very heavy on the sauce, Desta uses a lighter amount of sauce.  They say that the reason for that is that they're proud of their ingredients.  I can see why, because everything was very good.. . If you ask to share your food between the members of your party, all the food will come out on one huge plate together.  This allows you to eat "family style" - and also entertainingly reach across the table pretty far, although fortunately, the tables are small so the reach isn't so bad.  The restaurant thoughtfully provides hand sanitizer at each table, which is probably a good idea when you're eating with your hands and sharing food.. . The Beef Tibs with Shiro was delicious.  I'm a big fan of beef, and this tasted like high-quality meat.  It was seasoned perfectly (for being tasty - I have no way to know what "perfect" Ethiopian seasoning is yet) and accompanied by onions, tomatoes and I believe fresh jalapeno pieces.  And the shiro was yummy, too - I love hummus so it's unlikely that I'd ever complain about a flavorful chickpea paste. . . The Vegetarian Platter was great, too.  I wasn't sure of exactly what items I was eating, so I came home and looked at the menu.  After I looked at the menu, I'm still not sure of all the items I ate because I feel like there were things we ate that aren't listed on the menu and vice versa.  (Not that I mind not knowing what I'm eating, because I eat Korean food pretty often now that I live out in BFE and I usually only know what about 30% of the banchan items are.). . Anyway, everything on the veggie plate was good (except that my friend and I did not try the halved fresh jalapeno with tomatoes because neither of us wanted that much fresh jalapeno).  Some items I remember trying were the collard green stew, the split pea stew, more shiro, a beet and potato salad, and a yellow-tinted cabbage dish.  . . There was also a salad of lettuce and tomatoes and a red paste which I loved and think it might have been vegetarian fir fir.  Oh, and there was also a dish that was made out of pieces of injera (the flat sourdough-tasting bread that you use to scoop up your food) and something that tasted like olive oil and maybe vinegar.  From looking at the menu now, I think that may have been a fit fit of some kind.  . . My favorite veggie items were definitely the shiro, the red paste, and the collards.  But there was nothing on that plate that I didn't like.  All of the items were served over more injera.  I guess I should have read the review earlier that mentioned that you are supposed to eat that injera too because it's yummy and has soaked up all the flavors.  Oops.. . (Yeah, in retrospect that seems like common sense.  But my friend was minimizing her bread consumption and my week at work has been rough.  I don't think my brain is functioning at full capacity anymore.). . With all the food we ordered, our total check only came to around 24 bucks.  Not too bad for the opportunity to try a million and one items (well, maybe more like 10 items).  I let satiated but not stuffed, and looking forward to trying some more things the next time I eat at an Ethiopian restaurant.. . My experience at Desta was definitely enjoyable.  The food was great and our service completely on point.  The main reason I'm not giving a full five stars is that I don't feel really qualified to judge Ethiopian food since I have so little experience with it.  Give me time to build a basis for comparison, and this may become 5 stars for me.. . Oh, and on our way out of the restaurant, we noticed that Desta has a drive thru.  Drive-thru Ethiopian cuisine?  Win.
