ReviewID: kcAmn6ahZAun0owVFR8oxw
ReviewerID: y3IH1jtMxGkSvZYnCnh5Yg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Great food but the over-priced drinks and the lack of wait service and hostess is a disappointing. Singles: this place is a good meat market. . . On a Saturday evening, approximately 6:30pm, this place was packed. Since there is no hostess there, you are pretty much left to your own devices in order to get a table or even a seat at the bar. It also means that you may find yourself hovering over people, speculating how much longer they will be by looking at how much they have eaten and how much they have left to drink, or asking the people at each table if they intend on leaving anytime soon. . . When you are lucky enough to get a place to sit, you will find yourself constantly pestered throughout the evening or watched while you are trying to enjoy your food and drinks. Sometimes people are nice about the fact that you are not leaving yet, other people are not so nice and look at you like you just ruined their night because you aren't getting up anytime soon.. . Both scenarios suck. . . Besides that, I also found that this place was a meat market...but in a good way. There were a lot of good-looking guys on Saturday night and a lot of them were either there alone or with their guy friends. The men crowd appeared to be in their mid-20's to mid-30's. So ladies, if you are single, this appears to be a good place to go.. . As for ordering food, don't expect wait service! You have to order your food and drinks at the bar. They give you a stand with a number and they bring it out to your table. . . Prices on the cocktails were all well into the $10+ range. Not worth it at all!. . I ate the "Office Burger". It was very good but I can't say that it was worth what I paid for. It was kind of small too. The burger consisted of gruyere cheese, greens, and carmalized onions. The menu says that there is bacon in the burger but there isn't. The carmalized onions are cooked with bacon. The taste of the burger was very good. I loved the gruyere cheese. Only bad thing about the burger was that I requested the meat to be cooked medium-well and they just cooked it well. FAIL. I can't say this was the best burger I have ever tasted but I would say that it was a 5-star burger and worth trying at least once.
