ReviewID: KDFszGk3sk7nSYzNG0oumg
ReviewerID: Ez5XvlmwbZaUaKf8lp6fUw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Geisha House
Category: Sushi Bars
Anthony Kiedis has a new job as a waiter; Wilbur "Freaking" Valderrama is the epitome of a Hollywood celebrity sighting and a headache that is making me want to chizzle the Grand Canyon into my eye socket....oh and a review about The Geisha House!. . Okay, I have to admit, my first time going to the Geisha house was just last night.  I can't believe this because everyone I know has gone and had their opinions about the place.  Mostly good!. . So, I had clients in from Latin America and all they wanted was Sushi and Trendy.  I thought of a few places...and on a Wednesday, they were all booked.  . . BTW....I already hated Katana but now it's completely official, screw that place and the chick that was rude on the phone!  But I digress.... . So I finally thought of Geisha House and having never been and knowing that the bill would be picked up by them, it was on!  I got a reservation for 10, no problem!  I arrived early, got a drink and waited for the crew to arrive.  When I first walked in, it was exactly what I expected.   Super cool and trendy, a wall behind the bar that was covered from head to toe with squares, some with little TV's with Akira playing and some with nice bottles of alcohol.  Damn...Akira kicking ass and ass kicking drinks, good combo.. . As I took in the scene of uber hot (I said I would never use "Uber" again...damn) people sitting and standing about I noticed Wilbur Valderrama enter the door and get showered with hi fives, hand moves, hugs, chest bumps, taps of elbows, wiggling of finger touches and even a Sammy Sosa esque double tap from head to chest with a sign of the cross move and a point to the heaven's where Jesus sits happily and winks back blessing Wilbur with super stardom!  Right then and there I knew I should have taken that part on That 70's Show or at least slept with Lindsey Lohan after we did bumps in the bathroom that one night way back when.  RATS!. . Anyways, my crew showed up and I informed them of the celebrity siting.  Then they thought they saw another one in the form of Anthony Kiedis.  Unfortunately, Anthony was in a waiters uniform so I dont think it was him unless we were all on Punked, but then...who really would be the one being punked?  Hmmm.... . So, on to dinner.  We were seated upstairs at a great table.  The girl seating us actually sat us down at a nice big table that we filled to the brim and then had the nerve to say...."Are you expecting anymore people in your party" No, we weren't.  "We'll this is a table for 12" Really?  12 people are supposed to sit at this table that we have no more room left at?  . . Knowing the scene I was in and the fact that I was with business clients, I immediately and politely said, "Would it be possible to see if it's ok with the manager if we could take this table" She actually said ok and I followed her to meet him.  I watched her talk it over with him and noticed his face get upset and confused.  He walked over, and I started asking.  Before I could say anything, he said, you are welcome to sit there, I'm so sorry for the inconvenience; I don't know why she even questioned you.  DAMN SKIPPY!. . So, I happily trotted back upstairs and started the night off with some of the best Cold Sake I have ever had.  Delicious! Unfortunately, I can't remember all the things we ate.  I actually let my dinner patrons order so I didn't get things that I only liked.  But everything was really good.  The Carpacio was one of my favorite dishes.. . The service was awesome.  Our waiter Scott, was the BEST...he even bought us a couple rounds of free drinks, took pictures of and with us.  We even got the hot busgirl to get in the pics as well.  My dinner mates kept calling her Reina...I don't think she knew she was our queen for the night.  . . I tried almost every sake martini, mojito...whatever they had on the list.  As a matter of fact, I think at one point one of the ladies in our party was looking at the list while the waiter was waiting patiently and finally handed the book back and said, "make it happen"  At that point I knew I was definitely not paying for the meal.. . The owner even came over to see how we were doing and couldn't have been nicer.  . . Unfortunately, there was no room for dessert so I can't comment on that.  But maybe next time.  We will see...now I have to find someone to pay for my meal again.
