ReviewID: KdJ-EdzOtLYcTl3pJzpDjA
ReviewerID: tr_FaYhHh3YoFITnq7f0tA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
For those intimidated to visit Mastro's, please read. . . So 6 of my buddies decided to take me to Mastro's yesterday for my birthday/a bet payoff. We've always heard great things about it but none of us has ever gone. I heard from 3 different people that it was the best steak house in LA and that it was quite expensive. When we arrived, I must say it was quite intimidating with all the fancy cars and nicely dressed people. We even saw Jerry West and Jim Grey!!! (NBA legend and sports announcer). . . When everyone in our party arrived we get seated in a pretty cozy but decent sized room. Dimly lit with about room for 50 people I would say. Not shabby at all, but nothing extremely fancy either. It was just as loud as any other steak house. Not stuffy at all.. . Once we took our seats, we were given our menus and two other drink menus. I grabbed the wine list and saw every bottle of wine $100-$9999. O_o....seriously no bottles of wine under $100. My fear of an extrodinary bill for 1 meal just got hightened and I immediately opened the dinner menu to see what the prices of the steaks were. To my surprise, all the steaks were in the $40-$50 range except for the double porthouse cut ($85). Big sigh of of relief. I looked on the left side of the menu and there I saw another wine list with bottles of wine ranging from $30-$100. Nice!!! This isn't anything crazy at all. We ended up getting 3 bottles of wine. . . I ordered the Chef's Cut Bone in Ribeye (33oz or 34oz) to be cooked Medium Plus. We skipped appetizers and ordered 3 side dishes for the whole table. At first I thought we should all get at least 1 side for each person, but it turns out the portions are gargantuan. 3 sides eneded up being just enough or maybe a little too much for our party (7 of us in total). We ordered the gorgonzola mac and cheese, sauteed asparagus, and garlic butter lobster mashed potatoes. When the steak arrived on our sizzling hot plates, our side dishes were served to us. As soon as everything was served, I immediately took a bite of my steak....and I totally understood why people recommend this steak house. The mac and cheese was pretty good and the aspargus...eh. However, the garlic butter lobster mash....oh my goodness...my eyes rolled back. One thing I will say though, make sure you order your steak to be cooked less than you normally eat it. Because of the hot plate, my steak cooked to a well-done half way through my meal.. . For 7 steaks, 3 bottles of wine, and 3 side dishes (including some soft drinks, and 1 dessert) our bill came out to $650 including tax and tip. Thats less than $100/person which is easily spent if you go to a decent sushi house.. . I would give the food and decor a 4.5 star. Steak was delicious and would probably be in my top 5 steaks. The lobster mash...never had that anywhere before and the big chunks of lobster were outstanding. Their service was outstanding and our waitress was absolutely wonderful. At first, I thought this would be a steakhouse that I would visit only once because of the hype and pricing, but now I can say I've been to Mastro's and I would go back anytime if I wanted to enjoy a good steak. Service and Hype and the fact that I saw Jerry West bumps it to 5 stars. ^^
