ReviewID: KE9DxvMKeLJQW0zQl7Mo1Q
ReviewerID: yhJ1SVBSjC_R2viEh5AbUA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
There is so much hype and ballyhoo surrounding Porto's. Everyone keeps talking about their famous potato balls that will supposedly change your life. Well, I am never one to miss out on some balls that could potentially make me see things in a different light.. . I hate crowds. Absolutely despise it. Well Porto's is a crowd x100000. Luckily, there are two sides to this place so the lines aren't as horrendous. If you're facing the front of the store, the line to your left is strictly for hot items and their more popular pastries/desserts. If you want desserts I'd stick to the line towards the right. You can still get their potato balls and cheese rolls but you can't get their sandwiches on the desserts side.. . I did my research and read through some Yelp reviews to try to get a general consensus of what to get. I got the guava smoothie, two potato balls, a cheese roll, and a chicken empanada. I really wanted to get a sandwich but unfortunately they ran out of their Pan con Lechon. I'm not really sure what it is about the potato balls that has everyone's panties in a bunch. Sure it's soft with seasoned ground beef encased in the mushy potato but what's so great about it? It wasn't bad but it definitely leaves much to be desired. I was expecting unicorns and fairies prancing about sprinkling happy dust but all I got was a mushy bland potato ball.. . The chicken empanada, however, was finger licking good. The bread was so soft and thin you could feel the heat from the chicken and vegetables inside. The cheese rolls were of the flakey effect. It's like taking a bite of a homemade croissant. It contained just the right amount of cheese. I'm not a lover of cheese but they had just the right amount in them. . . The highlight of my experience? It has got to be the guava smoothie. I was in guava heaven! I kept taking a sip because I was in pure disbelief. Was my mind playing a dirty trick on me or was this smoothie really that good? I will go so far as to say that this is probably the best guava smoothie I will ever have in my life. The experience was totally mind-bending. It was so crazy that I found myself standing in the long arse line again for another one*. . . Their red velvet cupcakes come with a single red rose petal on top which puts you in this romantical mood where you simply want to eat them with a dessert wine at sunset. Although the cake itself was perfectly moist and the cream cheese complemented it well, I could easily name a dozen other bakeries that can make it better.. . Their potato balls wont be able to move mountains in my book but they've easily sold me with their other items. I can't stop thinking about the sandwich they ran out of and I need to go back ASAP. That and I need to get a dozen of their guava smoothies.. . *I didn't end up getting that second smoothie. The line was so long I managed to talk myself out of it as I got up to order.
