ReviewID: KeAV4H_ysLHZcU6FkUxX1Q
ReviewerID: R7Ev9bu2tg82lmBoqwHPlw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Taqueria Del Sol - Decatur
Category: Tex-Mex
Warning: This isn't what hardcore yelpers/foodies consider a "traditional" Taqueria. They can be a little uppity sometimes. If you look at the menu and see things like a "Memphis", "Fried Chicken" or "Brisket" taco, guess what? You are not in Mexico or on Buford Highway. . . That being said, it is what it is. I don't go here for "traditional" Mexican regional tacos, I go here for some flavors on a flour tortilla that I want when I don't want lengua or pastor or chorizo. Yes, it's a flour tortilla. Let's deal with it and move on. . . While as a customer, I don't like the whole stand in line in the parking lot for some tacos, I have to give credit where credit is due. The owners are a big fan of the turn and burn. Get you in, get your money, and clean off the table for the next people. The restaurant business is a business and I don't feel like I'm being ripped off because these guys want to give me some pretty good tacos and then get me the heck out of there to make some more money. At least I didn't spend a crap load of money for some just okay food like alot of other restaurants in town. . . The staff is pretty friendly given the clientele that at times, appears as if it's the first time they've been out in public. Seriously, figure out what you want, order, and try to not let your kids run around like you just let them out of the house for the first time. . . If you want to sit at the bar and have a drink (margaritas aren't bad at all), you don't have to wait in line. If there is an available space, you can walk up and sit down. . . On the weekend, if you don't like a bunch of kids running around completely undisciplined while mommy and daddy try to suck down a margarita in the middle of the day (see above), you might want to come here for lunch during the week. . . Want some authentic tacos from a place that you will be the only gringo in attendance, look elsewhere. Otherwise, don't hate.
