ReviewID: KExYI8RZ-ql364m5Z2gkpw
ReviewerID: qwONwL783a0hvPQl2TVWjg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
"Worst cooch"....Wow immediately turned off..*turns around to leave*....but then i remember they serve sausage and beer and then i'm back on the team.... . This whole idea and place is brilliant.  In such a metropolis as LA it's nice to have a little place like this to relax and have a beer.  The whole place is a super cute, urban, industrialized gastropub..but in a really good way.  . The ambiance is spot on.  I couldn't have envision a better unique experience or kitschy idea.  I loved the old red brick walls and the rundown urban feel of the outside.  It was all very lower east side dive bar feel almost.  Upon arrival I almost missed it.  But found the entrance to order and then made my way down the long hallway to the dining hall.  Very fun, chill, bustling environment which i absolutely loved.  I can't sing this place enough praises because it was great. The sausage was good :) I love me some sausage.... I could stuff a sausage or two in me any day...haha that's right i said it. The foreign beers...the interesting sausage combinations...Belgian fries with interesting dipping sauces...whats not to love? I got the rattlesnake and rabbit which i thoroughly enjoyed.  (the irony as well as the food...my bunny Chester probably smelled his brother on my breath when i came home...*he shivers in fear as i pet him..scared he'll be next*) My companions got the alligator and the chicken.  I enjoyed mine the best.  I got the chipotle mayo and the blue cheese and bacon dipping sauces.  Yummy and totally worth the trip to sausage bonanza :)   They have some delicious beers here on tap...a bit on the pricey side...but whatever...splurges every now and again...Loreal...*flips my hair* ..because you're worth it....haha. Will definitely make the rounds and hit this place again.. This was the perfect meal after that trek up Griffith Park.  Made every step worth it to get to sausage mountain :)
