ReviewID: kFjZAW6L4pPgItp6TJaicg
ReviewerID: bDSymj6V1FZFcOunxanzcg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Over Easy Café
Category: American (Traditional)
I may have found my new favourite brunch place in Chicago.  Yep, I said it.. . That being said, this is DEFINITELY a "sell your first born for a table between the hours of 10 and 1" type of brunch place.  So if you can, avoid the weekends, or if you must on a Sat. or Sun -- go early or go late.. . We went late, at around 1:30 on a Sunday, and only had to wait about 10 mins.  They do a good job of trying to keep those waiting happy, with a cart of Julius Meinl coffee parked outside the front door.  There is pretty much no space for waiting inside, so I'm guessing in the frigid months, this is not a place you want to go on the weekends.  Nonetheless, sometimes you have to brave the weather for something you want.  And even though it was raining a bit, I stood outside in the rain, sipping my gratis JM coffee, waiting for my table (ok, but only for 10 mins).. . Oh the food.  OH the food.  So many interesting choices, so many egg dishes done so many different ways.  I had the "dates benedict" (was actually a spanish name i now cannot remember) but here is the gist -- english muffin slathered in a date jam, topped with perfectly cooked poached eggs and ham, topped with a succulent piece of bacon and an amazing yet light red pepper sauce for a little kick.  It's like bacon wrapped dates and eggs benedict got marred and had a baby.  And since I love both, I was in absolute heaven with this dish.. . As we usually do with brunch, fiance ordered a sweet dish and we split both dishes -- so we each get some sweet, some savory.  I highly recommend this brunch tactic.  Our sweet dish was the strawberry cannoli french toast, which was absolutely amazing.  Between two large pieces of french toast was a delicious ricotta/chocolate chip mixture, surrounded by a strawberry coulis.  I have no words.  . . Server was incredibly nice and sweet.  The owner was out and about and actually working as host (I overheard him say his hostess got sick so he sent her home).  Super friendly and obviously cares a lot about his business, and it shows.  Great atmosphere, great staff, even better food.  It's no wonder this place has lines out the door.. . It is a wee bit pricey, but I felt it was worth it.  Treat yourself to a fabulous brunch every once in awhile -- it's good for the soul.
