ReviewID: KFnLyTf9gpb3D3Zc0vWJaQ
ReviewerID: pFMEqX7pn0QU8Z00bTOfuA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Watershed
Category: American (New)
I took the mother and the boy here for dinner recently. I have mixed feelings about it. The mother and boy loved the place. I found it nice, good, pleasant, but not orgasmic. The cuisine is southern, and honestly probably some of the best, freshest of these sort of things Service was steady though not mind blowing. Space is modern, fresh, clean and kinda crowded iand noisy in the main dining room.. . The chef sent over an amuse bouche of the soup of the day, an english pea with mint which was quite lovely both in delicate flavor and vibrant hue.. . To begin with we had:. Special appetizer of the day: Softshell crab. I am not a crab enthusiast, and my mother was not impressed with previous softshell, but this was pretty juicy and nice.. . Southern Cheese plate. Three local cheeses, one from south carolina and two from Ga's sweetgrass...all three were delicious.. . Main courses:. Pork chop with collard greens and mac and cheese. This was one of the biggest pork chops I have ever seen. It was cooked to perfection and the greens were bright and fresh. The mac and cheese was decadent and one of the highlights of the meal.. . Salmon Croquettes . These were okay. The grits that were served with them were creamy and tasty, but something lighter like pickled vegetables, salad or slaw would have been a better accompaniment to something as heavy as croquettes.. . Mushrooms on toast. These were a bit bland.. . Fried oysters. These were crisp, hot, plump and juicy. Perfect. They were also served with two delightfully different sauces for dipping.. . Dessert. Rhubarb crisp. Tart, warm and huge. Delicious.. . Cookies and Milk. Pecan sandies and an icy glass of milk were good. Cookies were very nice, but I expected the milk to be rich and creamy like my favorite organic. It was good....but not orgasmic.. . This is ultimately a nice place to take the family and whatnot. A bit pricey but acceptable.
