ReviewID: Kfo3Y_RfkdCndM1cJRqTQQ
ReviewerID: Vbm5Fmph0bHFIhBEehwtOA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I had been absolutely dying to try this place after years of all the hype. I saw this place advertised as having THE best burger in numerous magazines, on television shows, and the owner even appeared as a judge on the burger challenge of "Top Chef Masters.". . Sorry to burst your bubble, but your burger is definitely not all that.. . I came here after some late night fun in LA. (Pee Wee's last showing. Woot!) This place is supposed to be open until 2:00 AM. but supposedly the kitchen closes at 10:00. I forgot my Driver's license since I changed out purses recently, so I was bummed to think we couldn't eat since the place is also a bar. The owner finally came out and reluctantly let us in when we assured him we weren't ordering drinks and only wanted food. We were completely rushed to order in a not-so-nice way, so we settled on two office burgers and the sweet potatoes fries.. . When my boyfriend requested his burger with no onions, the owner scoffed and said "it comes as is, you have to get with onions." You can order the doneness of your burger, but you can't order it without onions, wtf?. . The sweet potato fries were pretty good. Not greasy and it had nice flavor. I've had better, but tasty nonetheless. Our burgers came out fairly quickly and I was excited to take my first bite. My patty was nice and juicy, and perfectly cooked to a medium. . . However, I had a problem with the other components. The caramelized onions, gruyere, and blue cheese all combined together was much too overpowering. I didn't have a problem with the bacon or the arugula. The choice of bread was fairly simple, but with such strong flavors, I would have liked a heartier bread. I was hoping the bread was a little toasted and buttered, but I think that part was completely overlooked since we came in right before the kitchen closed. Bummer, because I think it would have made a big difference.. . I'd give this place another chance, but I really can't stand the pretentious, overrated, overpriced tag that comes along with it.
