ReviewID: kGGo_W24sDWJ-Yen6AUofg
ReviewerID: jx1BSmGVycPVwUjWXgg_XA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Taco Cabana
Category: Tex-Mex
Came here in a drunken stooper late night after a long night of picking up Atlanta trash bags and pounding shots like Little John in a LMFAO video. Stick to the drive through window unless you bring your street sweeper or can muster to lay people out like Couture in the Octagon. The parking lot was a mess, asians packed into dated lexus's, Mandingo's in chevy's and late model tahoe's with rims the size of a ferris wheel and hicks originally from sticks with there mud flaps and deere hats on. In fact this place kind of had the feel of a Gorilla Zoe music video minus the eclectic mix(see above), saw some real change your luck ebony princesses lurking around the parking lot getting in and out of cars. We didnt even bother to look for parking, my brother, his roomate and I all waited in roomates  BMW 3 Series (yes, total yuppie mobile) on the drive through line. . . We ordered three quesadilla's and a few burritos.. The food here is nothing to brag about but suddenly becomes Zagat rated when your drunk and alot fresher than Taco Bell. My chicken quesadilla was the size of a small pizza pie, the only downside being the bland cheese and tiny pieces of chicken, if it wasnt for the feast I had at El Pollo Loco(huge size buyer) earlier this evening I would have stuck to my staple double burrito order. Girl in the drive thru was very friendly and promptly got us our order, seemed as though the Sean Bell case car in front of us took forever and must have been giving the girl a hard time(typical). We managed to yell at the guy in the kitchen from the passenger seat of our car and wave at friendly Juan who has to be the hardest working employee in this establishment. . . Definitely a good late night spot, nice alternative late night dining spot, would not be caught dead in here unless there was a serious bevy of 2nd stringers ripe for the picking. Next time hopefully ill be slaying some girl and this wont be the end to my Saturday night.
