ReviewID: KiD6l85KXXjzFUXi49HmwA
ReviewerID: yYEIePWZlDWuHWxUlir_oQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Starbucks is to green straws as Chinese restaurants is to horrible customer service. But I was shocked to find that Newport breaks that mold, at least for my first time dining with them. I'm used to being ignored and needing to flag down servers several times before being helped, but Newport really surprised me. . . It was Sunday last week around 12:30 - the busiest time for lunch - high traffic - villages of Chinese people flooding in. Initially, I had a party of 20 - so I went early in comparison to the rest of the church crowd. I told the guy up front that I had 20 people coming, and he asks how long it will be for them to all arrive. Upon asking why - he said there was actually 2 tables freeing up right when I showed up and he could give them to me. . . So as I was waiting for them to clean up the tables, I get a phone call saying "Andrew - looks like we're down to 12 now". I talk to the guy up front and he says - okay, I get one table instead of two.  As the party starts trickling in, guess what? Those that originally flaked out, are back and are bringing more. Seeing that we're down to one table with ~24 people showing up, I start freaking out. . . The server attending to our table says - no worries - you see that table over there? Hurry up and seat some of your party there - then you that table is yours. So guess what? We went from two tables to one table to two and some change, all in a matter of 5 minutes. I was waiting to be shown the door, but Newport was all accommodating. Absolutely shocking for a Chinese restaurant ESPECIALLY during high tide.. . THINGS YOU NEED TO KNOW:. Come during their lunch:. The lunch specials are ridiculously great. They range from 5.95 ~6.95, but all of the dishes are of good portions and excellent quality.. . Be ready to wait:. Although I was seated quickly, this place is highly popular and for good reason.. . 3. Parking:. Although there is a private lot, you're better off looking for street parking on the south side of Las Tunas - since I was heading East, I was lucky to find parking right before the restaurant.. . 4. The food comes out quick:. I believe our table ordered 10 dishes and all of them showed up within 7~10 minutes of our placing the order. We each got a complimentary hot &amp; sour soup, and by the time we were just finishing up with the soup, the orders were making their way to the table.. . HITLIST:. Clams with basil sauce:. Clams were cooked to a good texture and consistency. The sauce was not really relevant - could have been black bean sauce for all I cared. It was tasty and I enjoyed it, but no real wow factor. [7.5/10]. . Fish with basil sauce:. The pieces of fish were easy to eat and quite pleasant in general. They were moderately seasoned and tasted very good with rice. [7.5/10]. . Kung Pao Chicken:. Your better than par kung pao chicken, but it didn't really stand out much either. Peanuts were not overpowering and the diced chicken was pretty good. [7/10]. . French Style Beef:. Although this item was not off the lunch special, it was a crowd favorite. Completely stole the show. I believe it was $11.95 - but each piece of meat was tender. Seasoned with black pepper sauce and onions, it was absolutely delicious. Goes well by itself or with rice. Very smart choice. [9.5/10]. . VERDICT:. I am definitely making Newport a Sunday lunch consideration. The prices were good and the quality of food was better than I expected.
