ReviewID: kiv9oCovIxh7h0HLCr-oYA
ReviewerID: tq4zcVipxpvmmCsApMvwbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zed451
Category: Steakhouses
Essentially Zed 451 is a really high-end, glorified buffet, and I suspect that the owners and staff would likely dry heave if they ever heard you call it such.   That said, I have to say, it is the best buffet I have ever been too.. . First of all, the space is very impressive - I would even go as far to say it is one of the more visually appealing spaces I have dined in.  It had a very slick, modern feel to it and the large rooms and bar area flow very well together.  There are lots of natural materials throughout - I suspect bamboo as well as other eco-friendly species - and soaring ceilings with floor to ceiling windows.  There is an upstairs dining space, which is a bit more intimate, as well as the popular roof top bar - which  features real grass and lots of couches.  . . Second of all, aside from a snafu with the hostess seating us upstairs in the midst of a wedding party, the service was attentive, but a bit unpolished.  Upon complaining that we felt awkward sitting next to a private event - the staff quickly recognized their mistake and moved us to the downstairs dining room.  Apparently, the hostess was new and unaware of seating restrictions during private events.  The head maitre d'  took care of things and apologized extensively and then assigned a waiter who went out of his way to make sure we had anything and everything we wanted.  . . Third of all, the food was solidly above average in taste and excellent in terms of diversity and overall experience.  There are no menus at Zed 451 - which, while kind of a little gimmicky, ends up being really cool because of the quality of the food and overall execution.  Throughout the meal though, the staff continues to present this idea as if it is revolutionary (its just a really nice buffet) and explains it to you as if it is really hard to grasp, like they are explaining quantum mechanics or something.. . Anyway, the meal starts with you going to the harvest table, which features a wide variety of vegetables, fruits, pastas, and salads.  Each one is seasoned and paired with a vinaigrette or sauce.  The selection and quality is impressive.  The peaches with balsamic vinegar, grilled asparagus with a lemon glaze, and the spinach strawberry salad were my favorites.  The waiter drops off a tin of buttermilk cheddar biscuits and tangerine butter, which are flaky and light.. . After you are done at the harvest table, or during for that matter, you place a rock at the edge of your table and the roving chefs stop by with an awesome selections of grilled meats.  Some are carved tabled side, others are slid off these metal sticks onto your plate like the Brazilian steakhouse joints.  Truly exceptional.  We sampled the duck comfit, mango grilled salmon, a delicious buttery chicken, St. Louis style ribs, chipoltle rubbed flank steak, and garlic rubbed sirloin.  There was also citrus glazed mahi mahi, prime rib, and a rib eye. Next time for sure.  It was really a great way to try lots of different foods. . . Got to say, aside from the rocky start, this place was excellent and I would easily recommend it for anyone looking for a unique dining experience.
