ReviewID: kJfZ4L67urSPinAdtZV9Yg
ReviewerID: BMEmpeosi4LfwRlAMgtjbg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
Quickie: Time to leave your grocery store and open your heart to the wonders of the market. We're over stable and obvious baby. Ready to kick up a notch.. . Full: In about 140 days, I move to the Bay. The beautiful, the amazing, the Baytastic San Francisco Bay. And to be honest, I'm excited. Quite excited. Why? Because the Bay is filled with my favorite kind of restaurant, the marketplace.. . You know what I mean. You're getting tired of those painful, unexciting trips to Ralphs. You stare at the poor food in giant unattractively wrapped packaging. The plastic cutting off the air supply of all those cheeses, and meats, and the terrible paper packages that contain smothered seasoning. It's heart breaking. You want to rescue the sets of powdered garlic from their plastic bags, you need to free yourself from processed artificial cheese, and frostbitten meat. You're so used to it all and you want to get out. You want to eat a snickers bar cupcake while you anxiously stare down the quiche. Oh Joan's, are you ready to rescue me?. . Clean and white, you feel a little like heaven Joan. As soon as you walk in your eyes start to cheat on Ralphs. Stable, faithful Ralphs. She just doesn't satisfy you anymore. You're too attracted to everything else in the room. Easter chocolates straight in front, quail eggs and chocolate covered peeps. If you manage to make it past the Easter delights on the left, you'll be ready to scarf down the mushroom plates, the eggplant, the fried chicken. Maybe a bite or two of that delicious looking mac &amp; cheese. You think you're finished and you wander over to the table on the other side to start eating. But you barely make it four feet before your eyes set themselves on apricot bars, chocolate marshmellow and vanilla raspberry cupcakes. Oh God. I melt thinking about them.. . Two more steps forward and you hit the motherload. Salad dressings, soups. Is that crushed almond in the corner? Premade chicken pot pies and sorbets. You're going to give it all up for this. You feel your ears get warmer, your body starts to shake, you want it all.. . Joan's is incredible. She's better than whoever you currently seeing: Ralphs, Vons, whoever. They pale in comparison. Joan's will get it done. She always does.
