ReviewID: kKRtVSaTkzd6TA6GeBOtBQ
ReviewerID: mDtgiFvAUgQADVcwQ09DwQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
An AYCE meat-fest and who better to invite to this occasion...ME! =). . Granted I've been in retirement, but there's no reason like Fogo de Chao to come and partake in the abundance of meat.. . Sure, people thought I was soft for going to the salad bar and having some of the sides like the polenta, plantains, and popovers. But if you know anything about taste buds, you gotta reset them if you want to taste all the meat you're eating instead of shoving it straight into your belly.. . I chose bitters, sweets, and non-salty items...things like asparagus and endive helps cut through the fat and salt.. . We were seated in the middle of the restaurant, past the salad bar and next to the kitchen. Once the card turns green, the meat starts coming fast and furiously. We piled on several cuts in a few minutes and we had to quickly to turn over our card so we could actually eat.. . How's that for service?. . The majority of the meat is flavored quite simply with a lot of salt, some pepper, and perhaps a dash of other seasonings. But what you taste is the meat itself and that's the best part.. . All of the cuts were of high quality. I went for medium/medium-rare for the majority of the time and there were only a few that ended up well-done. Still, the food was tasty, tender, and juicy. I tried the lamb, pork, chicken, sausage, and beef...and honestly, the beef and the lamb were the best ones. As for specific cuts, I love the top/bottom sirloin, filet mignon, and the house cut. . . I wasn't the first to tap out, but I also wasn't the last. Who wants to end up on a stretcher and have their gut revolt against the onslaught of protein? Not me. I had enough to be satisfied, but also enough to get my money's worth. I probably gained a couple of pounds with all the food consumed, but it's worth it. . . Plus, the highlight of our evening was having a celebrity sitting in the table next to us! Definitely a place to go for a special occasion and if you love meat.
