ReviewID: kL8vaCOvgp-hU3jCl1TDUw
ReviewerID: 3uJootQ876cXOb4Q2H39IQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Wurstküche is a bustling hothouse of top-notch gourmet sausages with beer and fries to match.  Yup, it is a slice of heaven in DTLA.  And the secret is out, notwithstanding its hipster, underground rave-like location, where you almost seem to need to know a secret password or, in the least, hand over a can of peas.. . Unless you luck out, lines are generally long.  Fortunately, they do not move like molassas, and once you are inside, the staff take your order and ameliorate waiting pains by bringing you your chosen beer while you are still standing in line.  Winning policy, Wurstküche!  To add beam and gleam to win, beer arrives in designated glasses, each bearing the company label of the beer (all the better to properly repeat to yourself as the night becomes beauteously blurry).  Once you reach the cashier, you pay for your order, then with number in hand (staff bring you your food), you walk down a corridor and enter a room with communal bench seating rimmed by less communistic but just as community-friendly tables and chairs.  I love it.  I think it is appropriate that I am immediately taken back to San Francisco, where I, in fact, tried my first bratwurst (at Gestalt Haus).  With the weekend DJ spinning music just loud enough, the whole room has a just industrial enough feel that recalls casual cool, laid-back venues in SF.. . I love the simple but impossibly perfect bratwurst.  This is not a case of shying away from the exotic.  The bratwurst stands tall like an unsung hero with an unexciting name.  It possesses a casing of great, porky resistance that you lovingly sink your teeth into for a series of crispy-chewy, scrumptious bites that you will not want to end.  I am always a little sad when I have less than half a sausage left.  My bites get smaller so that I can savor it longer, coupled by increased interspersed reaches for the Belgian fries (which naturally are coated with truffle oil glaze, just call me a brat).. . As far as the more enticingly named, they are well-cooked, flavorful, and unique.  Gourmet sausages include mango jalepeño (chicken, turkey, nice, mildly sweet) and green chilles &amp; cilantro (chicken, turkey polka-dotted with hints of cilantro flavoring).  The exotics include rattlesnake &amp; rabbit with jalapeño peppers (tasty, give it a try) and the duck &amp; bacon with jalapeño peppers (lasciviously juicy, oh my).. . You have your choice of two toppings (caramelized onions, sauerkraut, spicy peppers, sweet peppers).  Don't snub the free whole grain mustard in squeeze bottles (fantastic).  Add Belgian fries with a choice of two dipping sauces.  Make sure to double-dip those fries in truffle oil.  They are incredible.  Why do they even ask?  I am at a sausage-eating warehouse nursing my beer belly.  Do you really think I am going to deprive myself of French Fry Nirvana?. . Speaking of nirvana, Wurstküche has a legit selection of Belgian and German draft.  What I like to start with is La Chouffe.  This is the consummate starter, one that goes down with smooth grace, perfect to take the edge off of a long Friday.  Then I like to graduate to the Houblan Chouffe, an even-keeled hoppy IPA at 9% ABV.  For the designated drivers, they offer a gamut of interesting sodas, including sweet blossom elderflower soda.  Gee wiz, I might try that next time... spiked.  Unfortunately, they're missing Orangina.  Oh well, nobody's perfect.. . Street parking requires a vigilant eye.  May the parking karma gods be with you.
