ReviewID: klaFtrw6Et2py-weJ7_Lhg
ReviewerID: 3KK7L2Q6NMfJA1Ky4Ntmdg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
I felt this place was only a little better than average, but that may be because I didn't order steak.  Maybe their steak is really, really good but I wouldn't know since I don't eat beef.. . I really enjoyed the ambiance and interior decorating as well.  Since we were dining on a Thursday evening, there weren't a lot of people except for some hotel guests, a few business men, couples, families, and a group of middle-aged men having a boy's date night (how cute).  My sister and I were seated at a huge table booth for a party of six, which was awesome because we had all this extra room to ourselves; but it was right next to an A/C vent, so were freezing.... . We ordered from the lunch menu even though we were dining at 9:30 pm.  The chef was nice and willing enough to accommodate us since our server wasn't sure if we were allowed to order from the lunch menu.  We ordered a chicken sandwich and a tomato pasta (I don't remember the names) and they were both pretty good, but not jaw-dropping-worth-the-expense good.  We also ordered a dessert, (forget which again but I did submit a photo of it) which was also really good but paled to comparison to the cookies given to hotel guests during turn-down service.  NOW THOSE COOKIES WERE JAW-DROPPING GOOD.. . My only complaint is that although our waitress was friendly, she was a bit incompetent towards the end of our meal.  I saw her walk from the kitchen to the cashier and began chatting with a male server, with our dessert in hand.  I just kept thinking about her spit going all over our dessert because she was just chatting away.  She was there for awhile, until the manager saw her and she noticed, and finally brought us our dessert.  Obviously, the ice cream in our dessert was melted to say the least.. . I was originally going to rate David Burke's a 4-star establishment but because of that, I'm going to have to deduct one star.  I love a good dessert and I want it as soon as possible; with the ice cream not all soft and gooey.
