ReviewID: KMr8zLyCwpnCLVhj5TKSTQ
ReviewerID: yOi3du7-JJQHAcYCC7ClbA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wildfire
Category: American (New)
First impression: this place wasn't much to look at. The building's exterior was rather ho-hum and the restaurant's tiny lobby was very chain restaurant-ish (complete with a case selling its wares). Once we were taken back to the main dining room, however, my impression totally changed. The large and super-clubby steakhouse atmosphere really distracted me from the fact we were eating in a mall parking lot. . . Overall, I'd say this place is Houston's-ish. Booths, steaks, white jacket waitstaff. But Wildfire has more of a art deco vibe. I could see this place in the first floor of an old Chicago office building, and I mean that in the nicest way.. . Not a big fan of chains, the whole reason we came to Wildfire was a $25 off coupon we'd received in the mail. It was a good excuse to try some place new and it allowed us to have a nice dinner for about the same price as going to Chick-Fil-A.. . We started out with the spinach and artichoke fondue. While not bad, this was my least favorite part of the meal. The fondue was more creamy (and less dip-py) than I would've liked and the toast was a little too thin to support its weight. Just a few minutes into eating, I had a piece of toast break en route to my mouth, which dumped some fondue down my shirt. . . When the entrees showed, however, we were pleasantly surprised. I order a "stuffed" burger, which had a cheddar cheese and bacon center a la a Juicy Lucy. My wife, true to her steak-loving ways, ordered a steak sandwich. Both had a great hickory flavor from the grill they were cooked on. My burger was extremely juicy and had a nice fresh taste, while Nova's steak sandwich was really good. The perfectly cooked beef was complemented by a creamy, melted cheese and a tasty pesto sauce. Needless to say, there wasn't much left of either of our entrees by the end of the meal. I can say the same about the fries too, which were crisp on the outside and soft on the inside. . . On the whole, the service wasn't bad, but not great either. Well into eating our entrees, we still had the appetizer plates sitting on our table. Just because we had a big booth table doesn't mean there's room to leave everything, you know? . . In the end though, we had a mostly enjoyable experience. Especially considering after using the coupon, our meal was only $13 (before tip). Oh, it's worth noting that for the time being they're running a 3-course deal that's pretty good. You can get an app, small steak or other protein, and a dessert for around $30. While that's not a $25 off coupon, it will give you the opportunity to have a pretty good meal for not nearly as much as you'd think.
