ReviewID: KnaaI84OW487tGrxZV-l2g
ReviewerID: sM81zDDI_rp9Nroo-GzKeQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Panahar Bangladeshi Cuisine
Category: Restaurants
I was visiting Atlanta and per the Yelp reviews decided to check out this 'Bangladeshi' restaurant. . The restaurant itself is located in a big strip mall and was easy to find.  We were seated right away by the friendly waiter but the table had not been cleaned yet.  However it was clean by the time we got back to the table with our food. (We ended up doing the weekend lunch buffet for $8.50).  My husband ordered a Coke and I asked for a regular 'lassi' to which I was told they only had the mango version. I stuck with water.. I'm Indian but Bangladeshi cuisine is very similar to North Indian cuisine so I fully expected to enjoy this meal.. Here are some of the dishes from the buffet-. Bread (Naan) and Rice were both available and these were fine. No complaints there.. Appetizer: Lentil Soup and chick pea salad.. The soup tasted good but was really thick and had a more 'dal' type consistency instead of soup. I wasn't very impressed. The chick pea salad was fine. . Also I did not see any other kind of appetizer  - samosas or pakoras (fritters); if they ran out they did not refill.. Entrees: There were a number of entrees available (6 vegetarian and 2  non). However none of these had a label or description. It mattered to me because 1. I'm vegetarian and 2. I am allergic to certain ingredients; I managed to guess and tasted some of these -. 'Dum Aloo' (baby potatoes in a tomato based sauce): very nicely done. Not too spicy just perfect.. 'Palak Paneer' (creamed spinach with cottage cheese) - There was a little more cream than I liked but  it still tasted pretty good.. A Mixed Vegetable curry (Korma?) - 4 on10. This was nothing spectacular. frozen veggies and potatoes in a gravy.. Cabbage - This tasted really good but was way too greasy for my liking.. Bring a vegetarian I did not taste the meat/chicken entrees ; There was one more entree that could have been vegetarian but I wasn't sure so didn't try that one either! (not that I could tell which one was which). Desserts: There were 2 available . - 'Rasgulla', balls of flour and cottage cheese in a sugar syrup.. I did not try this but I noticed they had used some kind of food coloring to make them look pink.. - 'Kheer'; rice pudding. . I would give this a score of 4 out of 10. It was ok but I didn't care for it much.. . Once done, you have to go to the counter to pay your check for the buffet, it is not brought to you at the table. . So while was thinking of giving this restaurant 3 stars..here is why I'm giving it 2 stars (generously).. - Lack of variety in buffet (for $8.50 I've had way better). - The waiter forgot my husband's drink until we asked for the check. - I found a bone in my vegetarian entree that grossed me out so much that I couldn't eat any more.. - There was really nothing 'Bangladeshi' about this place. I did not find any of the wonderful dishes that Bangladesh is famous for.. - Giving half a star for the friendly waiter even though he forgot the drink.. . I wonder if the a la carte menu is better, however I wouldn't recommend the buffet to anyone! I don't understand the Yelp raves but I won't be going back here again.
