ReviewID: KnBi209G840c3GAqh3Ygmw
ReviewerID: 3Kl3oO_jgwmMY8sMI_2wKQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Fred's 62 is alright.  I haven't experienced any of the horrible digestional tract woes people have noted here, nor any of the flus, colds, or greasy/sleazy feelings after eating here.  That said, the food is just "Okay.". . I had the breakfast burrito with the tofu scrambled-egg alternative and soyrizo; it was pretty good, the habanero ranchero sauce on it was tops.  The veggie burger I got the next time with fries was, well, a veggie burger; precisely how one rates a veggie burger from one place to another is really based on the quality of the condiments used and how pleasantly it left your body; no problems to speak of.. . Warning though: the Japanese items on the menu are not all that good.  I had the udon and it was like 65% bitter greens, 20% broth, 10% noodles and 5% veggies... it was pretty bleh, but I guess I should have expected that from diner-grade udon.  That will learn me good.. . The milkshakes are decent, and I think they use real banana in the banana-chocolate shake, which is a nice touch.  Banana syrup is synonymous to dog testicles, so, Godspeed, Fred's 62!  You make a good shake.. . I'm taking off one extra star for the ineptitude and alarming vapidness of the hostess who seated us the first time we were there.  Half the place was empty, and she put us on a list anyway, saying it'd be 15 minutes.  I saw her list, and there were like two other people on it; admittedly I don't know how things are run there, but, there were like a dozen tables open.  After about ten minutes of almost no one else coming in, we asked if we could sit outside since all the outdoor tables were empty, and she looked confused for a minute and was then like, "uh, okay" and gave us menus.  She never offered this as an option; I'm not a very fussy person when it comes to seating, I really just want to sit and eat my food, especially if it's a post-Blue Monday danceathon energy makeup, and the experience was a bit annoying.  However, the waiters I've had have all been very friendly, chatty in a nice but unintrusive way, and overall very good.. . Overall, Fred's is pretty much okay.  More interesting than Mel's and less greasy, too.  I haven't gotten sick yet, and I'll probably be back.  The shirts the servers wear ("Actor At Work" and "Jesus is our dishwasher") are quite amusing, as well, for a sardonic fellow like myself, which is a nifty bonus.
