ReviewID: KNj5E2nSz26y0FuSQERSQw
ReviewerID: v2Bn5eAgkqrpnZkDmwZv_w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bluepointe
Category: American (New)
I know, it's not two stars. Sorry guys, but I enjoy well-done expensive food and am not anti-Asian Fusion. Bluepointe was not only delicious and relatively reasonably priced for an expensive restaurant, but the service was extremely friendly and had just enough great conversation to be lively but not overbearing. It was a great choice for a birthday dinner, definitely.. . I was pleased to see a prix fixe three course meal on the menu as well as a wide variety of sushi offerings and other pan-Asian cuisine. I enjoy a meal inspired by one culture merging with another with an open mind, and was excited to see a variety of recognizable Asian dishes with interesting twists. I finally settled on a sushi roll for starters, the Doc Martin. Slightly seared tuna, apples, and avocado ran through the inside, with raw tuna and a spicy mayo drizzled on top. It was very good! Is it real sushi? Of course not - this isn't Japan. That doesn't mean it's any less of a dish, and it certainly delivered the perfect combination of spicy, tart crunch, and smooth flavors. Highly recommended!. . For my main course, I went with the butterfish and a side of bok choy. Everything was cooked perfectly, and the sauce was salty yet pleasing. The fish fell apart like, well, butter! Some restaurants just can't cook fish correctly to save their lives; Bluepointe is not one of those spots. Yum! I also had a few bites of the salmon my boyfriend ordered from the prix fixe menu. It was wrapped in rice paper and cooked medium-rare upon request. The texture was so smooth and silky, with a creamy yet subtle sauce underneath. I loved both dishes!. . For dessert, I forgot to mention it was my birthday in my excitement - fried goat cheese? The waiter was very kind about my error in judgment (they do offer a piece of cake for birthdays) and was more than happy to give me my dessert free! The dessert itself was AMAZING. I wish I could fry some cheese at home... Delicious!. . This is a great spot for a date, birthday dinner, girls' night out, or even just meeting up at the bar. The drinks are priced on par with other spots around town, and the mixed drink list is extensive. Drinks are well prepared and very flavorful, and the bartender doesn't skimp. The meal is as expensive or as cheap as you make it out to be - the prix fixe meals run $29 for three courses, or you could order sushi (priced like any other sushi spot), or even just pick up a few appetizers to make a meal. It's possible to get out of here for under $25 per person or go all out and spend upwards of $75 per person. It all depends on what you get, but regardless of what you get, there's plenty of bang and flavor for your buck here.
