ReviewID: KO7_31CxPGk32uy7uBiWfQ
ReviewerID: 4rTYoRQlKggUqmP_fe905A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I've been trading barbs with a friend of mine to try some different foods. Mozza was one of the restaurants high on our lists, but we could never make our schedules work or we could never get reservations. I called one time and indeed she did say they were booked for weeks. She did share I might have luck calling in the night of a visit, just in case there were were cancellations. Strangely enough there was one and we had to pounce on it. However we had to include another friend which threw off the whole system. If you're a table for two, I suggest sliding into the bar and getting your grub on rather than wait for a table. Its the same.. . Since we had to wait a while we wound up having some drinks next door at Osteria. It was hard to resist ordering something to nibble on at Osteria.. . On any given night, I'm sure you will see someone recognizable from the media. Mozza has a well earned reputation and hype because of their food and service. I think I saw skinny Al Roker. LOL. So if you are interested in that kind of side show, this would be a good place for you.. . At this point I was ravenous. I could anything. I was silently cursing the +1 who made us wait longer for a table. The couple I was with surprised me by ordering plain jane pizzas. A sausage pizza and a magherita. They weren't too explorative considering all the varieties they offer at Mozza.I ordered the pizza with Yukon Potato with Bacon and Egg.. . The pizza is very good. It really does deserve high praise it receives. Whether or not its God (Mario)'s gift to pizza is debatable. Pizza is one of those food items that is too subjective to measure correctly. The toppings are elegantly simple and not overdone. The real character is in their crust. Its light and airy with a great tooth to its texture. As I said earlier, Mozza makes a fantastic pizza, however I admit there were elements that reminded me of other good pizza joints. Enough of the taste and flavors made me think I can get a pizza just as good as Mozza somewhere else. Its not a knock on Mozza, its just my culinary mind coming down from the mountain of expectations.. . Our little party of three was stuffed. We order a bunch of side dishes, that I can't remember. The one I recall is the eggplant caponata. Its was very good. I was fascinated at the dark color of their caponata as compared to some other places I've tried. Fantastic. We really couldn't eat anything else.. . Did I mention our server was spectacular? She offered sound suggestions. Apologized for the bad seating. Tended to many of our random needs. When she suggested desserts we graciously declined. The smile on her face that was present throughout the evening literally melted off. With a blank stare and a serious tone she said: You MUST have the butterscotch budino.. . A what???. . Just get it. I recommend it. *lower to a whisper* its the BEST item on the whole menu.. . Are you serious? Get out of here. I hate butterscotch.. . Just get it. I guarantee you will like it. If you don't I will pay for it.. . I have to admit: It blew my mind.. I easily dismissed it as a very creamy pudding with a nice caramel at the bottom. I was ready to talk some shit at the waitress until the little crystals of sea salt bloomed on my palatte. WOW. The sweet and then the salty just made the dessert soar. Its one of the best desserts I've had in a long while.. . The waitress didn't take kindly when I told her I didn't enjoy my dessert ~ because I wanted order 3 more ;) I would return to Mozza just for the butterscotch budino. Its that good.. . 4.5 stars
