ReviewID: kPcXjlQ_363P2AtKuOEkAQ
ReviewerID: b9HcFEjNs2iE64uCVF4yww
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I came here today for breakfast because I'd read such good reviews on here :-)  Man, it took a long time to get here from Century City!  Parking was okay... had to park in the neighborhood behind the cafe.  The walk was nice and definitely needed after eating.. . Since it was my first time here, I wasn't quite sure what to do.  First time patrons- here's what you do: grab a menu off the podium, peruse, and decide what you want and order at the counter.  You'll be given a number to stick on your table (which you choose anywhere that's open) and your food will be delivered to you.  . . The atmosphere is lovely, I think.  I love all the trees and yet, the sun seeps through which is fine by me because otherwise it'd be very cold.  Today was also the first real sunny day after all the rain we've been having so sitting outside was awesome :-)  This is a great place for people watching, for me it was people listening.  It seems every person in LA is a wannabe actor.. . The food.  Well, I got the crab cake benedict.  It came with seasonal fruit.  Jonesing for something majorly carb-loaded I ordered a side of the oven-roasted rosemary potatoes.  The crab cake benedict?  It was okay.  I'll have to say the crab cake did taste a little too "bready" for my tastes.  But the crab flavor did come through, as well.  They used fresh (fresh out of the bag, I'd assume) baby spinach.  The Hollandaise sauce was creamy, had a velvety richness to it and the eggs were perfectly poached.  The fruit was pretty good, too.  The potatoes were not good, in my opinion.  There was a total lack in flavor.  It needed some salt.  The rosemary didn't come through that well and have you ever tasted burnt rosemary?  It's not very appealing.  Ketchup didn't help much, either.  . . I think the prices are a little high.  There is a lot of square-footage in this place, though, so... somebody has to pay the rent!  I can get the same food at a not-so-appealing location for a little cheaper.  So, you know, you get what you pay for.  I'd say it's a fun place to come to with your friends, have good food for a hangover, people watch, etc.  But I don't think I'd come here again unless I was in the area because well, from OC to there is an EXTREMELY long trek.  And the food wasn't that bangin' for me to actually make the drive.  And there ARE places where I'd drive for a LONG time just to experience their amazing food... unfortunately, Alcove Cafe &amp; Bakery isn't one of them.. . On a different note- while waiting in line to get my order taken... I kept staring at the cake display!  VERY INVITING.  Whenever I do come back, I'll definitely be trying their desserts out ;-)  Oh, and also, their small orange juice is ridonkulously BIG.  I couldn't quite discern if it was freshly squeezed or just one bought with lots of pulp in it.  Because there was pulp in it, which is fine by me but some people do have issues with pulp.. . And try to sit outside if you can find a good table.  Indoor seating is ridiculously small.
