ReviewID: Kq9F2rwK3YeYi1cqvBJffA
ReviewerID: Gru52_1cuMMkmYDHK9VgWg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Flying Biscuit Midtown
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I know i review this place often, but that is most likely because i end up coming here so often. Whether it be friends or family, someone always ends up wanting me to take them here. So always a new food to yelp about.. . Wednesday, June 09, 2010:.      Today, i decided to bring a friend up to midtown for brunch. So we thought "What better place for both a vegetarian and a carnivore to get a great meal than the Flying Biscuit?".. .      We arrived at 9:50 and were seated immediately right next to the door. Our waiter took a minute to grab us a few menus and water, and then got our drink order of my coffee and water, and my friend's sprite. . .      The coffee was as good as ever and exactly what i needed after skipping my cup that morning. After the drinks where there, he took our order.. .      I ordered the Tofu &amp; Tater salad with a whole wheat biscuit. The tamari-marinated tofu was a little spicy and was well balanced out by the rosemary potatoes and the mixed greens. It was a good portion of potato and tofu as well, but i think it could have used more salad base. But that is just my opinion..      The biscuit was warm when i got it, and i even ordered an extra one to take home. He accidentally brought two extras, and left it off them off the bill for me, so i was pretty happy about that.. .      My friend ordered the Piedmont Omelet with potatoes instead of grits. He said the potatoes where very well seasoned and he enjoyed them. The omelet was also good in his opinion as it was nice and warm, with a meaty and cheesy interior..      Biscuit: the best he had ever had! He also loved the apple butter that came with it.. .     So all in all, another great experience at the flying biscuit. The manager was in, and he even continually stopped by our table to see how we were doing. Our waiter was very happy and i was sure to tip him generously for great service and free biscuits!. .      So whether you are a vegetarian who wants a well put together salad with a kick to it or if you are a carnivore who wants a meaty and cheesy omelet for a great price, i would without a doubt recommend this place.. . -Andrew D. Morrison-
