ReviewID: kQ_Q9wjJWOn-8yfHKfTVIQ
ReviewerID: RmXIjppHNtVveguN10iO1g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: French American Brasserie
Category: French
The acronym for this place is so apt - FAB is exactly that (and if you know me, you know I use the word sparingly).  Everything about this place screams, "I'm a rock star, and I know it."  Maybe it's the cavernous open dining space with high ceilings.  Maybe it's the giant circular quasi-sports bar with the large screen TVs.  Or maybe it's the attentive, entertaining service.  It might just be some combination of all of the above at an extremely reasonable price point.  Whatever it is, can we import one of these joints to the D Sizzle, pretty please?. . My favorite HOTLanta CM was sweet enough to pick me up from the airport and bring me straight here after an early morning flight (well, we took the scenic route around most of Midtown/Downtown to find it, but eventually arrived at our destination after almost giving up - tenacity pays off!).  What a treat for lunch!  Apparently quite the local businesspeople destination, everyone else seemed to be wearing business casual, so I felt nominally under-dressed in shorts and a polo, but no one batted an eyelash.  I'm classy like that.. . Although everything on the menu sounded ridiculously good, we ended up settling on two appetizers to share, and an entree each.  Oddly enough, the apps (~$12) ran significantly more expensive than the lunch meals (~$9).  one could easily come and drop a little over $10 for a sandwich plate and be completely stuffed - and it's a steal for what you get!. . The tuna carpaccio came with little rounds of crunchy crostini and a huge lemon half, which was all the extra flavor needed to top off this mildly salted fish.  The natural pesce-flavor was ideal.  I thought that the lamb tenderloin was the star of the starters, though.  Deliciously seared on the outside, but tender and pink inside, this incredibly well-seasoned meat paired perfectly against the fresh crunchiness of the cucumber slices and sweet diced tomatoes.. . My croque monsieur with emmenthal was absolute decadence.  Who knew a grilled ham and cheese sandwich could be this amazing?  Not only was there cheese -in- the sandwich, there was gooey melted cheese all over the top of the sandwich, too... yum!  Served with a heaping mound of crunchy fries and a small side of lightly dressed salad, my lunch platter would have been plenty of food even without the incredible appetizers.  Mysteriously, everything on my plate vanished.  And -this- is why I have a personal trainer.. . I don't know if the ATL is known for its food, but this joint definitely has me wishing I could visit y'all's city more often. For anyone heading down to this neighborhood, I can't say enough great things about lunch at FAB.
