ReviewID: KQuTULHgNb-2-mhR39uRJw
ReviewerID: L80nu6pXxl07zb_IKn0ZLw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
Another $50 gift card my dad received from a client but a much better experience than Marche (one of the sister restaurants). This time my college roommate and I headed down at about 7:30 for a Sunday dinner. The place was pretty packed but we only had a 20 minute wait which was spent quite pleasently at the bar where we found two open seats. After ordering two glasses of Cab Sauv ($10/glass) we proceeded to dive into the appetizer menu - mango lobster rolls and pork dumplings (they were out of the fried artichoke we originally ordered). We were seated before the appetizers came out but the host/manager brought them to our table when they came out of the kitchen. . . *BONUS MOMENT* - while clearing our tab at the bar, the very handsome bartender tell us that he has a comp account and that he put our wine on there because he wanted to "thank us for being so patient" (we didn't really wait all that long, so I'm pretty sure he just thought we were cute).  Score!. . Service was adaquete, nothing incredibly amazing but she wasn't a total fool either. She earned her 15%, nothing less, nothing more. She did help us narrow down our two dishes, so thumbs up for that. We decided on the diver scallops and the prawn curry. Both amazing (though I preferred the scallops, even though they were a much smaller portion) dishes, however, both overpriced...as is everything I'm finding at these KDK restaurants. They were $26 and $25 resepectively. Our appetizers were equally overprices considering how small the portions were but I would say the hoison sauce on the dumplings were my favorite part of the meal. Or was it the coconut infused rice paddy in the spicy curry? I can't decide.... . Like Marche, this place has a killer atmosphere and is perfect for date night and girls night out alike. I liked that the executive chef, Jackie Shen, was on the floor plating the food and supervising the kitchen. You don't see that very often anymore so it reassured me that we were getting the best quality from their dishes and the presentation. Not to mention one of the cooks was equally as handsome as the bartender.. . Call me?
