ReviewID: kRPX2GOQPflZIUA87QoRig
ReviewerID: tjwblGkWN9m0vsGaypJ0Vw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
Lightning in a bottle, at least for one Sunday evening.. . We lived in New Orleans for more than a decade and spent a decent amount of time in Houston.  Both cities have large Vietnamese populations and are loaded with Vietnamese restaurants, and we visited those places relatively often.  But only a couple of joints in our current city have Vietnamese food, and it is subpar.  We hadn't had the good stuff in a few years.. . As a couple of long-weekend tourists under the influence of a couple of Goose Island IPAs (yeah, I know, it's not the best, but pretty good on draft) and with no dinner plans, we decided to hop the Red Line to Argyle.  I was only vaguely aware of Argyle Avenue's reputation for Asian food and had seen something about Pho Xe Tang, although I didn't know exactly where it was.  So we were delighted that we could actually see this restaurant from the El platform.  . . I see the complaints here about the lines &amp; crowds &amp; table-sharing but on a Sunday evening at 8 or 8:30, we were seated immedately, although the place was almost full &amp; festive.  Everybody in the place, probably about one-half to two-thirds of whom were Vietnamese, seemed to be having a good time, so we were optimistic.  . . Maybe it's just our Vietnamese drought in Cincinnati, but I thought the food was fantastic.  We kept it very basic.  Spring rolls with pork &amp; shrimp were the best I'd had in a while.  Got the pho with the works--flank, sliced beef, tendon, tripe, although I somehow missed out on meatballs--and it was best bowl I'd had in a long time.  A really deep, rich, complex broth, at least by the standards of New Orleans and Houston (and light years better than the stuff in Cincy).  The side items were really fresh.  (A huge, huge portion that I could not finish, and that is unusual....)  Cafe sua da was perfect. . . Wife was really pleased with the bun with shrimp &amp; nuoc mam.  . . The menu otherwise is monstrous.  It's difficult to imagine that you couldn't find something on this menu to suit your taste, assuming that your taste runs to Vietnamese food.. . As some here suggest, maybe Pho Xe Tang isn't as good as Orange County or Vietnam itself or your mama's kitchen (our mamas are white crackers from Alabama &amp; North Carolina, so that third option doesn't work for us).  But by comparison to dozens of Viet places we've been to in Houston &amp; New Orleans, as well as SF, Pho Xe Tang more than held its own, at least on this one night.  . . P.S. No alcohol here, but you can bring your own.
