ReviewID: KRXZdBmh0PQhLKjhlzEsFQ
ReviewerID: 574x3ezQTKDSsq37bi3HPw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Sometimes I think I'm really indecisive. By this hour, I know it's going to be something that's open late. Searching on Yelp Mobile just doesn't seem easy even on a simpler device like mine. I think it's the interface so what popped into my head was Fred 62. I'll tell you why in a few moments.. . Each time I come here, I look through the menu and just not sure what could be good or what would grab my attention. Then what really is the big downer is seeing the prices that go with these items I see. Expect spending at least $10 here unless you are only having water. Then again, if you're eating with me, bring extra cash with you. I saw this one called, The Manhandler (Classic Sloppy Joe). This is what I'll have. Fries, slaw, potato salad or green salad. Dammit!!!! More choices again. Green salad with 1000 island dressing. Extra please.. . I keep forgetting the 1000 island dressing is done up a little bit spicy where if a little more kicked up, I would be breaking a sweat. So did the sloppy Joe as well. Other than the spicy-ness to the food, not much taste to the rest of it. So without the sauce, it would be plain and bland. Know what I mean?. . It doesn't end there, I really came here with a craving for the Bossa Nova Waffle Sundae. That's right, you read it correctly. Waffle sundae. I Belgium waffle topped with vanilla bean ice cream. Now that is definitely worth the $7.95 or whatever it is. So that's $20 right there with tossing in a few bucks for tip after the tax. You see the same sweet ladies here working. You know you're going to be back for this awesome treat. You best take care of them or they'll remember your face the next time you're here. (just kidding but you never know) . . I think the regular burgers were a little more satisfying but my just dessert is a must. One thing that is very amusing is seeing and reading the t-shirts the employees wear. My waitress had on her's, "lesbians eat out" and I saw one of the busboys wear "Barack is beautiful" where he was moving pretty fast and I thought I read, "bareback is beautiful". "I (heart) 69" was on another one. Wish my freaking camera was working so I can take a few pics of these shirts. I have a feeling you wouldn't believe me just telling you what I saw.
