ReviewID: krZ4OPNpRYTA_4PjpcbDzg
ReviewerID: Wvdus3DyQLqhNJXuB8t0aw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
whoa, the view. the view is amazing!. and the japanese mansion is totally cool!. . i also got one of the coolest seats in the house! the corner of restaurant, panoramic view! except i was facing the trailer park sign. classy.. . first came the appetiser. it took a while, i was starving. we got the kurobuta pork carnitas. it was a little salty but it still tasty pretty good, crunchy rice added a nice texture to it. . . then the main course took even longer. i got the wagyu steak which everyone highly recommended. decided not to get sushi since the quality here is subpar. the wagyu steak actually didn't come hot enough. i was slightly disappointed at that, but the taste was good. . medium rare was perfectly tender too. $30 extra for the himalayan salt plate? everything else is normal except for the way they cook it. dang! i didn't get that, but that's pretty steep!. the sides were pretty good. a lot of broccollini/veggies. devoured all of it! some cut potatoes and onion rings which i'm not a big fan of anyways.. . my bf got the cracked pepper filet mignon. that was pretty good too. though i personally preferred the taste of the wagyu steak, especially since they're at the same price. his side came with broccolini and a potato. i preferred my sides cause it had more broccoli in it =D. . the portions are actually pretty big. i got a good amount of steak and the sides were pretty big. i actually left feeling full even though i didn't eat lunch earlier!. . the dining experience was superb! if i wasn't so hungry, i wouldn't have minded the wait at all. also walked around the koi pond after and the garden, a nice little exploration. more breathtaking views!. . tip: sit by the window, corner is even better! get the wagyu beef. explore the restaurant and walk around the garden outside!. . favourites: the view, the view!. . do not want: $8 valet. food took a while to come. . last words: just go there for the view, that's what you're paying for!
