ReviewID: ktEiEYoPEId-z1mqxa6rRw
ReviewerID: crjRib_eqevfp-igFJKMjQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
First off, what a hell of a wait. 45-1hr minimum. Although we did come around the Lakers game night and we had a large party, many other people were complaining just as much as we were. When we finally went inside, there was a good atmosphere with a few birthday tables full of drunks. Those were kind of annoying, but hey if you like that, that's cool too. . . When we sat down, we had to split our party of 11 in 2 groups so we decided to split our bills as well to make it easier for everyone. When we tried to arrange the table across from us to be placed with the rest of the group, but apparently this was a fire hazard even though we were in the very back corner where it was just us. So this waitress or manager or w/e made us move it back, then we just added a chair to the table of 4 because we split our bills. Yet again, this was a problem for the same person because she thinks it'll bother the table next to us which is ridiculous because they weren't even complaining and the table of drunks was even more annoying. Don't get me wrong, the other servers were great, but this bitch was PMSing to the max. So annoying.. . Anyways, on to the food... We ordered 2 lbs of crawfish, 1 lb of shrimp, 1 lobster, and 2 baskets of cajun fries which all included the whole sha-bang. The sauce is really good, but I have to say the crawfish is not worth it. It looks good, but when you actually eat it, it's not that filling for all that work trying to peel all of them. Shrimp was pretty good though. The lobster was ok, but you couldn't really taste any sauce so you had to keep dipping in it. The cajun fries were good and we were hoping that would fill us up, but sadly, the 6 of us were still pretty hungry and our bill was already 89 bucks + tip. So we just stopped, but went somewhere else cheaper to actually get filled up.. . In summary,. Long ass wait for dinners. Hit or miss with the service. The whole sha-bang is good. Don't order crawfish or lobster, it's not worth it. Still pretty expensive for something that didn't even fill us up.. Messy, but fun I guess. . I would come here once in a long while to splurge.
