ReviewID: kTi94AxqG1V8j4Q7i7YDPg
ReviewerID: 67cIKJxnQKrQ0UFH0I8TQw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Other reviewers have been very detailed about this restaurant. Based on their suggestions I went here last night.. . It is in, predictably, a crowded ugly mini-mall in the crowded ugly Vermont Avenue district near Wilshire. There is hardly any parking on the street, so you must valet. It is only $2.00 so the parking charge is not obscene.. . The restaurant is beautifully and slickly designed. Aluminum hood vents hang above every table. The atmosphere is very clean, very professional, very friendly. The hosts will come up to you immediately and seat you.. . The menu slants towards BBQ-beef, pork, chicken, shrimp. The server will bring you hot tea, water or beer. Someone will come to adjust the black charcoal and add new soaked pieces to the pile.  You won't be waiting long when an armada of vegetables, mostly soaked in chili and garlic, are piled onto the table.  One enormous fresh green salad, lightly dressed in vinegar, is also included.. . And then the raw meats arrive. The server puts them on the grill and he also places many spices and side dishes on the table: raw garlic, soybean paste, spicy chili sauce, two spicy vinegar dips, rice paper wraps, sliced paper thin white radishes. There is kim chi, sour pickles, beans, potatoes, spinach.  Perhaps 9 side dishes and half a dozen ways to flavor everything.. . The meat was so tender, so well flavored, just exceptional. A lot of food to eat. The chicken was enough to feed four people, but just one person ate it. The restaurant does not, unfortunately, allow you to order less dishes than the amount of people seated at a table.  . . One warning: the smoke from the bbq can blow into one's face, despite the high-tech venting.  Your clothes will smell of BBQ too.. . Just when we thought the meal was over, they served a cold rice drink, followed by a bowl of rice, and a hot miso soup. This was for DESSERT!. . This is healthy eating, well prepared, professionally served. Even the bathrooms smell nice and have automatic waste-baskets that sense the motion of your hand and open intuitively.
