ReviewID: KtrQjiqEAlEZxktbIWeLbg
ReviewerID: igaoaFNkX7ieMuyUBg0u5w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Brazzaz
Category: Steakhouses
I want to find fault in this place so that I won't want to go again, but I can't.  I made our Valentine's Day reservations here a couple of weeks before, and was grateful for the fact that I didn't have to use my credit card to reserve a table.  Some places do, and it's so annoying.  We did the valet parking, and were seated within a minute of us arriving.  The service is great here.  Our reservations were at 6:30pm, so it wasn't super busy yet.  The place is trendy, but yet warm and inviting.  We started off with the salad bar, which was huge.  I think vegetarians could appreciate this.  I loved how they had field greens with orange and strawberry slices already in it.  The strawberry dressing was fabulous.  They had a variety of other items to pile in the salad.  Plus, there was sushi, chicken salad, apple celery salad, potato salad, orange and mozarella to make caprese salads.  I also saw the mushroom risotto.  I was a fan of the oyster shooters, but passed on the shrimp cocktail.  I quickly flipped over my chip afterwards for them to bring on the meat before they even took my salad plate.  We had a nice Brazilian cabernet to complement our meal.  There were these guys there that continually brought fresh sides of mashed potatoes, fried potatoes and fried bananas.  Along with this they set down steak sauce and the chimmichurri sauce.  I don't remember Fogo having to anything that was the equivalent to the side items, but it's been a while since I've been there.  The cheesy bread that they have there look like little puff pastries that are really soft and chewy.  This can easily fill  you up, so stay away and make room for meat - because that's what you should really be here for.  My boyfriend was mentioning how he felt sorry for the guy serving the pineapples.  He was thinking that not a lot of people were wanting that, but he was taking that back as we both got some and ordered 2 or 3 slices at a time.  This tastes delicious together with the meat, makes the meat even juicier.  I was a huge fan of the shrimp, I think I had 8 pieces myself.  I also loved the strip and the filet.  I tried the flank, top, and bottom sirloin - along with the rump roast, and parmesan pork.  The sausage was very tasty as well.  It was misleading that the web page has lobster on there, but it's a la carte yet nice as an option.  We also had the Impanema Supreme for dessert, which has vanilla and chocolate type of puddingish.  This I thought was ok.  My boyfriend was more disappointed that I wasn't as much of a fan of the dessert as he was.  I should have asked for the Papaya Cream instead.  Since it was V-day they were giving out Brazilian chocolates in a glittery red heart shaped box as you were given your bill.  I think they're just softening the blow for the price that you pay for having dinner there.
