ReviewID: kTVwVn1__Q9Dh_FRa1ujPQ
ReviewerID: lrvBE5PMCkvylXGSOJMsSA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Butterfly Sushi Bar &amp; Thai Cuisine
Category: Japanese
First of all, let me apologize once again for knocking over the lady at the table next to us's water glass with my purse or coat or something.  I'm so so so so sorry.. . That being said, Jesus, could they squish the tables any closer together?  Maybe if there was room in-between the tables, this never would have happened.  It's that ole Tyler Durden "Ass or Crotch" dilemma &amp; it's annoying.. . Secondly, as I was waiting for my friends to arrive, I noticed that there was no where to wait.  I just stood there, in the middle of the awkwardly situated dining area with some lady staring at me.  I tried to explain that I was waiting for friends, but I don't think she quite got it.  She was certainly pleasant enough, but talk about feeling weird, standing in the middle of the restaurant by myself while servers &amp; other patrons &amp; I did the dance of "am I in your way? are you in my way? should we step right? left?". . Alright.  Onto the food.. . The edamame was passable.  I personally like mine with those big salt crystals on it or something, but this was just ... pods.  Pods on a plate.  A stylish plate, but pods on a plate nonetheless.. . Granted, I'm not very adventurous with the whole no meat thing, but I do know my veggie rolls well.  &amp; these veggie rolls were not, well, good.  They were fine, but lifeless.  Tiny little slivers of cucumber surrounded by a thin line of rice, all squished in with seaweed.  &amp; the mushroom ones were bland &amp; lacking of all imagination.  &amp; can you believe there were no asparagus rolls?  None!  Sad..... . Unless I'm once again forced to go for another birthday dinner, I don't believe I would ever go there again.. . PS:  To my friend who, after asking me why I wasn't eating the tray of rolls that everyone else was eating, said, "Fish isn't meat!" ... Uh ... I'm a vegetarian &amp; have been for over a decade now.  I think I know what constitutes meat for me, sweetikins.
