ReviewID: ktyjUNHrgxXYR4hihwV-RQ
ReviewerID: Wvdus3DyQLqhNJXuB8t0aw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Everyone talks about the house special lobster. I think it's delicious, but worth the $55? (for small) I'm not sure if it is.. . It wasn't too crowded and i quickly found parking, that's a good sign. Waited for about 15-20 minutes on a thursday night for a party of 3. There were a decent amount of people, not packed. Looks pretty clean for a chinese restaurant. . . Servers were very friendly as they gave us the menu. The menu was in 3 different languages, english, chinese and vietnamese. rather stranger, but i later found out the restaurant has vietnamese influence, or even viet-chinese owned? i'm not sure about the latter.. . Ordered spicy clams, tong choy, garlic shrimp and the house special lobster. the first two dishes came lightening fast was was super hot.. . The portions were generous! The clams were very fresh and flavourful. the tong choy was a little salty for my liking, but it was still very well cooked. the shrimp was alright, and again, very hot!. . The house special lobster was fresh, and it was pretty big, but i guess in the end there wasn't that much meat. although 4 dishes is quite a lot for 3 people. It was a little strong for my palate. When i eat fresh seafood, i much prefer them to be milder in taste. i am cantonese after all! but unfortunately it was pretty overwhelming with the sauce, and i could barely taste the lobsters original flavour. regardless, it was still very well cooked and fresh.. . pretty good service for a chinese restaurant, they even refilled water, what?! and a little strange since there were hispanic servers? but then that could attract a more diverse (and it does) demographic.. . The bill came to $101 for 3 people. a little steep if you ask me, mainly the lobsters which ended up to be $55! everything else was $10-13. . Tip: House lobster is pricey but you come here for it. small for 3 people, medium for 4+. lobsters run around $15-16/lbs and a small is usually around 4 lbs. Be sure to specify. They do accept credit now! portions are pretty big, so around 1 plate per person is good. Comes with rice ($1.50). . Favourites: food is FAST and HOT. well cooked. . Do not want: a little strong for my taste, since it's viet/thai influenced. I expected a canto restaurant, and that wasn't what i got. . . Last words: Fresh lobster/seafood. Come at your own risk!
