ReviewID: KUXCPx0aWzjEMzuliMTdEg
ReviewerID: E4UUqPlwClhSZ_JaRHvXPQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Wow...88 reviews already.  Okay, here goes another one.  Magic Castle is definitely something different...definitely a date place...definitely a special occasion place...definitely pricey...definitely worth it.  While waiting in line for one of the shows, a Magician from England told us there was nothing like the Magic Castle anywhere in the world.  . . There's a lot of history here.  The inside of the castle is dark and huge, yet cozy.  Everywhere you walk there is something to look at, even in the restrooms.  There is a bar on each of the three levels.  The thing I liked most is each of the three show rooms ranged in size from 21-100...small enough to feel the energy of each trick.    . . A tip: start waiting in line at least 30 minutes before each show's start time because every show gathers a large crowd.  Get your money's worth and try to view each show.  Sit in the front row and you will most likely get picked on.  (I was two for two in the front row.)      . . There are also little tables spread out throughout the castle for Magicians not a part of the line-up to perform throughout the night.  This is a nice thing to watch while you wait for the next show.. . Even though the food smelled delicious, I cannot comment on the dinner because we didn't eat.  I was fortunate enough to go with a member, which does not require us eating dinner.  I did try the French Fry appetizer (which you can order at the bar) and they were very yummy large seasoned potato wedges.    . . I believe the entrance is $20 per person AND you have to pay for dinner.  This is after you receive a guest pass from any member of the Magic Castle.  Valet is mandatory ($3) and they have a coat check.  . . If you ever need a Magician for a private party, banquet or social event, contact . http://www.kellyspades.... .  He's young, energetic, funny, super talented, a fellow Yelper, and not bad on the eyes either.  ;-). . (ROTD #2)
