ReviewID: KW1dSJvO8mmcHXrqmCZKPg
ReviewerID: H2ypgSQanDLuP3wkVJM1Vw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
this place continues to impress me every single time.. . first of all, I've never ordered anything off the menu that I haven't been satisfied with. If I ever did, the staff is seriously so nice that I would feel so comfortable mentioning my "issue" and I am confident that they would take care of me. In all honesty, there have been maybe 1 or 2 times that our waitress was a little on the "crabby" side - but in their defense, this place is always busy and you can tell that the staff is hustlin' for the most part. I've even witnessed a single customer once complaining about his ham tasting "funny" -- I felt so bad for the waiter who was more than accommodating to the gentleman's needs and quickly brought him whatever else he asked for.. . breakfast here rocks -- makes me smile!. their sandwiches are delish &amp; their salads are very good too. again, i've been with friends who have ordered an item and not gotten what they expected. before they could even say what was "wrong", our server has offered to either bring something else or not charge us.. . what really impressed me about this place..... I ate a salad here for lunch one day and towards the end of my salad, there was a piece of plastic (either from the lettuce bag or cucumber wrap). keep in mind, 3/4 of my salad was now in my tummy! I told the waitress and she was very apologetic. she brought our bill and had removed the salad - very nice and of course, what one would expect. HOWEVER (it doesn't stop here and this is what really impressed me about Toast and will keep me as a loyal customer), a very nice gentleman (the manager?) came to our table and said, "hey guys, I understand someone had some plastic in their salald?" I told him it was me and he was more than apologetic. He said that he does his best to make sure the prep staff and the chefs are careful and it must have been from produce packaging. The way he spoke with me and approached the situation was unlike anything i'd ever experienced. This guy was truly sorry and not just because he didn't want to get in "trouble", but because (well or so it seemed) he really didn't want me to have a bad experience at this establishment. I said "it happens. human error" and thanked him from removing it from the bill. He also said that dessert was on the house if we wanted anything (we didn't order any dessert - but this was so nice of him).. Needless to say, AGAIN ... very IMPRESSED.. . I've eaten here since then and I still love it.. . I wake up every morning wishing I didn't have to be at work and could just go sit @ Toast.. . What a lovely AND delicious place!
