ReviewID: ky5mwm3J3RSmnyIVncclCg
ReviewerID: 30uf4qsB9RAqZFMiJG9-sw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Wow!!!. . I haven't given 5 stars in a while.  Maybe I am just ornery or just going through a misanthropic spell.  Oh well, regardless, I am out of it now!!. . Wow is all you can say of this place.. 1 hour wait -- who cares.  The crowd is eclectic and educated so no pains in the asses or cutting.  The host had a dry sense of humor that kept people entertained and me on my toes as I heckled him.  :). . Place is slam packe inside -- who cares.  The staff is super cool and knows how to handle gaggles of people (Pictures to be loaded soon showing the action). . Menu -- straight forward and amenable to many a patron. They know what they are good at and known for so it's easy to "test" the place at your pace.. . What we got -- (which was WAY too much for 3 people). . 2 mimosas  -- tasted one pretty dec.. OJ and coffee -- Coffee is french press (Nice detail of the joint  and fresh coffee to boot). . I got the Eggs benedict which comes on potato skins instead of an english muffin.  WOW!!  flavor country.  Soooo good.  the eggs were perfect and the texture contranst betwen crunchy potato skin, firm ham, and yolky egg with Hollandaise was sublime.. . My sister split a protein bomb scramble with her friend.  very fresh and very very good.  I only had a bite so can't really comment much.. . ONE blueberry pancake.  -- wow -- batter is fresh and fluffy yet not dry.  This particular pancake comes with blueberry sour cream.  At first I made a face, but once I tried it, I understood.  it's a perfect companion to the pancake.. . Per the reviews on here we had to try the French Toast.. HOLY CANOLI!!  this FT rivaled my mothers and that's sayin' a lot.  When I try FT "outside", if you will, it's usually with Texas toast and crap.  it's either doused in the egg mix and soggy or dry as bone in the middle.  This one was indeed made wit Texas toast but PERFECT!!. . wow, words can't really express what happens when you eat the French Toast.. . ancillary niceties --  6 to 7 types of hot sauce; REAL Maple Syrup; copious amounts of ketchup;  awesome blues music piped in; and a mystery room in the back for big parties.
