ReviewID: kyA3eTWfKBq5X4brwcCCcQ
ReviewerID: hx-0WkKPi-hnGx-0DjsCvA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
The Food was 3 stars. The Servers were 4 stars. The Decorum was 5 stars. The View was 6 stars. . You get 4.5 Stars once you average them together. Add .5 stars because it had extra meaning for myself. That's the reasoning behind my 5 star rating.  . . I came here December 28th, and I got the filet mignon and my gf got the wagyu steak. They were pretty decent from what i can remember, portion was small/decent.  For the filet mignon there wasn't too many sides that came along with it.  The Wagyu Steak on the other hand had many sides, so that one def could fill you up.  Coming to a classy $$$ restaurant like this, the quantity of the food however wasn't number one on our priority. . . The Servers were nice, took pictures for us, came multiple times to refill water, the chef even came out himself to deliver our appetizer (name escapes me at this moment).  Good services!. . The Decorum inside the building was awesome, nicely decorated japanese garden within the restaurant, it almost felt like a park. The lighting inside was amazing as well, it was close to christmas however, so the decoration of the restaurant probably would be different by now!  The decoration outside the restaurant was amazing as well, with japanese gardens filling the lower deck of the restaurant. We walked around for 10-15 minutes, would've walked longer but it was freezing.  T_T. . Lastly, the view of this restaurant was simply amazing. Beyond the 5 stars restriction given by yelp.  We drove up this narrow road to get to the top (grr valet parking only.. I shall let that go) But we sat by the corner of the restaurant with views from both windows. It was around 8-9pm, and everything we saw/were able to see was just dazzling. I believe the best word to describe the view would be: Magnificent . . In the end. This place holds special meaning for myself, shall definitely come back here one day if I have the chance.  5 Stars all the way!!
