ReviewID: kYhha55hpPDZg7tbG4CTtQ
ReviewerID: dS4gYU9apq86jtkIlnTztQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bocado
Category: American (New)
Bocado is an example of one that has been on my list for far too long. In fact, it's been there since opening back in October '09. Seriously,...it's on my "restaurants I want to try list" that I keep on my iPhone, right under my list of "bands to check out" and "stuff I want". Doesn't everyone do that?. . Unfortunately, things did not start off on the right foot. We arrived late on a Thursday evening (post 9 PM) and were seated immediately. The problem came when we ordered drinks. My date ordered her drink, the name of which escapes me, that included Cynar, a bitter Italian liqueur. I wish I could tell you what else was in this, but the overwhelming bitter aftertaste is all that I can remember. I know that the bitterness of Cynar is a big reason to use it in a cocktail, but a good mixologist should balance that bitterness so that it isn't all-consuming. That was obviously not the case here. This thing was undrinkable. And before you chalk it up to personal taste, we had a cocktail with Cynar in it the next night that we both loved.. . For my drink, I ordered a Woodford Reserve Manhattan on the rocks. It arrived "Up" in a cocktail glass instead. It was still a Manhattan, so I didn't make a fuss to my waitress, as I still enjoy drinking them that way. But I didn't enjoy this one. It barely tasted like a Manhattan at all, and I know enough about bourbon to know that it was not made with Woodford. That was later confirmed while reviewing my bill.. . Now, I love me a good cocktail. For those keeping score, that is 2 cocktails out of 2 that I didn't like. And one of them even had bourbon in it!. . The food was a different experience for us. First we had the Roasted Brussels Sprouts, served with thyme, lemon, parmesan, croutons, and capers.. . Brussels sprouts are a great example of a green that, in the right hands, can shatter the misconceptions most of us develop during childhood. And I'm a sucker for well made Brussels sprouts.   . . They were browned just enough to add flavor without being overcooked. At first, we thought this might be a little under seasoned, until I combined all of the components simultaneously into one bite. Make sure you do the same. Paired with the sharp flavor of the parmesan and salty pickled capers, the sprouts are magnificent. I would definitely order these again.. . Next up was the only "miss" in the food department, and it crushed me because I was so excited about it. As soon as I spotted the Veal Cheek, served with baby rutabaga, turnips, grits, and jus, I knew that I had to order it. Excitement turned to resolve when our server told me that this is prepared sous vide.. .  I mean, come on! Sous vide veal cheek?! Just writing those four words is making my mouth water.. . Alas, as much as I wanted to love this, I was left wanting. It definitely wasn't bad; it just wasn't everything that it could have been. The meat was tender and the grits slathered in jus were delicious. This was still good, but I found myself slowly chewing each bite, waiting for that thing that makes your eyes roll back into your head. It never came.. . The most noticeable correction that could have been made was the crust of the meat. As with all things sous vide, there needs to be a nice crust to contrast the soft textures that this method produces in proteins. The veal cheek had been seared at some point, but all of the crunch had gone soft by the time it reached the table. That might have been the only issue. Whatever the cause, it felt like this was one flavor layer short of badass.. . This dish really pissed me off, because it should have been mind blowing. The cheek that I ate had enough potential to merit a second try, and if you've had this I'd love to hear from you. I'm hoping I just got a bad plate.. . Next up was the Roasted Poblano &amp; Pimento Cheese sandwich with bacon and fried green tomato. The pimento cheese was fresh and smooth, and the poblano had that slow heat that creeps up on you 6 bites into the meal. This sandwich is highly recommended.. .  Fortunately for you, this is on both the lunch and dinner menu. Fortunately for me, it was dinner so I got a cup of their creamy tomato bisque to go with it. It's very well done, with a nice thick texture and rich flavor. We got an extra batch of H&amp;F bread just so we could soak up every last drop.. . You really want to blow your own mind? Dip the sandwich INTO THE BISQUE!. Thank me later.. . Don't let my bitching confuse you. Even though my experience here wasn't flawless, all of the issues could be easily explained away as flukes. The pros outweighed the cons, and I will definitely be back. With the knowledge that I work minutes from a lunch that includes that sandwich, I'm not even sure how long I'll be able to wait.
