ReviewID: kYZ8Vz1iT_zKHq_Kk_RwTQ
ReviewerID: ukfZEKae8SLavXHDDwdKBQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
I find it funny and mildly entertaining that to a lot of people, the way I live my life is offensive to them.  I choose to live in an urban environment where I am independent of car, I don't own a TV, I rarely listen to the radio, I make conscious decisions about where I live and where I spend my money and how I choose to define my lifestyle based on my moral, social, political, and environmental beliefs.  . . I don't expect other people to follow me, and I am far from perfect, but when I explain why I live the way I live, other people seem to get defensive because it is not how they choose to live.  And I am not on the offensive, I understand that others find quality in larger abodes, in convenient parking and driving, and the lowest prices for the cheapest mass-produced goods.  That's fine with me.  I am not dictating how others should live their lives.  I only know that I couldn't look at myself in the same way if I shared their lifestyle.. . So of course, I am anti-sprawl.  And anti-suburb.  And anti-environments where you're dependent on cars.  And Din Tai Fung is exactly the type of place I would have never ever have gone to if not for, well, the fact that I am Chinese and the fact that this place *should* feel like you're going on a pilgrimage.  A pilgrimage to the San Gabriel Valley east of Los Angeles to go worship at the foot of the xiao lung bao.. . Set inside a non-descript strip mall in the HERRA Chinese city of Arcadia lies America's only location of famed Taiwanese chain Din Tai Fung Dumpling House.  In a glass window at the entrance, you can watch people create the traditional Shanghai soup dumpling from a piece of dough to a carefully crafted thin-skinned wrapper filled with a juicy meat filling, folded 16 times on top, and steamed to perfection.. . And when it arrives to your table, hot and steamy, you can pick up each dumpling without the fear of accidentally puncturing the skin and having all the hot soup run out, and you can hold the dumpling with your chop sticks, and see the pork juice floating within the thin dumpling skin, and know that this might be the best xiao lung bao you will ever eat in your life.. . Others may do it better, but Din Tai Fung sets the bar. And sets its high. High enough that I, Mr. I-hate-cars-and-suburbs-and-strip-malls-and-tract- housing, ventured out to the suburban ethnoburbs 20 miles east of Los Angeles to what is essentially a global chain restaurant simply for a taste of the finest dumplings this country might ever offer.
