ReviewID: L0uWHBhF0zOKQ-8Y4zeinw
ReviewerID: IyIZSTVm6tTt5AhAz1sX7A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Chateau de Saigon
Category: Vietnamese
We went here on a Sunday night at about 8:00PM.  It was a close call between a 3 and 4 star.  Let me begin with the positive aspects and then I will roll into the negative.. . Positive:. . The decor is beautiful, it is dimly lit, the dishes (i.e., plates, chopsticks, etc.) are very nice.  A very upscale feel in this strip mall.  You really forget where you are.. . Presentation of the food was very pleasing to the eye.  Truly photo-worthy.. . Surprisingly, the portions were large, which I often worry will not be the case at a restaurant that strives so hard to appear "classy.". . We ordered the seafood on flat rice noodles and shrimp with crispy chinese noodles as the main course.  Both were delicious.  I appreciated that the calamari used were whole small octopus and not just a severed piece of tentacle. There was more than enough seafood in each dish.. . The grilled shrimp paste on sugar cane was delicious, but a little pricy for such a small appetizer.. . The vegetable soup (in chicken broth) was very good, make sure to ask for sauces to go with it.. . For desert, we ordered vietnamese coffee.  It is a very thick drink over condensed milk.  The miniature french press is perched over your cup.  It was $3/coffee and was small, but delicious!  I highly recommend it.. . Negative Aspects (hint: it was the service):. . Seating: Though there were other seats available, I belatedly realized we had been seated next to the bathroom.  That should be the seat of last resort.. . Service!!!!!:  I could tell that the servers cared more about themselves than their clients.  That is probably why we got put next to the toilet, so a server could get his fair share of tables when better seats were available.  . . We were there for our anniversary.  I wanted for us to take our time and enjoy one another's company.  So, we wanted the appetizer, soup, dinner, and dessert.  Well, soup and dinner came out simultaneously about 3 minutes after our appetizer.  I HATE that!  So, there we are, eating our soup, while our dinner is sitting at the other end of the table getting cold.  Did I really need to tell them that I would want to eat the soup first???  . . Also, while I was still eating, they come around to box up our food!  Then, it was my plan to drink a coffee, but they bring me the bill instead.  I had to tell them to go and take the bill back and bring us coffee instead.. . With the exception of one very nice young lady (who offered to take a picture of us together), they all seemed too rushed (it was busy, but they weren't swamped).  Don't let the customer "see you sweat."  The panicked servers kill the dimly lit upscale ambiance they tried so hard to create.. . BTW - we were there only slightly over an hour.  For a four-course meal?  That is way too fast.. . Bottom Line:. . 3 stars.  It was about $60 (including tip) for two people.  We couldn't help but compare this to Cho Dang Tofu House which we had visited days earlier.  Maybe that wasn't fair to Chateau Saigon.  We paid $20 (including tip) at Cho Dang, and had wonderful, attentive service, despite the fact that they had been as busy as Chateau Saigon.  They are both South Asian restaurants on Buford Highway, so I do hold them to the same standard.  Sorry, but the much less costly of the two places (Cho Dang Tofu House) turned out to be the more enjoyable option.
