ReviewID: l1e5ExtlGJqsiCxk7lhbTw
ReviewerID: J3nsp_-4Eknx1KqblMBxng
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Cut is delight - (wait for it).....ful! It is beautifully filled with light from its linear skylight centerpiece, which creates a luminous spatial energy and atmosphere in the room. I felt like I was walking in a trance from the intimate lighting, to the white walls, and 5 foot portraits of "the artist formerly known as Prince", Brad Pitt, George Clooney, and Obama starring back at me.  I was drawn in by the warm wood tones of the furniture and took notice of the flatware and artwork as these are a few of the aesthetic strengths to describe this whimsical moment.  It was so magical and overwhelming to comprehend how the evening was going to unfold.  I felt like everything in the room was well thought out and placed meticulously in a certain position to create harmony.. . The design and architecture is so elegant and delicate that I swapped my signature drink of a Dirty Martini to a Burnt Orange. I've never tasted anything quite like it but our Maitre d' insisted I clean my palate with this intoxicating liquor to begin my first journey.. . I wish I could remember our server's name because he was highly entertaining and full of enthusiasm.  The service was impeccable and his recommendations were incredible!  He hijacked our attention when he brought out a tray of Wagyu steaks for us to examine (I'm a sucker for visual effects) and a bottle of wine to complement the meat.. . The quality of the meat was heavily marbled and very tender.  My steak melted in my mouth and I can still recall the taste and texture as I savored the memory by not swallowing to quickly.  Gluttony never felt so good!. . Last but not least, the desert was decadent.  We ordered the Chocolate soufflé, mille feuille with strawberries.  Unfortunately, I can't eat chocolate but my dinner companion confirmed that it was the best Chocolate soufflé he's ever had.  I can only confirm that the strawberries were the best strawberries I ever had in my entire life!. . The night was well orchestrated and struck a nice balance between intimacy (the physical space) and excitement (the food).  In conclusion, this is a great place to "close the deal" for whatever, (or whomever), one wants to close on because I was sold!
