ReviewID: l1eXwc_VRLB_9G_CyGtPUA
ReviewerID: LhYez9kxuIdfEU1-g5ojpA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
My sister (the Vegetarian) and I went to Green Zebra for Dinner on Saturday night last week, prompted into fiiiiinally going by the Groupon my sister had purchased (I think the deal was you could buy a $40 gift certificate for $20). . . We were seated immediately (we had a reservation, which I'd strongly encourage...there's really no area to even wait for a table). The interior of the restaurant is really gorgeous and very fitting for the menu. The clientelle was diverse, from hipsters to baby boomers.. . I should preface my review of the food by saying that I have been meaning to go to Green Zebra for quite some time. It's steps from my house and I really like the IDEA of having a fine restaurant of this callibur that is all-vegetarian (almost all...one pescatarian option was available). Further, I should mention that I'm a meat and potatoes kinda gal, though I've gone veg in the past and can share my sister's perspective as well. . . First, our server was very nice and the service was great and well-paced (there was only one breif lag). Two caveats:. 1) I noticed that he told the table seated next to us after we had already ordered that the starred items on the menu were "not vegan but could be made vegan if requested" though the menu seemed to suggested that they WERE vegan. Why didn't he tell us this? What if my sister was vegan? (she's not) Were our plump physiques a cue to the waiter that his speil on the use of non-vegan ingredients in certain dishes would not be of interest to us? Am I nit-picking? . 2) Here's something that ISN'T nitpicking: we were sitting right by the bar and the bartendress had long and fine blonde hair that was positively all over the place. I recall thinking ever-so-fleetingly that it seemed like a bit of a health code violation. (You know what the say about food at the finest restaurants being touched by the most hands, etc.) Well sure enough, the Sasparilla I ordered showed up with a long blonde hair coiled,wet and plastered on the inner rim of the glass. Luckily, I'm not a prude about such things, so I swiftly removed the offending strand and drank my beverage with a straw. Is it passive aggressive of me to point this out only after the fact via Yelp? Probably, but it happened and I can't just not mention it! Watch out for Rapunzel the bar maid. . . On to the food: my sister went for the Chef's tasting menu (prix fixe) and I ventured out on my own. The dishes are teeny-tiny but the flavors are very strong. I'd definitely suggest 3 dishes and maybe a side or dessert. Of all the dishes we had (we both tried each other's as well) I most enjoyed the Grilled Heart of Palm, Roasted Beet Carpaccio and the dessert (a modernist take on a PB&amp;J). Overall though, everything was just very BRINEY (save for the dessert), and as an avid consumer of olives and all things pickled, that can be good...but I don't want my whole dinner to be just one big brine-fest. I think it was the soups that did it (trio of onion and an asian soup that was on my sister's tasting menu) but all of the dishes definitely leaned toward the acidic. I was happy to order the side of Hush Puppies to hopefully temper the acid, but they were just sooo dense and blah, I couldn't choke them down. . . So I have mixed feelings. The meal was certainly not to my liking, but I did have a nice time hanging out with my sister. She really enjoyed the meal, but I think mostly because of the great variety of choices at such a fine dining type of establishment. If pressed, I'm sure she'd much prefer to go to Chicago Diner.
