ReviewID: L3wyQVclKS742jj6_neAfg
ReviewerID: vssJ80skEcuR90RYb2SgWQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Dresden Room Restaurant
Category: Lounges
This world is going to hell. My experience at the Dresden Room last night has clinched it.. . So I'll start at the top. I'm strolling in the back entrence after parking (dude, piece of advice, pay the $2.50 to park in the back - worth every penny) and some dude is giving me the icy glare. I'm thinking "do I know this jokester?" and this fuckwad is still giving me the jock-eyes. As I walk past douche-of-the-month, he turns to his buddy and says: "What's up with this guy?" (referring to me). . . So I turn to him and say: "Hey cock-slinger, why not stare at this for a change?" and give him my deadly left hook, knocking him out cold and sending him flying into his equally douchy, low-IQ-laden pals, which of course drove them to come at me. So now there's three of them, the muscle-bound ass turds against skinny ol' me. Lucky for me (and quite unfortunate for them) I have my razor sharp problem solving skills (they call that "being intelligent") and I used simple geometry and a little bit of physics to calculate out a Chuck Norris (I know, how overplayed in the Chuck Norris jokes?) style roundhouse to the Raiders' fans and knocked out all three in fell swoop. Effing A, right?. . Well, that last paragraph didn't happen, save only in my mind, but it does sound kinda cool, right? Skinny ol' Duffy took care of four spikey-haired, bottle tanned, "Raiders nation sticker on my duely (. http://www.adobeservic.... ) that my dad bought me", fox racing shirt wearing meat heads. . . What really happened is after douche of the month said what he said is I walked inside and noticed something that I never noticed before about the Dresden: There are a lot of jocks there.. . Now, I'm not talking necessarily about your classic jock. I'm talking about the Hollywood jock. He's a dime a dozen. He wears Abercrombie &amp; Fitch, he wears a baseball cap, he's tan even though it's winter, he screams and gives high-fives to his "bros" and he should be shot. That's the "Hollywood Jock". He is (obviously) not from LA, but probably from the mid-west, he is here to pursue an acting career (he "majored" in theater in West Alabama Community College) and he is the same condescending piece of shit that he has always been from Junior High on up. . . So, my theory is a scene from Swingers was filmed here in the Dresden, Vince Vaughn is cool, he got laid in that movie (right?), so these "HJs" are there to score some action.. . Jess B. calls them Hipsters. I say: wrong. These are Hollywood Jocks. Hipsters are too busy hanging in Silver Lake to give a hoot about the Dresden. Or Echo Park. Or Highland Park. Or whatever. . . So, anyway, enough about that (holy hell, I really do ramble!). The Dresden is the most ho-hum bar in the world to me. It's super crowded, no seats, no places to stand, the bartender that I got at first was a shmuck (no personality at all and was not helpful) and you cannot sit in the the four hundred empty tables in the restaurant (unless you order their retardedly expensive food) untill 11:30 pm. So I stood around for an hour until 11:30 (all the while being moved around by the bouncer every two seconds because you can't stand anywhere where there's not 75,000 people) then we finally got to sit in the restaurant. Then it was pleasant. . . I just don't like loud stupid bars. You can't talk to anyone. You can scream, but a normal conversation is impossible. . . Marty &amp; Elayne was great, though. Really entertaining. If the bar wasn't filled with a bunch of hacks, it would have been better.. . (Oh, and the second bartender was great. A really genuine guy. Thank god.). . 3 stars.
