ReviewID: L4cRuYoA0O_ppxtIm5ppLA
ReviewerID: pD4c0eVE0ImAgcag4w4-lA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Shabu Shabu House Restaurant
Category: Japanese
Here is a set of instructions to help you through your shabu meal/ordeal/experience at shabu shabu house.... . 1.  Arrive often and arrive early.  Put your name on the list.  Also put what you want.  A is for 10 slices of beeef, B is for 15.  If you want a lean cut, write it in the comments section on the wait list.  They will serve you the cut you want.. . 2. They herd in new shifts of people in every 40 mins to the hour.  You are most likely going to wait here peak hours unless you get there around 4:30pm and put your name on the list (it opens at 5:30pm). . 3.  Stick around because if they call your name and you're not around, your seat goes to the next willing person on the list.  . . 4.  Sit down, and order whatever you want to drink with the waitress.. . 5.  Most likely when you sit down, all the food and sauces will already be in front of you.  Start throwing veggies in the boiling pot.  . . 6.  Add a number of things to the sauces you are given (2).  The big jar of white pasty gritty stuff is radish.  I usually throw that one in the vinegary-soy sauce looking dip.  Throw in as much green onion into the sauces too.  The smaller jar of white pasty stuff is garlic.  Don't skimp out on that either.  Keep them vampires away!  There is also chili oil and chili flakes and soy sauce.  Add to taste (to any sauces)!. . 7.  Also start throwing in the meat into the boiling water.  You can either throw them in a bunch at a time or one by one.  Cook it as rare or as well done as you like.  Dip meat in sauce.  They will refill these sauces.  They also refill rice.  . . 8.  EAT!!!  Don't take too long because they will stare and turn off your boilers (I am told) if you eat over an hour. . . The whole process down to the service is very efficient.  Don't come here if you don't like waiting or if you eat extremely slow or want to converse after your meal.  There are yogurt shops in the square for that!  Cheapest shabu shabu in the area... The meat isn't the greatest quality and its sliced a little thicker than I like but hey... you get what you pay for.  Also, it's Japanese shabu shabu so, no, the boiling pot is water, not soup base.
