ReviewID: L7uMQoMPIhDU34AUuOcAhA
ReviewerID: LhCcVyWKFgwYpUk2NaWxCw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
Went there Saturday 2/27/10. MEMO: This place was closed by the Health Department due to cockroach infestation~ 2/11/10!. . I remember this place as a small kid when it was directly across the freeway by Union Station~ then--- it had good Deli Food!. Now it is, why go here with Langer's is not so far away!!!. . So in our meetup group were 3. I set this place as freeway close in downtown, free parking, a place to gather, then head off for our Volunteer project at Union Rescue Mission!. . Speaking of which, much of the food I have seen at the Missions, is superior to the Crap served at Philippe's!. This place is a shit hole as: Clifton's, the Pantry, and now~ Philippe's!. . Our group:. One had a lemonade: small glass shitty old wore out glass @75 cents.. . Another a French Dip (beef dip) , pathetic- hardly any meat, on substandard rolls).No DIP~ $5.55. . I had a bowl of  Vegetable Barley ( salty, bad taste, with cheap saltine crackers around side of plate ) $3.25. A side of  Cole Slaw-and 2 cups of DECAFF (60cents per cup). . At 10:30Am, the place was sorta empty, but the customers there were many as I would volunteer to serve at Union Rescue Mission!. . To order food is a pathetic joke. people stand spread out, in lines in front of DELI counter, and wait for one of the Hispanic women with bad attitudes to actually wait on you. The issue here is chaos, people shoving past, as the only isle way is between people waiting and deli case!. . Regular coffee is 9cents, I had Decaff at 60cents, x 2, as I would not subject myself to the derogation of returning to the Deli Counter, to await a refill!. Nowhere is there any server with coffee pots, coming by the tables to refill cups!. The decaff here sucked! Bad taste, weak, cold when I got to table!. So for $6.35 I had a bowl of soup, side of cole slaw ( quality less then Smart and Final ), 2 cups of Decaff coffee!. . Here are pieces of reviews from other Happy Yelpers writing about this shit-hole !. . What crap for food they serve here and to be charged this for not much of anything!. Also, to add insult of the bullshit of this has-been place! ~~~ you bus your own food to table!. . The food was marginal when I went.  There was nothing about the food that makes you say wow.  It was an experience to say the least.  The place is a mess to the point it was shutdown because of cockroaches.  . . FROM: Los Angeles Times. "February 11, 2010    . Philippe the Original, a venerable Los Angeles eatery famous for its juicy French dip sandwiches, has been shut down by county health inspectors because of a cockroach infestation, officials said Thursday evening.. . Health inspectors discovered the problem about 11 a.m. Wednesday after conducting an inspection prompted by citizens' complaints, said Angelo Bellomo, director of environmental health for the Los Angeles County Public Health Department.. But inspectors had to close the restaurant for 48 hours to allow the vermin to be removed.. . "When you have a violation like a live cockroach infestation, it doesn't matter how good the score is," Bellomo said.". . This place is a testament to mediocrity and blandness... and I guess people's preference for mediocre and tasteless food.. Just because they claim to be the creator of the French dip sandwich does not mean that they are good. If this was the first French dip I ever experienced, then I would have been turned off on French dip sandwiches.. . I was actually glad when my boyfriend told me that they were closed due to a cockroach infestation. And then I wondered where all the old beer bellied men would go eat now.. . Anyway. The bottom line is: I think less of you if you like Philippe's.. . We tried the beef and the pork.  Couldn't really taste the difference between the two.  That's not a good thing.  Also, the jus is not provided on the side.  Rather, the ladies behind the counter dip it for you, so by the time you find your table to sit and start eating, the bread is a soggy sloppy mess.  My friend ate two sandwiches and said he was so unsatisfied.  I completely sympathize with him~~. . Cockroach Infestation?? Wow.... It's been over 5 years since I've returned and was ACTUALLY planning on going there this weekend.  . . What a shame.. . SANDWICHES, SALADS, SOUPS AND MORE. PHILI P PE " F RENCH DI P P ED" SANDWICHE's are a delicious. combination of a crusty French roll dipped our own authentic "jus" created. from our freshly roasted meats. . Ask for "single-dip", double-dip" or "wet".. Beef Dip Pork Dip Ham Dip Lamb Dip Turkey Dip. 5.55           5.55         5.55      6.75          5.55. . Saturday Vegetable Barley 1.70 2.30 3.35. Cream of Broccoli* 2.30 3.10 4.80. . VALUE:  -3 ( bad food, cold crappy coffee ). Parking:  1 (panhandled in parking lot- no security). Ambiance: 1 ( filthy dirty, let alone the funky locals and homeless sopping up 9cent coffee). Food: 1. Cleanleness: 1. Restroom:  -2  ( piss allover floor infront of unranls, paper about, smell, just not so good!). Neighborhood: -3  ( filthy, dangerous, lowlife's panhandling, crummy
