ReviewID: L8fMvCTF3e7XcFpx_tHR4w
ReviewerID: xT-kqzQm8hcXJrWdKyrwpQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Highland Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Really?  Really?!... This place is this popular?!  And why?!!!?... . I should have known what a poor time I was getting myself into following the server's initial comment to us... She dropped off one straw with our two waters, and said, "Here's one straw.  Maybe I will bring another one, maybe I won't."  No freaking lie.  I am confident she was on drugs or seriously delusional from being hungover after a long weekend or something... I am still leaning towards my drugs theory though.. . Not to mention the fact that if I were a large person, there is no way in hell I would have fit in the seat situated WAY too close to the table behind us... And that would have sucked.  . . As you can most likely guess, our server was awful...  I sat at the table without a refill of both water and coffee for at least 5 minutes (until I pointed them out to her), and I had to get up to get my own condiments following the receipt of my food (which took a good 20 mintues at least).  Really?!  Really!!. . I got the Tofu Scramble which was mediocre... I suppose the potatoes were good, but who can go wrong with those?!?  The wheat bread was gross and replicated that of forgotten about, cold toast out of the toaster.  I did not even finish half of a piece of freaking toast... Really?!?  Really!. . Matt and I split an order of muffins to start, which were good although I am not a "sweet" person in the morning.  I opt to get my sweet calories late at night when you really should not (oh well).  Matt ordered an interesting combination of Cilantro Corncakes.  They were good although the serious mixology of food going on in that entree would have had me guessing otherwise.  Take note though, they are really filling (so watch the seat behind you after finishing 'em).. . Anyhow, enough about the OK food- the ambiance reminded me of a more upscale Waffle House (with cakes).  I will say that I am a single young lady, however.  If you have kids and a family who you know will be loud, then this place is calling your name.  No doubt.  It certainly was when I went.  Loud, crying children throughout.  Don't get me wrong... I am not a cold hearted person who does not like kids or anything.  However, for a Sunday brunch I seriously prefer otherwise.  Maybe an artsy cool place with delicious food, rather than a noisy, crowded, mediocre place with horrid service... Who wouldn't?  . . To conclude, I really wanted to like this place.  My boyfriend even thought I would.  But everything about it- the ambiance, the food, and the service did not work for me!  It really is popular though... So if you want a place with tall ceilings (that enable the noisyness), OK food at mid prices, and the prospect of not fitting into your seat comfortably, then go here.  Really.
