ReviewID: l8wLLJGNocIegruYfVgj1Q
ReviewerID: jqTa-RtGU26q3TFTmMZOAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Iberian Pig
Category: Spanish
So I've heard from so many friends that this place is phenomenal.  So we finally decided to try it out. We got there and of course it was packed by 6pm with an hour wait, so we opted to sit at the bar.  Literally, by 6:30 it was standing-room only at the bar and the line for people waiting for seats was out the door.  However, I'm not really going to take any of this into account for my review.  It is what it is, and it's just what one should expect when you try to go check out a hot new reputable restaurant.. . I'm going to say that some things on their menu were in fact, very very very good.  Others . . . very good, and some others, okay.. . What we ordered that night:. . Selection of 3 meats/cheeses - . 1. Jamon Iberico - Absolutely delicious.  . 2. Jamon Serrano - Very very good.. 3. Mahon D.O. - Very good pairing with either Jamon. . Tapas - . 1. Eggplant fries - Didn't really taste the eggplant.  It got lost in all the batter somewhere.  It really just felt like I was eating deep fried batter.. 2. BBQ Octopus - This came strongly recommended from some friends . . . but to be honest, we just weren't as impressed.  It was definitely "interesting" to couple octopus with BBQ sauce.  I'll say that the octopus itself was delicious, tender, and as our friends described it, it almost "melts in your mouth" . . . but the BBQ sauce just didn't seem to jive with the octopus in my opinion.  Maybe that's just because I've only had octopus as sashimi.  . 3. Huevos con Trufa - This was absolutely delicious.  Probably my favorite thing the entire night.  Even more than the Jamon Iberica.  The pork was so tender that it literally breaks off with a fork. The sauce is not overpowering, but allows for you to enjoy each of the flavors of the black truffle, rustic bread, and egg.  . . We were also going to order this special mussel tapas that the cured meats/cheese chef was preparing . . . but right before we were going to order it, somebody else took the last order.  But he gave us a sample of the mussel sauce to use a dipping sauce for bread . . . and it was fantastic.  I'm definitely ordering that next time we go there.. . I'll also add a note that another friend of ours told us to stay away from the Prawns.  I'll just put that in here as a comment.  :). . So like I said, overall, there were some very very very good things on the menu, and some very good things, and then some okay things . . . . . I wasn't completely blown away by everything, but it's definitely a good place to eat . . . and make sure you call in a reservation in advance.
