ReviewID: LabHpkAMbwbF8f8LlFIe4A
ReviewerID: DO7LWmWl26m1JrtDXLq3hQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Doughboys Cafe
Category: Bakeries
When I think of comfort food, I think of Doughboys. . . For those not in the know, it's in West L.A. on Third Street about equidistant between The Beverly Center and The Farmer's Market. Once I get past the dog-eat-dog parking and the half-hour-to-hour wait, I'm in Elysium.. . The greatest French Onion Soup ever made resides here, in a big, inviting bowl with ultra-stringy cheese and wedge-like garlic croutons that retain just enough crunch to make life worth living. All French Onion Soups that pass by my tongue must compete against this Doughboys masterpiece -- and they ultimately fail. . . One giant bowl of soup is enough for one human, but I can't be at Doughboys without having their French Dip sandwich too. I often have to negotiate with my eating partner to share the two dishes, because having both would mean armageddon for my stomach. I tried it once, and spent the next hour immobilized in my car seat, reclining out of necessity and trying to digest faster than my body could choose to self-destruct. . . The French Dip sandwich has juicy roast beef with nary an ounce of fat on it, tender-yet-crisp French Bread that won't wreck your upper palate, and an amazing side concoction of horseradish sauce -- not too spicy, but with enough kick -- to encourage a liberal spread on every bite. Oh yeah, and dipped in their tasty au jus. Orgasmic!. . For breakfast, or rather brunch (what's breakfast on the weekend? Does not compute),  I often gravitate to the tofu egg scramble combined with an ideal mix of turkey sausage, tomato, spinach and potato -- hold the mushrooms, thank you.. . So, what's the catch? Being a garlic fiend, I once tried the Cream of Roasted Garlic Soup with cheese tortellini -- again, hold the shrooms. Chock full of fresh roasted garlic cloves, I thought I would be in heaven, but a demon from hell came knocking. The garlic was so intense I literally kept wondering if I had ingested Drano (knocked in accidentally by the staff -- or on purpose?). No kidding -- my esophagus was on fire and remained in the burn ward for a full 24 hours after I finished the soup. Is it always this strong? If I, a garlic fiend whose taste buds have practically become inured to the magical bulb, couldn't handle this soup, what mere mortal could? Perhaps one day I'll try it again to see if it tastes the same -- or if someone really did add a dollop of Drano in there...
