ReviewID: LaOBJqN5_K2DqavBYqwEEA
ReviewerID: SE-P1AtCjcgtYX6X4UXDbw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
We heard Jonathan Gold's review on KCRW Good Food yesterday and decided a trip was necessary. Walking up to the restaurant our first impressions was WOW! Las Vegas arrives in Downtown Los Angeles. Amazing physical design ... very open, very white, lots of glass.. . Walking into this Red Line adjacent restaurant brings you into contact with a vast interior space - both horizontally and vertically. In some respects, it is as if you are walking into a department store because the various elements of the establishment are like departments in the space. There is a sense of European indoor market-eating-establishment ... but it's having trouble keeping pace with the opulence of the marble floor and glided lion heads. . . The marketplace departments occupy the area immediate to the front door. The gourmet market and patisserie will no doubt be a welcome addition to the downtown scene, but I think the folks comparing it to Dean &amp; DeLuca are a little too excited. . . The kitchen is a part of the scene. Open and accessible the gleaming stainless, glass ware, food-in-progress and white clad staff are all a part of the attraction. Watching the frenzied kitchen staff reminds you about the enormous effort required to launch such an effort. . . There is also a bar. . . Atmosphere - Festooning the vast, unadorned stark white interior is the clamor and din from the guests and service. The noise cacophony is certainly central to the design and expectation of the space ... but should be an important planning consideration when choosing Bottega Louie.  . . Bottega Louie does not take reservations - not sure this will work for the time sensitive Music Center crowd. So, you walk up a large interior boulevard between the bar and the kitchen to the maitre d'. The pleasant maitre d' writes our name into a very official looking book. Due to the lack of automation there seems to be a considerable effort associated with finding tables and the guests who have wandered away into the department store floor plan.   . . Service - The table service process deserves some careful reconsideration - it is uncomfortable and self-conscious. Long waits for drinks and service seemed to be the rule at all the surrounding tables as well. There was also some confusion about the ownership of the role of server for our table. No coordination, no refills, and no checking back to make sure everything is ok. The atmosphere is incomplete without a confident and knowledgeable table service that supports the mechanics of the meal.. . Water - I drink unfiltered Los Angeles tap water ... so I will admit that I am not impressed with the water scene. However, for those of you who are ... the wine and beverage menu proudly announces - COMPLIMENTARY PREMIUM WATER - STILL OR SPARKING. Your choice arrives in a recycled wine bottle ... nice touch. . . Bread &amp; butter - Non-descript bread arrives to the table wrapped up like a white English firecracker. A chewy, yeasty replacement with a salty butter would be a good replacement. . . Caesar salad - this was a very attractive dish. The neatly trimmed long spears of romaine carried the salad dressing, shaved parmesan cheese, and crunchy rustic croutons. Personally, I prefer a zestier salad dressing ... more lemon/vinegar would have been welcome.  . . White beans &amp; red onions - Small plate of traditional fare here, broad white beans with some slivers of red onion. . . Meatballs Marinara - Bright marinara with several light, finely textured, Worcestershire sauce perfumed meatballs.   . . Fried Calamari - Well fried calamari with a tomato sauce to accompany. . . Sausage &amp; peppers - Was longing for more flavor from the sausage. . . Portobello fries - Without a doubt, this was the most interesting dish of the evening. Served with a side of tarragon mayonnaise the lightly crusted Portobello mushrooms are an essential. . . Burrata &amp; grape tomatoes - Some heat source had wilted the grape tomatoes, but the result of this combination was still not very remarkable. . . Brussels sprouts with almonds - there were no almonds in my Brussels sprouts but I didn't really care. These caramelized baby Brussels sprouts (about the size of a peanut M&amp;M) were just amazing.. . Coffee - My cappuccino was wonderful - rich, earthy and very smooth. My partner's coffee was like a weak tea. . . Prices - reasonable prices.
