ReviewID: lAvddbV7yQVKz7mildTsqA
ReviewerID: -McIr0gQYXJ-7JgEEKkbkQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
After my boyfriend pestered me, over and over and over, I finally said, "Dang. FINE. Pick up dinner at Umami Burger." It's like back off Burger Whore. You know I'm not really a burger eater. You want a burger from there so bad? Go with one of your guy friends.. . ANYYYYWAAAAYS. He wore me down. . . The first time? I ordered the Manly Burger + onion rings. Biggest problem? Super greasy. They wrap everything in white paper, so you can even see the grease oozing out. Kind of gross. Like I felt my arteries clogging just looking at it. But once I got past the greasiness, I have to say: pretty tasty. . . The onion rings are tempura battered. Sort of light and crunchy. They only give you a few. But along with the burger, it was enough for me. Sadly, I think like anything fried, they lose a little something on the way home. One of those things that probably needs to be eaten there, fresh out of the kitchen, for the best experience. . . Now, as for the burger? Like I said, I'm not a big burger person. So I don't have a lot to compare it to. But I liked it. The Manly burger is packed with bacon lardon (fancy word for bacon cubes, don't let the word 'LARD' scare you), little crispy onion string thingies and cheddar cheese. Good classic flavors.. . We gave it another try yesterday. Except this time, remembering the greasiness of the onion rings, I asked him to get me the steak fries. I have the same complaint as others: portion is on the smallish side. But I wasn't starving, so it seemed okay. They are little rectangular yummy bits of fried goodness. But best of all? I love that they add salt to them. . . Lately it seems like every time I get french fries, from anywhere, they don't add salt. Being the dirty Fry Whore that I AM, I must always sample fries in the car on the way home. And Every. Single. Time: Damn IT. NO salt. Forgot to ask for a few salt packets and I've already driven away. The key to a perfect french fry is the right amount of salt and ketchup. Unless you're old and beaten down and your doctor has put you on a No-Salt Diet, which sucks for YOU. 'Cause really? Fries without salt? HELL no. But I digress.... . Thank the Baby Jesus, Umami Burger adds salt to their fries and you don't need to ask.. . Got a side of the Umami Ketchup. Really loved that. Not sure what they add to it, but definitely had an unusual zinginess to it. . . Had the same burger as before, the Manly. It was better this time. Less greasy. . . If you're a burger fanatic? Definitely give it a try. And from what I've read, the La Brea location is best. Boyfriend says the service is awesome. No complaints. Since it's such a small spot, they'll ask you to wait outside for your order, but they bring it to you.. . p.s. the Boyfriend also says, "the Truffle Burger is the Goddess of Burgers."
