ReviewID: LcdNTLq7XVy0RHTMVDdEDg
ReviewerID: ExXA6FW5oaTq5IniIT7rWw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Green Sprout
Category: Vegetarian
First off-- I'm not a vegan or a vegetarian, so maybe my tastes are just wrong for this type of restaurant, and thus the low score.... . I ordered from here for delivery, and the food came rather quickly (About 1-2 mile drive from restaurant to apartment, in total took about 30 minutes to get to my door).  The ordering process, everything up until the food went quite smoothly.. . I ordered two appetizers based on Yelp suggestions:. - Chicken Drumsticks ($5.25):  These were surprisingly good for something that wasn't actually meat-- the tofu, or protein, or whatever it is, was pretty tasty.  Probably my favorite thing of the meal.  The dipping sauce it came with was alright-- just some kind of normal sweet and sour like contraption.  $5.25 fetched you four decent sized pieces.. . - Curry Spring Rolls ($2.75):  This was a good deal, I feel, for the filling-ness of the rolls.  These rolls are stuffed with something resembling lightly curried mashed potatoes.  The starchiness was filling, although the potato filling wasn't nearly curried enough for me.  The spicy dipping sauce it came with was a little too hot for comfort, and pretty unflavorful.  In summary, these were okay, but very bland.. . My main entree was probably the biggest let down, the Moo Shu Pork ($9.50). . The plum sauce, the roll wrapping was all fine and good, but the filling they served it with was really not good.  The cooking was average, the vegetables were just... average, and the tofu and the "fake pork" was basically not edible.  I ate one roll of Moo Shu and ended up throwing the rest away.  I'm not really picky when it comes to junk chinese food, but this Moo Shu Pork was the worst chinese food I've ever tasted.. . I forgot to order bubble tea, but maybe that would have been alright?. . In total, I would not eat here again-- it was an experimental thing, but from what I've had of their entrees, they're really not worth the price at all, even for a vegetarian version.
