ReviewID: lddNIjOZ_OWn6-YMaDeDVA
ReviewerID: QqlRIgbCQmRDmtraGyVbSA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Spring is a place I would come to during winter, spring, summer, or fall.. (..."all you have to do is caaaalll, I will be there, yes I will...dun dun dun...to see you again."). . Yes, it makes me sing. This place is THAT good. . . Upon entering the restaurant, the decor makes absolutely no mark on me. It's almost like Le Bernadin in NY...simple, straight lines, no flair, no fun. Almost boring...but maybe they do that so their food will stand out even more? Because after the food was placed in front on me, the background just faded away.. . Our group of 5 decided to go all out, so we tried a bunch of delicious things. I love amusing my bouche, so their lil cup of yumminess before we got down and dirty was great. . . Appetizers:. - Foie Gras Gyoza: o.m.g. superb.. - Crispy Pork Belly: delish!. - Tuna Tartare: tasty, but nothing you can't get elsewhere. - Tuna Sashimi: they gave for free! how could I NOT like it?. - Kusshi Oyster: friends had it and said it was good. not amazing tho. . Soup:. - Lemongrass &amp; Coconut: very good and had some small dumplings in it. . Sides:. -Scallion &amp; peekytoe crab pancakes: pretty good. . Entrees:. - Seared Maine Sea Scallops: da BOMB. i love scallops and these were perfectly seasoned and perfectly cooked - not rubbery at all!. - Duck Breast: a disappointment. Ordered medium rare (as it should be) but it was dry and  not the greatest.. - Halibut: enjoyed by a friend w/ no complaints. - NY Skirt steak: also enjoyed by a friend w/ no complaints. . Desserts:. I can't find the dessert menu, so I don't remember exactly what we had. We had 3 or 4 of them. . - The chocolate stuff was good.. - The pumpkin something or other was just ok.. - Their ice cream was tasty (different flavors that came w/ different desserts, but all great). - They ended it with a rosemary chocolate amuse bouche. Not sure I liked it very much - made me feel like it was almost too savory with the rosemary. . . Anyhow, I would say this was a 4.5 on my list, but because they put up with our obnoxiously loud group (in a normally very serene setting) I have to round it up. . . But I blame it on the great wine and cocktails that they serve there. Otherwise, the intoxication level would have been minimal, and therefore our level of obnoxiousness would have been too. :)
