ReviewID: LE5vR3Bcqd8vtPyD20ul2A
ReviewerID: Ue8TLzuyqcBm4SsRiMhwdw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Six Feet Under
Category: Seafood
The food and the ambiance and the service make this place worth finding!. . When I told my friend that I didn't care where we went to eat, just as long as the food was good and that I could order a beer. Well, he surprised me with taking me to Six Feet Under off Memorial Drive. I've driven down this street several times, and although the large cemetery with graves peaking above the giant brick and stone walls, the patio on top of Six Feet Under has almost always stolen my attention because to me, it looks like it was placed top of an old convenience store from the 50s with a few two by fours and, you hope, some screws and not nails. I knew that if I were to ever go to this place, I would want to sit high on that patio with all the other young professionals drinking away to the sunset while starring out over the city skyline. . . Fortunately, and I do say fortunately, there was about a 45 minute wait for a spot on the patio. This gave my friend and me ample time to take a stroll though the neighborhoods surrounding Grant Park to work up the appetite we would need for the reputation of great seafood this place had. All the old, but newly renovated and brightly painted houses in this area were fun to walk past and interestingly to note that they were all very affordable (this compared to my Buckhead neighborhood where everything tries to sell for at least half a mil). . . By the time we arrived back at the restaurant they had two high stools ready for propped aside the table size deck post. We started with a pitcher of Sweetwater Blue as we browsed through the menu selections of jalapeo fried calamari (I love calamari, but this sounds too spicy for me), crab legs, fish baskets, and a few chicken options for those who don't appreciate the sea. We couldn't make up our minds so we ordered the Six Feet Under Steamer to split - a platter of 8 crab legs, New Zealand mussels, fresh clams, broiled shrimp, sliced sausage, corn on the cub, and roasted potatoes (I think that was it). Wow! It was definitely plenty of food for two, but if you have the courage, order it (for 3). . . Our waitress was fun and polite the whole time. She consistently came to check up on us and the conversations were effortless. I love when waitresses or waiters take time to talk and connect with the customers and not seem overwhelmed or overworked. She even came by once it got dark and gave us a candle for ambiance - the wind blew it out about 5 minutes later, but it was a sweet gesture. . . After our hands smelled like we ourselves were digging in the oceans for our dinner, a cockroach crawled across my plate! Luckily I'm not a little five year old girl who screams at the sight of a six or eight legged creature, and I understand that we were sitting on top of a roof in Atlanta at sundown where cockroaches or any bugs are almost impossible to avoid.
