ReviewID: LFiLbQ6rNNjHS3mWwDmKEA
ReviewerID: vjIVi7SCuwyKPTiSvSlQ1g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Belly Shack
Category: Latin American
I'm currently sitting on my couch watching "It's the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown." In front of me are the remnants of a pretty damn good meal.. . Yes, I visited Belly Shack again. I fell victim after I failed to realize it was closed on Mondays and couldn't go with the lady yesterday for a dinner date. Tonight, it was just nasty out, and I couldn't bring myself to go home and cook.. . So I stopped into the muchly hyped restaurant and ordered take-out. I ordered the Asian Meatball sandwich again. Still yummy.. . This  time though, I got the much talked about Hot and Sour soup. Chicken/Hominy/Hot and Sour with tortilla chips. Maybe it's Charlie Brown...but this made me miss home and my grandfather's hot and sour that I drank as a little girl. Though this soup has nothing on his, it was delicious. I am obviously biased to the traditional hot and sour (being Chinese and all) but this was just great! Sad to say, I have not had Hot and Sour as good in Chicago at an actual Chinese restaurant. To all you Southerners....Mian Gan (Cantonese spelling??)...but, you know, the dried/fried noodles that come with soup in an American-Chinese restaurant...well, think of the tortilla strips as a trendy version of those. Yum yum yum and definitely made me nostalgic. I will definitely be back to at least get the soup bc of those things. (Call me a dork.). . The place was pretty packed for a Tuesday night, which I think is due to the hype it's gotten recently. I had to wait about 15-20 minutes food, but I think it was ready in less because I ran across the street to the tea shop, and it was ready by the time I came back. Only complaint...it is a bit pricey for what you get. My meal was around $14 and I left a $2 carry-out tip....at least this time I'm really full. So 4 stars is my final decision.. . Ugh...I don't know if I'm going to be able to leave Charlie Brown and go out tonight. At least I worked out tonight. Ha.
