ReviewID: LhZyhx_uy3oauaMSVdp9ew
ReviewerID: ggOhKph3o-PPHq7EFEzVyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
DAIKOKUYA is just as good as everyone says it is.  . . This past Sunday, my friend and me went down there to try out the Ramen that's supposed to be so great. Anyway, we get there at about 3pm and there's people waiting, of course. . . Since this is our first time, we discovered that you write your name on a sign up sheet that's just inside the door (on a chair) and remember your number, since they don't take reservations and it's first come first serve. They called out #12 and we were #31, LOL.. . So we waited for about 40-45-minutes. It's great to people watch and stuff, so my advice is to have a snack before you go there! If you're really starving, there's a small market down the street to buy some snacks/drinks until you can get into the restaurant.. . We finally get called and we sit at the counter, felt like we won the lottery! I order the "Daikoku Ramen", we split the Gyoza, and my friend gets the bento with tempura and chicken teriyaki (he's not a soup fan).. . The gyoza was a little odd shaped, looking sort of flat, but they tasted fantastic! Topped with a lot of green onions, the gyoza was delicious and the dipping sauce was mixed perfectly.. . Then the Ramen came. Moment of truth...It has a caramel color, as you can see in the pix that other yelpers posted, and I thought it was going to be thick and creamy. It isn't. It's light and has just the right amount of seasonings. I loved it! There's all kinds of stuff in it like bamboo shoots (I would've liked more), green onions, bean sprouts, Ramen noodles (that are just the right consistency), one egg and the cha-shu (pork). . . The egg was amazing and I really don't like eggs. This egg was hard boiled enough so that the whites and most of the yolk were firm, but in the center the yolk was still moist. And when I bit into the egg, it also had a well seasoned taste. I'm not sure what they soak the egg in but it's fantastic! . . On to the pork. It melted in my mouth. No chewy meat here. . . Then bento was pretty good to. The chicken teriyaki was deep fried with crispy skin and had the teriyaki sauce on it. Delicious.. . Anyway, if you don't mind waiting around you should definitely check out Daikokuya, especially if you love Ramen. Maybe in the summer time it won't be so crowded. Just make sure you bring a snack!. . I'll definitely go back. BTW, since the place is small I would advise not going with a group larger than five people, because you might not be able to get seated together or as soon as seats become available.
