ReviewID: LifD_LJEBAKcgNHshleXmw
ReviewerID: m5heP-HiotiMxmbdI0CmDg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
A magnetically enchanting and spellbinding experience! WOW! what'll I have to tell my grandkids... adopted ones, of course. . . First off, last night, 11/4/2009, marks the 100th anniversary of Magic Castle and it was an honor to be amongst such a talented array of magicians. Everywhere you turn, you see a magician that is standing/sitting/lying.. ever so aloof around you, only to dazzle you with their incredible tricks and powers that'll turn your head into mush. So what, go ahead, have one more glass of that absolut and you probably can stumble onto the stage floor. Please, just don't fall asleep, that's just rude.. . When first driving up a steep passage into Magic Castle, you're instantly enthralled by the castle, but terrified by the fact that you might not have changed your brakes recently, and that your car will roll down in an instant's notice. . . Next, when you're actually in the Magic Castle, you're instantly captured by the photos and all the little refined details on the walls, in the telephone booths, in the bar area.. EVERYWHERE! Ladies, if you do go, please wear walkable heels so you don't end up butchering your feet in your fervent pursuit of shows. . . Even though the shows were good, for me, the magicians chillin' near the bar were the ones that made the Wednesday evening, one of the most memorable and riveting nights of my life. I want to thank five particular magicians, especially, because they made the initially slow night, into an encapsulatingly fantastic and mesmerizing world that gave me a new direction in life. No, silly, I ain't gonna be a magician, cuz I ain't got the dough, but... it certainly lights up my understanding of the pursuit of happiness. . .  To tell ya the truth, I'm an exceptionally skeptical person when it comes to magic and reality, but Magic Castle, and their uncanny magicians, are slowly turning me into a true believer of life and miracles. Miracles do happen, just on a more frequent basis in Magic Castle. ;)
