ReviewID: LIULGdZz1GqZM5VdgR3IHQ
ReviewerID: ZXH3X8qG_rTi4uEWpDphow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Honestly, I wish I could give this place more than 5 stars.  I've had the fortune of eating here twice, and while I would have given it 5 stars the first time, it was even better the second time around.. . Originally, when I called for a reservation, they said they only had availability for the shorter tasting menu for the date we were going.  However, when we got there, they said we could get the tour after all, thank goodness.  The wine pairing is very expensive but they're very flexible - I asked for an abbreviated wine pairing because I found it to be too much wine the first time I got the pairing, and they reduced the amount of each pour and also reduced the price accordingly.  They also came up with a beer pairing for my beer-loving dad.. . As for the dishes, I thought there were a couple misses the first time I went, but this time, I loved every dish except for one (uni), and that was more a function of not generally liking uni very much.  Some highlights:. .  - pork belly with cucumbers and thai spices/dressing on iceberg; this came with a shot of lemongrass/fish sauce/other thai flavors that smelled like hell but tasted amazing. .  - pigeonneau--Alinea is generally known for experimental/molecular gastronomy type food but they decided to throw one classical French dish in there and I'm so glad they did.  This was basically a tart with squab, foie gras, onions, and mushroom and was as good as anything I've had at nice French restaurants.  . .  - sweet potato--basically a sweet potato, bourbon and brown sugar croquette served on the end of a cinnamon stick.  people who had the shorter menu got this as part of the dessert but we got it in the middle. .  - truffle explosion--they always have this on the tour, and I'm so glad they do, this might be my favorite dish.  Love truffle and it's never been better than when exploding in liquid form in my mouth. .  - this dessert that was basically a tube filled with layers of creme fraiche, hibscus jelly, and bubble gum tapioca pearls...those bubble gum tapioca pearls were definitely one of the best parts of a dessert i've ever had. .  - they were doing a pretty new dish...basically, they cleared our whole table for the second to last course and laid down a sterile, waterproof tablecloth.  then grant achatz came out with a bunch of small bowls and proceeded to create a piece of art directly onto the tablecloth.  he made this picture of malted ice cream, blueberry in different textures, chocolate, and maple spheres.  it was absolutely gorgeous and quite large.  we completely ravished this dish.. . So yeah, I think this place deserved more than 5 stars despite the astronomical prices and the sometimes cold service because the food is just on a completely different level than anywhere else I've been save maybe one or two places.  I've had some of the other "best restaurants" in the country, and I just think Alinea is so much more innovative while still remaining delicious.
