ReviewID: LiVJD-ySZC7_ZAyW6HHMKg
ReviewerID: QmH5O1JHDOBvUqzr4vz5-Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
In honor of my 100th review, and my experience at lunch today, I thought I would offer my definition of the expression...Foodgasm.. . Foodgasm [food-gaz-uh m]. . -noun. The physical and emotional sensation experienced at the peak of sensual excitation resulting from stimulation caused by the intake of spectacular and delicious food. . . -verb. To have a foodgasm.. . Today I had a significant and prolonged foodgasm...no really, the earth moved! I had the most amazing lunch at Craft today, and I left satisfied, dazed and physically and emotionally spent. I am still unsure whether it was one prolonged foodgasm or multiple foodgasms, I just know that I liked it...and I want more! Take me Tom!!!. . Here's what we ate:. . Baby beet and gorgonzola salad- I didn't think there could be a beet salad better than the one at Crafttsteak...this one is better because of the addition of gorgonzola. I could not stop eating these amazing beets.. . Braised Lamb shoulder-two large medallions, perfectly cooked...you could cut them with a spoon.. . Niman Ranch Flatiron steak-OMG I almost fainted by this point...the foodgasm was getting more intense and I think my brain was deprived of oxygen.. . Organic farm chicken with black eyed peas-Wow! The chicken was so juicy and flavorful....drooling...eyes rolling back in the head.. . Green beans-sauteed in butter with just a heady hint of nutmeg...amazing! Yes! Yes! Yes!. . Baby broccoli-perfectly cooked and delicious.. . We were  stuffed to the gills but I had to have the Maple Bacon Ice Cream!!! Seriously, does it get any better...bacon Ice Cream? Well maybe chocolate bacon ice cream, but why be greedy.. . I ordered the three ice cream sampler :. Maple bacon- Crazy amazing! The maple was subtle as was the bacon flavoring, and it had large bacon bits in it. Heaven!!!. . Black Pepper- It tasted like black pepper...it was spicy and had a serious burn to it that was immediately cooled by the creaminess of the ice cream itself. It was an amazing experience in my mouth.. . Basil-the ice cream is bright green and tastes just like basil...I love basil.. . O.K., so I want to have Tom Coliccio's children! Yes, I want to have his little bald children. I'll be his top chef...or bottom...or side...
