ReviewID: lJ2DgExvtd8N4WPKpA_fzw
ReviewerID: aJS6dlQEOcEYGix1_8VmaA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Wurstkuche is pretty close to my work and so it wasn't long before this place came to my attention. apparently some guys at work have been going here for quite some time now. . . I really enjoy the variety of Grilled Sausages this place has to offer. The place has a pretty clean neat atmosphere. and there seems to be for the most part plenty of seating. When i went over the weekend it appeared that you could also call ahead and reserve a table for a large party if you want to make sure you have some seats saved for you and your friends.. Seating is inside at the front along the wall, or in the back they have smaller tables, or bench type tables (this is where the bar is located anyway), as well as small tables offered for outside seating.. . So the food. the food is pretty good....i really enjoyed trying some of the different sausages they offered. so far I have eaten the alligator and pork, rattlesnake &amp; rabbit, sun dried tomato &amp; Mozzarella that has smoked chicken and turkey in it.....the bratwurst, and the hot italian..... . so far my favorite...the rattlesnake and rabbit...the juicy...softer meat was very tasty...and didn't taste at all gamey like i had feared it would...in fact compared to the turkey which was a bit heartier I preferred the snake! I ate this with sour kraut.... . The buns are lightly grilled and are waaaay better than regular hot dog buns...and they offer 5 different mustards for you to try....my fav...i don't have one!...I put a glob of different mustard for every bite!!! hahaha but will say the dijon got the most play!. . all in all this place is pretty boss....if you like sausages then this is a great spot to hang out....even if you don't eat meat try one of the veggie sausages...my vegetarian friend said they were yummy.. . Fries....fries are a must when you come here....the Belgian fries have restored my faith in fries!!!....if you are hip on the Belgian fries they may differ slightly.....for example...I have been told that Belgian fries are usually cut thicker....this place however does one kick as job regardless...and i don't even know if i would want them thicker.... . you can get your fries in a klien (small) gets 1 dipping sauce or a groot (large) which you will get your choice of 2 sauces... the klien is definitely enough for 1 person...2 if you don't gorge on fries....the large...good for 2-3 people....but again if you love fries you may want the small to yourself...it's more than enough for anyones hunger...as far as sauces go...i love the blue cheese bacon walnut....followed close by the sundried tomato mayo...the pesto mayo was pretty good too..... . there are some great sodas to try too....i'd just stay away from the Ginger Beer...I thought it would be like root beer...i was wrong!...it kinda burned...hehehe.....orange soda..is my personal fav.....but there is also this spiced apple...like soda....TRY IT!...i kid you not..it tastes just like a damn apple pie!!!!!! i swear!...drinks are not really cheap...but they are all glass bottled sodas...that you probably don't normally drink.... . this place offers free water...which is pretty rad...cause you don't gotta ask for it.... . they offer alot of beers....some very tasty ones in fact...but the prices are pretty insane....(that's why i normally drink orange soda! hhehehe)...the 1 saving grace in this place is pabst blue ribbon is $2.50....thank got for Pabst...even though that's still a sickening price for pabst...but everything else is $5.25 and up!!!!. . the cost isn't too bad..but this ain't no $1 dog joint.... . . they have been expanding into the warehouse type area next...and have been for some time...it's slowly getting finished..and from what i hear...they are talking about having bands there on certain nights too.... . it looks like they currently have a DJ or something (because we saw turn tables set up when last we were there). . but....in short...you can bet your sweet a$$ i'll be there soon....drooool... . oh yeah, and the girl at the register this past saturday was pretty cute too.
