ReviewID: ljG56vep5SnuvaJJGohNdg
ReviewerID: 7sIrydiVNzLMGPeHMYMk3Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
When I arrived and took one look at the packed place and long list of names of people waiting to be seated on the clipboard hanging on the door, I almost left. My friend had suggested the place because I had wanted to go somewhere with soupy goodness (of course ramen fits the bill) and she needed a place close to the 10 fwy. The wait ended up being a mostly uncomfortable 30 minutes outside in the chilly air (the server kindly told my friend and me that we couldn't wait inside and there I was sick with a cough and cold), but it was well worth the small sufferings! We sat at the counter, but we didn't mind. The server was attentive and friendly, even as he answered questions that I'm sure every other customer asks. . . We each had a 1/2 order (less than $5, plus extra for each topping, but the downside is that you can't get extra noodles) of pork ramen without the pork, hers with hard noodles, medium base, light oil, sweet, firm corn and spinach, mine with medium noodles, medium base, light oil, flavored egg and seaweed, and we also had a side of delicious, large fried tofu covered with yummy bento flakes and green onions in a ponzu-type sauce, and an order of fried squid balls with a creamy center and  bento shavings accompanied by a sweet mayonnaise sauce. Each spoonful of ramen with just the right texture of straight noodles in flavorful, not-too-fatty broth sprinkled with the various toppings hit the spot, although I still think the broth at Santouka on Centinela and Daikokuya in J-town are much better. However, it's great to know that there's a quality ramen place close by when I can't or don't want to make that drive. . . My friend and I appreciate the "build your own ramen" concept. The bill came out to about $25 before tip. We were both content, and definitely could've eaten more had we given ourselves the gluttonous chance to do so. I think I'll be back!
