ReviewID: ljGcDbeN3ID-rpUXxV10PA
ReviewerID: UHm2auqzAq18Du8Dz2EjMg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
Sepia is a winner.. . Any restaurant that can make gnocchi live up to its reputation deserves a big nod. Sepia was on my radar for an entire year. I finally ate there this past weekend and I was impressed.. . I sat at a round table for a party of six that had its own private alcove. The decor is an interesting mix of vintage, industrial, and earth all packaged in a modern way. There is a lot of interesting texture both physically and visually. The restaurant space used to be a print shop. The owners wisely decided to preserve the original feel while giving a 21st century facelift. The food is also an extension of this. The cuisine is deeply rooted in American cooking with some added flair:. . Pork Porterhouse with buttermilk mashed potatoes and collards, Shortribs braised in Belgian Ale with red cabbage and spiced bread spaeztle, etc.. . The service was very solid. But it is the food, IMO, that headlines here. None of the menu items exceeds $30 for main courses, but that doesn't restrain what you experience on the plate. Kudos to the Chef for orchestrating a menu that intelligently combines ingredients that taste as good as they read on the menu.. . My app of gnocchi with braised lamb and gremolata delivered the joy of simplicity; Italian cooking at its best. Each gnocchi was a pillow of soft potato covered in an unctuous hearty glaze of braised lamb jus. The gremolata pierced right through with lemon zest and garlic. Dee-Lish!. . I sampled the laughing bird shrimp with cheddar grits. This was yummy too, but no where near as harmonious as the gnocchi.. . For main course, I had the flat iron steak with roasted hen of the woods and bone marrow beignets. The steak was perfectly cooked and rested. The beignets were excellent. . . The food was consistently executed well across everyone's dishes. We didn't sample dessert. The check avg was $70-$80 a head for  glass of wine, tax, and tip. This puts Sepia up there with Avec in terms of quality relative to value. . . Like I said, Sepia is a winner.
