ReviewID: LjKHEo9MmtLYbXkZelZIIw
ReviewerID: WZxIjASuzJi6VKX5nVljVg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
I don't usually write reviews, especially ones this long, but I just had to after eating there this past weekend.  My family and I went here on a Sunday before seeing a show at Disney Hall.  Since their shuttle service to and from Disney Hall isn't offered on Sundays, we walked from Disney Hall.  Only 10 minutes away, the restaurant is tucked away in a little shopping center.  You don't realize how large it is until you're inside.  Our food experience here was absolutely amazing.  Sundays is also the day they serve their tapas menu.  We had a large group and our waiter was very patient with us and explained how tapas work and recommended good dishes.  We ordered a variety of dishes at first to try out so we could order more of ones we really liked.  The only problem was... we liked them all!  The small little plates were perfect for sharing and we felt satisfied without overeating.  Some dishes to try...the fresh fish ceviche (has a nice kick to it and served with plantain chips), baby back ribs (melt in your mouth), tri-tip (tender and sooo flavorful), the spinich empanada, lamb meatballs, portuguese sausage (has great crispy onions), sauteed calamari (great dipping sauce too), jalepeno deviled eggs, lamb chops, olives, mixed chips... everything really tasted delicious!  Their drinks are also very good.  Best was their cucumber elderflower margarita, sounds weird but has a great flavor.  This restaurant also deserves credit for using earth-friendly practices.  They have filter onsite to purify water and evn to make it sparkling.  This way they don't waste plastic bottles.  They also use Monterey Bay Aquarium approved sustainable fish.  They also buy locally grown produce.  Couple of tips... when going with a large party and bringing your own bottles, they only charge one corkage fee if you buy one of their bottles (The Prisoner is excellent).  Also, if you are a KCRW member, you get 15% off (excluding alcohol). Really one of the best, spicy, flavorful places I've been to in a long time!  Plus the head chef is going to be on the 2nd season of Top Chef Masters and she makes great tasty vegetarian food. Love it!
