ReviewID: lk1f8D-igE79oK9jz3cvkA
ReviewerID: _P_MKB4_rfRVSmTfxBdc6Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
beer .. check.. . bib.. check.. . piles of shellfish in plastic bags.. check.. check.. check.. check... . wow.. that's a lot of food. . . the hardest decision at this place is "what kind of spice?". . whatever that question means but they expect one of the following answers:. ragin cajun. lemon pepper. garlic butter. or the WHOLE SHA-BANG.... . on top of this you determine your spice level.. mild.. medium.. or extra spicy.. NOTE: the normal spicy is medium.. there is no in between medium and extra spicy.. . and coming from me.. medium is good enough.. unless u want to burn a direct hole from your stomach to ur exit hole.. . . well we got ragin cajun and garlic butter as our flavoring and medium for most of our lbs of bags and then the crawfish we got extra spicy.. . I would suggest just sticking to ragin cajun..the garlic butter will make u feel a little sick because it's so heavy and full off of raw garlic.. . and i love my garlic usually but this was probably 3 heads of garlic in one bag alone. . . But the favorite throughout the restaurant was the whole SHA-BANG.. you hear them yelling it across the place back and forth... maybe it was just the servers to create excitement.. . either way.. the crawfish which was extra spicy ragin cajun.. was.. too spicy.. well in the sense there was so much spice on it that it looked dirty you were pretty much licking off chunks of seasoning and then sucking out the seasoned juices from the body.. . the king crab legs i got for my mom.. that's her favorite.. it was nice because you actually had meat to chow down on that wasn't drenched in the seasoning. but you could taste it from the shell.. . My favorite was the shrimp, as i mentioned before the garlic butter wasn't my favorite but i did like the ragin cajun with medium heat.. . but they should give you plastic gloves along with the plastic bib.. i didn't so much get splattered on my bib but juices were running down my arms and i had seen a friend's cat earlier who had needle sharp claws and any time i dug my hands into the red sauce to grab another shrimp, it brought back memories of the cat's claws piercing through my skin.. . your fingers will smell for a day or so.. . you will most likely have food left over if you are not careful.. . order some plain fries to help with the seasoning and also stomach acid. the fries taste like an offspring of mcdonald and in and out fries.. they are really good.. . beers - domestic $2.50. import $3.00.. . our bill - 3 people $75 - 5 lbs of goodness or so... . tip - take some of your food home and eat it with some rice.. it's really good.. but after the first time you open up that bag again.. you might not want to smell the cajun spices for awhile.
