ReviewID: LKcaWGBhqwbQVp5I83I14w
ReviewerID: BGGEU2Bvj1bdcN8AGofazQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Shaun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
This is my first 5 star review...I think...oh no there was one other but don't worry about that. What I'm trying to get at is that This place deserves the highest star rating that is available.. I've lived in the neighborhood of Shaun's for a little while and have thought of going in plenty of times but understood that it was going to probably be a pricey dining experience.  . Since Scoutmob gave a HUGE deal for Shaun's I was on my way!  I took my girlfriend and oh boy were we impressed!. We arrived around 7 and there was already an hour and a half wait for tables inside without a reservation. We were offered outside seating or waiting for open seats at the bar.  They have a very quaint courtyard in the middle of the building which we decided was worth a try. Even though it was in the high 80's the courtyard was quite comfortable. They have one of those huge sun setter awning things, so there was plenty of shade. Our server was very polite, friendly and helpful. We ordered some cocktails and checked out the menu.  The menu was small but excellently varied. We decided to share a salad to start, it was an incredible greens and mushroom salad with goat cheese. I'm not usually one for goat cheese, but it was 'effing fantastic. We split the salad and ordered Steak Frittes and Crab cakes for entrees.  Both entrees were cooked impeccably. Medium rare steak actually cooked medium rare, with duck fat fried french fries (btw Duck fat....so in for 2010). The Crab cakes were also perfect, served with a cabbage and a mustard sauce. It was truly a great meal from start to finish. It was made a little more special when the staff retracted the sun setter shade and the evening sky was above us. The courtyard has lights strung between the walls which made the place look great.. . We were certainly full by the end of the meal and very very happy. The restaurant is beautiful, the staff were great and using the Scoutmob deal was a such a pleasure. I'm now a huge fan of Shaun's and will be checking out his new restaurant Yeah Burger on the westside.  This is clearly a high end restaurant and I'll be making reservations for every special occasion that I have from here on out!
