ReviewID: LKHlFNT90pZj4ise8FoZLw
ReviewerID: dSBkPxqUjJ9W-RZdR9XN7w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Coobah
Category: Latin American
Coobah, Cuba, how happy thy Mojitos make me after a long day at work!. . I first found out about Coobah through Groupon - given that the restaurant is merely 6 blocks away from me, you can imagine my surprise when I finally visited this gem!. . The moment you walk through the door, a breeze of exotic spices, refreshing "Yerba Buena" spearmint and hearty smile welcome you into the restaurant! The walls were hand-stained stucco in red earth, with a full bar to the left and plenty of cozy, intimate seating to the right.  I fell in love with Coobah at first sight - How can anyone resist their smoking temptress, the "Pan Seared Diver Scallops"? Every scallop was perfectly sized atop a sea of butternut squash. The "Jibarito" presents jerked pork in a Tower of Pisa, held between caramelized yucca with a onion-marmalade finish. When the appetizers finally arrived, the scallops practically flew off the plate!! We learned our lesson and tried to pace ourselves with the Jibarito... but the oooh-jerrrrked-carnita was too good to resist!   Our server was great and very tentative, she refilled our glasses constantly and offered great wine pairing choices while we pondered on our next prize...... . As I looked around the room, attempting to figure out the Holy Grail of Spanish-Conquistador-meet-Philippines-Island, I discovered that almost everyone else were having the night's special - the Beef Short Ribs Adobo! We went ahead with the short ribs, and ordered another Pork Tenderloin upon the server's recommendation!  . . Alas, the entrees arrived. The Pork Tenderloin was surprising succulent, with a stuffing-like combo of shrimp, bacon, coconut and pineapple. We were initially worried that the dish might be too heavy, but it wasn't greasy at all with a great side portion of jasmine rice!  Now... the short ribs... I must admit, upon first glance, I was skeptical about the ribs. They appeared charred and was much smaller than I anticipated. But BOY - talk about juicy, melt-in-your-mouth ribs! The meat gave away with a light tug of my fork, and its complex flavor can only be a result of serious marinating! We later learned from the chef that the meat has been marinated for a day, later stewed with additional fresh spices!  You know you've come to the right place if you get filled up before the desserts, especially for someone with my sweet tooth!!. . Looking at the dessert menu, Coobah's dessert were limited to its caramelized yucca and a Pina Colada bread pudding. But hey - who said desserts have to be served on a platter?  The next time I am back to Coobah, I will definitely try out their signature cocktails. I've been eyeing the Leopardi Brut with scents of peach, apple, and anise (!), it simply looks too sexy to resist!. . All in all, I will definitely recommend Coobah for a date, cozy night out with your sweetheart, or even girls night out! The food quality and service alone deserve this 5star rating, wait till you try their Mojitos ;)
