ReviewID: LM3ewUHtDykRCsmUPxBRiw
ReviewerID: WWnhqRnWWjutMqh-2SzEuQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Excellent, Umami Burger has replaced Kikkoman as my first association when I hear the word "umami."  Goddamn, those commercials get stuck in your head.. . My mom and I decided to check this place out after a rave review from my dad, so we came for an early Saturday lunch right at opening.  By the time we left, the place was packed.. . The space is tiny and very cute, with the clean-cut trendy semi-Asian decor you'd expect from the name.  The service is friendly and reasonably attentive, and the food is excellent.. . We started with the beet and truffle salad, and while I know Umami is a burger joint, this salad was worthy of the loftiest wine bar.  It was made with candy-striped beets, arugula, toasted almond, ricotta, and a creamy truffle dressing.  The presentation was beautiful, with the beets sliced in a way that resembled tuna sashimi.  This was a balanced dish in which every element played a part - the sweetness of the beets, the creaminess of the ricotta, the smokey nuttiness of the almond, and the warm evocative earthiness of that truffle dressing.. . We split the port and stilton burger and the umami burger, and while the port and stilton was tasty, it was no match for the umami.  The port and stilton came with blue cheese and port caramelized onions, and it was pretty good, but not quite as good as expected.  I wanted more stink from the blue cheese and more of a sweet edge from the onions, but the flavors kind of collapsed a little in contact with patty and cheese.  The umami burger, on the other hand, was delicious.  My mom and I were purring in our chairs.  This designer burger came with elements calculated to achieve maximum umami - a parmesan crisp, roasted tomatoes, shiitake mushrooms, umami ketchup, and onions.  I could go into the saltiness of the crisp, the acidity of the tomatoes, blah blah blah, but really, this burger just delivered incredible mouth-filling flavor with richness and depth, masterful balance, and great meat to boot.. . We also ordered a side of sweet potato fries.  These were a good thickness, and pretty decent, but they could've been better seasoned.  They was nothing irresistible about them, and most of them stayed untouched.  I would consider getting a side if you have a big appetite, though, as the burgers are moderately sized.. . One downside to this place - I wanted a Diet Coke, but no dice.  I got an iced green tea instead and it came pre-sweetened, with what I can only imagine was a quarter cup of sugar.  No matter.  No lack of Coca Cola products is going to deter me from making a return visit.  Umami...is in every drop...of Umami Burger.
