ReviewID: lMOx7RbICHIDSjyx0gBHLQ
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
I was a little skeptical about making a return visit to Ford's Filling Station because my first experience was just okay (not great) and there seemed to be a lot of mediocre reviews on Yelp.  But Yelper Daniel G. wanted to try it so we met our friend Van here for lunch.. . It was a nice afternoon day and Culver City was packed with people (especially Tender Greens--a pretty decent and affordable salad and sandwich place).  Ford's Filling Station was kind of slow at the beginning, but it really picked up after 12:15pm or so.. . The outside patio sits adjacent to Tender Greens outdoor patio and it is good for people watching.  It is also a nice patio.  Nice brown wood tables and comfortable chairs.  Good temperature and great sunlight (bright but still shaded enough so that you don't have to wear sunglasses).. . We started with the bacon wrapped dates and they were good--nice mix of sweet and salty.  The sweet dates had some cheese in the center and were wrapped with crispy bacon.  The dish was garnished with a little bit of frisee.  I liked the bacon wrapped dates though I've had better.  The one difference was the bacon.  I've been to other places (like AOC) that have used better and more flavorful bacon.. . I saw someone's fish and chips and the dish looked good so I ordered it.  It was a nicely presented plate and even though the portion of fish was small (about the size of two chicken pieces from Long John's Silver), there was a lot of food on the plate for $16 (not cheap but reasonable).. . The beer batter was very good.  Crispy.  Also not greasy.  I liked the deep fried asparagus the best (good flavor from the asparagus).  This kind of reminded me of those deep fried vegetables they sell at carnivals or county fairs.  There were onion rings too and I liked those even though they could have used a little more seasoning.. . They used cod for the fish.  When I cut open the fish, a lot of water oozed out.  Some fish hold a lot of water, which could have caused this.  It may have also been frozen (and thus the cod could have been holding even more water).  The fish was okay.  I've definitely had more tender and fresher tasting cod.  The tarter sauce was a little more tart than I am used too, but I thought it went well with the fish.  I did not ask for malt vinegar (which would have been good); I am sure they probably have it.. . The chips (fries) looked a little soggy, but they were good.  Hot, crisp and with the skin still on.  They also reminded me of carnival and county fair food (the kind of fries that go well with salt and vinegar).  The fries were similar to the fries at Five Guys Burgers and Fries though I like Five Guys' fries better.. . There was also a salad of spinach, carrots and frisee, which was actually more of a garnish.  Still, it provided some nice balance to the heavily fried plate.. . We opted to share a dessert and the waiter alluded to the strawberry shortcake, but Daniel wanted to go elsewhere.  I remember having a really good banana split here on my last visit.  On this visit, the banana split was not on the menu and nothing on the dessert menu really stood out.  The waiter suggested the roasted peaches (because they were first of the season) so we went with that.. . The dessert was not a big portion.  The roasted peaches were two peaches with the pits still inside.  There was also some caramel, a little powdered sugar, a cinnamon stick, and some vanilla bean ice cream.  The peaches were hard to eat with a spoon.  They were okay but they were quite soggy and just too much work to eat.  They were definitely first of the season because they had a little bit of tartness to them.. . The vanilla bean ice cream was good, but the dish really needed something else.  It could have used some wafers, cookies, cake, pastry or something to make it more of a full dessert.  In the end, it felt more like a dessert for people who aren't big dessert fans.. . Service was good.  Food came out quick and the waiter was friendly and attentive.. . Ford's Filling Station has some good things about it.  With the exception of dessert, all of us enjoyed our food.  For lunch, Ford's Filling Station is a decent spot.  The fish and chips seemed very popular and I can see why.  That being said, the fish part of it was a little underwhelming.  There are definitely some things with the menu that could be improved, but with lunch options $12-$18 and a pretty good atmosphere, Ford's Filling Station may be worth a try if you work or live in the area.. . Parking is available in the structure next to Ford's.  It is free for the first two hours.
