ReviewID: lOaF5aU2IqzlsrwDr7zd3w
ReviewerID: TVgDN-CZ0wdszYCFXDtOug
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Agave Restaurant
Category: Tex-Mex
Finally, I made it to Agave. Not sure what took me so long as I drive by here everyday and have only heard good things about this place. It was a Saturday afternoon (Valentine's eve) and Agave popped into my head as a place to meet my friend for dinner. I asked for a reservation at 9p and they said they could take us at 9:15 - not a problem. . . When I arrived, my friend was sitting at the bar holding the last open stool for me. It was pretty crowded, but the bar service was efficient. The drink menu is extensive - several margarita choices, lots of tequilas as you would expect, good beer selection and very nice wine offerings. Agave is noted for their excellent margaritas but I opted for a beer.. . Upon being seated at our table, a bowl of fresh, warm, lightly salted chips and excellent fresh salsa were brought to us. We ordered the spicy shrimp &amp; poblano spring rolls and also wanted some calamari. Our server suggested a half order of the calamari as he said the portion is big. I appreciated his suggestion on two levels - one it was nice that he wasn't concerned about knocking a few bucks off our bill and two, the calamari was just okay. However, the spring rolls were tasty especially when dipped in the red pepper jelly. . . I ordered the slow cooked short ribs marinated in ancho chiles &amp; honey and topped with a chile glaze. They were served on top of goat cheese &amp; roasted yellow corn mashed potatoes. EXCELLENT! The short ribs were very tender and the flavor was mouthwatering. The mashed potatoes were rich, but that didn't stop me from eating every last bite. They were too delicious to leave. Of course, I had to have dessert and ordered the banana plantain dark chocolate cheesecake. This dessert was also nothing short of excellent. . . The service was great, not rushed at all and they were very busy. . . I am definitely a fan and Agave will be on my regular rotation of fave restaurants.
