ReviewID: LOEzZ5WK47mIAZGZzX2tgQ
ReviewerID: cqXXdLyVKlpckdu5odG5sw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: R Thomas Deluxe Grill
Category: American (New)
I can't even begin to describe how bad my time at R. Thomas was, but since it is amusing, I will try. I ordered a seaweed salad, I was going to order a small, but the waiter told me the large (at 6.95) was 2.5 times bigger. Out came a large plate with a tiny cabbage leaf stuffed with sea weed- less than the size of a tuna can. I asked the waiter what size the small was and he said he was just as perplexed as I am, because when he ordered it it was always much bigger. He said I could talk to the manager, because he was afraid to. So the manager came over, and in none of the hippy spirit that the menu attempted to convey, put on his worst attitude and basically asked me what my problem was. I asked him what size a small was- since what I had was large and he said it was the size of a monkey dish-The dish they serve ice cream in if it comes with your meal- the same size as the cabbage leaf!!! My friend who has worked as a waitress for years became boisterous and said "Sir I know what a monkey dish is and that is the same size," at which point I just asked him to take it back. It was a very bad experience. THEN to add insult to injury or to pile on to the hilarity, the waiter, who is basically a nice guy, comes over and gets down on one knee and apologizes. "I am sorry the portions are so small," he said. "I really hope you come back, Next time you should order the tuna sand witch because it also comes with a seaweed salad and the portion is a good size so you don't have to worry about being cheated or jewed out of anything.". I joked with my friends that I should have said "Yes, as a Jewish woman, I take offense to this portion size.". "You cannot Jew a Jew!"". . I have overheard the employees at Krystal Burger off of lawrenceville highway talking amongst themselves and they are FAR more progressive and personable than anyone at R. Thomas. I would rather eat fast food than be subjected to this faux progressive food place that is as regimented and money oriented and rude as any major corporation. . . (My friends who dined with me--the Paddy and the Jap agree)
