ReviewID: loXa_c46m8-Iqx-k41ee0Q
ReviewerID: 9spaxJyv-_29_AeeFS5T3A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
I've never had better French toast in my life. It's not just the best French toast in LA, it's the best French toast I've eaten in every corner of North America. . . Start with a cup of coffee or espresso while you wait outside, because if you come anytime after 10:30am on a weekend, you're going to wait a while. It's not as bad a wait as the Griddle, by any stretch, but they eagerly offer you coffee or juice to ease your wait, and you can stand around outside and watch everybody eating the best French toast you could every imagine and make fun of all of the weirdo Scientologists strolling by, because, yes, Square One is located directly behind the Scientology Center (the big blue former hospital on Sunset &amp; L Ron Hubbard Way).. . The fruit bowl is mind-blowing, but pricey ($9!!). The French toast is the reason I keep coming back, they offer both hot and cold toppings that change out regularly, usually featuring a fresh cream, nuts and seasonal fruit. A message written on the chalkboard inside lets you know that Square One is serious about seasonal fruits and vegetables grown locally, enjoy the taste of California. And if you're a pseudo-diabetic like my best friend, get the baked egg dishes or the pressed egg sandwich, which is the hidden gem on the menu (the aoli is a nice touch!).. . Attentive wait &amp; host staff, polite bussers, and whomever is in the kitchen, God bless their soul, this is the best brunch restaurant in LA, and also the best brunch I've ever had. . . Parking is pretty terrible in the area, since it's so residential, but there is also a valet if you're a supporter of that terrible LA institution. . . Call ahead if you have a large group and they will do their damnedest to accommodate you, unlike a lot of other brunch spots around town.. . I wish to hell they decide to open up for dinner someday.. . If you live on the Westside, come on over, you'll probably see me there.
