ReviewID: LPAl8TBDDhaF8-Ehm6HT2Q
ReviewerID: v-pGGrjLlnJPUpblDCAVCQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
I grew up coming to this place... My first visit here I was about 5 years old... little did I know that 20 years later, it would be the talk of the town! It's located in Pico-Union and frequented by all sorts of people---from the Latino families who live in the community, to starvin' students, to westside yuppies, to businessmen here on a lunch break---you'll find them all!!!! . . Papa Cristos is always there to greet with his big JOLLY smile! I love him... He's friendly and always happy! And he has mastered his menu dishes---they are all delish (no need for details)!!! And best of all: GREAT PRICES! He also offers great bottled beverages that you can't find at your average restaurant/cafe...  And his desserts are yummy. On Thursday nights, they have wine night.. I have never been, but it's been on my "to-do" list for a few years!. . The fresh baked bread they sell in the deli is the best bread you'll ever have---La Brea Bakery, what?! And CHEAPER! Their deli meats and cheeses are fantastic. They have a wonderful array of different foods, spices, oils, condiments, even lotions, handsoaps, etc that you can purchase... And they nornally have samples of red and white wine up front (BUT ONLY IF YOU ARE 21---none of that funny business)!!! . . The dining room is "picnic-like." Don't come here expecting to eat with silverware on china plates... The place is faaaaaaar from fancy... You'll get a couple napkins, some plastic utensils, and a styrofoam plate! And all the posters plastered on the walls are kinda cheesy--- but hey! You are coming here for the food!!! And the food is, indeed, SUPERB!!!. . Don't forget to take a little handy dandy "Greek Language Tutorial" by the cash reg (Papa Cristo likes it when you use Greek phrases) and DEFINITELY sign up for their email promos... I constantly receive specials (ie: one they run a lot is 4$ for their normally priced 8$ gyros on certain weekdays).... . . If you haven't been here, you are missing out... If you are too afraid to come here because *gasps* "its sooo ghetto" then please do yourself and Papa Cristo a favor: Don't Come! =)
