ReviewID: lPdeP12vcXK_2_8ZXPf0kw
ReviewerID: ggTL9DNe7_4DPHr7FdXiJw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
We used a GroupOn coupon for lunch at Fraiche.   I was excited about going because I had heard such great things about the food.  Well, the food was excellent, but the service was terrible.  I don't know if they were unintentionally short staffed, but for whatever reason, our waitress seemed to get to us as an afterthought.  My husband ordered a beer.  After 7-8 minutes she returned to say they were out of that type of beer.  She took the new order and left, and did not bring the beer until he had almost finished his lunch, even though we asked again when the food was served.  I asked for a refill on iced tea and it never came.  . . It took a long time to get water, let alone bread, which was served with an olive oil to dip in.  What happened to the olive tepenade others wrote about?  . . We had the lamb sausage sandwich which was spicy and tasty, and the branzino fish, which was not served as the menu described with red peppers and fennel, but rather with a cold lentil salad.   It was very yummy, anyway, as was the Tarte Tatin for dessert.  We had to wait again for the check after requesting it at the time dessert was served because we had other things to get to.  . . I expect service where you are greeted by your waitress quickly, drink orders taken and filled, a recheck after food is delivered, refills to water or drinks as needed, a dessert order taken and check delivered promptly.  This was not the case at Fraiche.  There was a manager who stood around and talked to the waitstaff, but I never saw him lend a hand or check with the customers.  . . And we were not alone.  The table next to us waited 10 minutes for water after the bread was served, and when the man asked for a second glass of wine, it came 10 minutes later when he had finished his lunch.. . I'm glad we had a chance to experience the excellent food from the kitchen, but we won't go back because the service undermined the entire experience.
