ReviewID: lQAs2Ify1kKkATe5yt01DQ
ReviewerID: 8Aqr35f254lOeitNowt7ig
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
We were graciously taken to David Burke's for my man's birthday by his stepmom--hence, why we came here in the first place, we'd never be able to afford it, remember we'z poor! . . Our server Chris was super cool--he gave us the official spiel about their prize bull, nicknamed "Prime" whom they breed all their steak from; told us about allll the organic stuff they serve; helped us pick out a wine that wouldn't completely burn a hole through our already flaming pockets; and he was very attentive the entire evening, particularly when something went wrong...more on that later. . . The menu is similar to the other few hoity-toity steakhouses I've been to, but with a twist. For instance, the crab cake an appetizer was not a cake, it was a LOG of crab. Different and delicious! I had the beet, honeycomb and mache salad with pink peppercorn dressing; others had the lobster bisque, and the arugula, goat cheese and tomato salad with balsamic. The lobster bisque was verrrry rich and tasted of sherry...mmm. Talk about a meal in a bowl.... . When our steaks and sides came out, Chris immediately noticed that my classic filet mignon had been covered in blue cheese, NOT my requested order. I was so disappointed, I considered keeping it as not to sit there without a plate of food while everyone nom-nom-nomed on their steaks, but Chris let me keep the steak there, pick at it as I pleased, until my new steak came back out. Well, that was gracious of him...and I'll tell you, the bite I had was outstanding (minus the blue cheese flavor) and quite possibly the most tender, well-seasoned, melt-in-your-mouth bite of steak I've ever had. Too bad it was screwed up and I couldn't eat the rest, not even when I had done my best to scrape the blue cheese nastiness off. My second steak was fine, and only fine--they had rushed it, so the outside was more charred than the slower cooked first steak. Boo. I ate the whole thing anyway? . . The sides? My favorite of those we tried were the truffle asiago fries and the tempura green beans--you can always count on the fried stuff! The asparagus and shallots was nothing to write home about, and the cavetelli mac 'n cheese was sort of bland. . . But then...dun duhn dahhhh...dessert came. OMIGOD. Creme brulee with fruit sorbet and drunken peaches (I think that's what it was, it was absurdly awesome); freshly made donut holes with salty caramel, pastry creme, and apple ginger dipping sauces; and chocolate mousse cake with s'more ice cream. Every centimeter of the inside of my stomach was filled with dessert extravagance, and I was content.. . All in all, David Burke's was a solid experience--the staff was gracious, the food (for the most part) thoughtful and well-prepared, the atmosphere sleek and upscale. I'll come back...when I'm very rich and I want a redo on that steak.
