ReviewID: Lr4lAL829-t-NE724pIyUQ
ReviewerID: 0XiaV1Y2Qa6MAM0K6iAoOw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sapori Trattoria
Category: Italian
This place was recommended by friends of ours (who we also dined with that night) who absolutely love Sapori and bring everyone they know there. From the beginning to the end of our dining experience I can understand why. . . Lovely and welcoming atmosphere. I was surprised at how quiet it was, even as the back dining room we were in began to fill up. Very easy to have a conversation you can actually hear--big plus for me. Our server was great and a favorite of our friends. As such, he knew exactly who they were and what they liked. What really impressed me, though, was the friendly presence of Chef Anthony in the dining rooms. He took an active interest in greeting fellow diners and was introduced to us when he came to visit with our friends. . . Started with the Crostini Di Avocado and Polenta Fries. While I'm not an avocado fan, it was still an interesting variation. The Polenta Fries were great--wide sticks that were perfectly fried and an aioli that complimented them perfectly. The Gamberoni e Broccoli was my entree, but I really wish I had ordered something else, instead. The serving was massive and loaded with chopped shrimp and vegetables throughout and topped with two of the largest shrimp I've ever seen. Unfortunately, I found the shrimp flavor to be too overwhelming. My boyfriend ordered the Lasagna Vegetariana which was also generously portioned. Turns out we actually should've just switched entrees because we preferred the other. We were too stuffed to order dessert, but our server brought out a plate of tiramisu and bread pudding on the house. Both were delicious, but I just couldn't stop eating the bread pudding even though I typically avoid the stuff. The combination of warm vanilla brandy sauce, sweet raspberry sauce, and fresh bread flavors was addicting.. . I would definitely go back to try some other dishes. We went on a Tuesday, which is their Italian Style Tapas day; I'd really like to go back for that and try a few of those in place of a single entree.
