ReviewID: lRbEgbBtPJ1EnJdXfApgRw
ReviewerID: oAf9OkoaeE252ijLydHUqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chops
Category: Seafood
It'd been a while since I had a really good steak and last night fortunately was no disappointment. However I can't say the same about our snooty server. Thankfully his assistant and the rest of the servers who greeted us on the way in and out of the restaurant made up for his shortcomings. . . First the food. I ended up getting the "8 oz. Filet Mignon Barrel Cut" ($34), and ordered a side of the "Signature Fresh Corn Mash". The corn mash looked just like mashed potatoes except for the color (duh) and tasted similar to cream corn but so much better. My steak was in one word, perfect. 3 more words - thick, juicy, and delicious!. . My friend got the "8 oz. Signature Fliet Mignon Pepper Steak with brandy pepper sauce, mushrooms, port braised shallot, and potato confit" ($38). Hers was really good too, esp. the sauce. But I liked my steak more :) . . Our bill came and I was surprised to see they charged $9 for the corn mash when I had ordered the small portion for 1-2 persons ($5.50). Our server pointed out that he asked me earlier whether I wanted the corn for myself or for the table - I did say for the table b/c I was planning to share the side dish with my friend (after all, the small portion clearly states it's for 1-2 persons). But apparently when he said "for the table", he was thinking family portion - which I didn't get b/c there were just 2 people at our table. I think this misunderstanding could've been avoided if he clarified "for the table". Anyway, the server did correct the bill but throughout our dining experience, I never got any "warm" vibes from him. His answers were pretty curt and lacked the passion that I've come to appreciate at other similar high-end restaurants. Maybe he was just having a bad day.. . The steaks @ Chops are top-notch for sure but for me, a little too pricey for my current financial situation. We came here only because I had a $30 gift card for the "Summer Dine Around". I'd definitely like to come back - when times are better :)
