ReviewID: LRKgKxhoZhHk5Vf94HIDYA
ReviewerID: xhZehM9Zf5xCbZVekNhJ6A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
Let me write a brutally honest review of Porto's. I've been going there since they first opened. I'll start with the POSITIVES: The food...great quality, fresh, terrific breads...delicious desserts for every palate. You can't go wrong with a homemade 30 cent chocolate chip cookie. Head over to Starbucks and you'll pay $1.50! Very affordable sandwiches...some are tasty, so, so-so...salads are decent (your best bet is the Porto's house salad w/ grilled chicken) and the potato balls a great treat.. You can get a lot for less than $10. The owner is a FANTASTIC person...the restaurant is clean and it's a great thing to have in Burbank.. . NEGATIVES: Now, and I have to take a deep breath as I write this, I think the service if just awful. I would give this place 5 stars if the service were different. I go there at least 4 times a week and I see the same problems. Staff members on their cell phones behind the counter. I have seen this MANY MANY times...an employee behind the counter pulls out their cell phone to see if they have a message or text or whatever before they serve the customer! Totally unacceptable. Staff members socializing with each other while numerous customers are waiting to be served in the normally long lines. A rather lame system of placing an order with one employee then going to the register where another employee has a card to ring the orders up. So then there is a backup of orders as we all wait for the "master" cardholder to ring up other people's orders. When I order something to go, I notice people just standing around while my sandwich sits on the counter, no one making a move to bag it and hand it to me. I always have to signal someone to get my food...this happens every time I get a to go order. And if you order a coffee, orange juice, smoothie, be prepared for a long wait as they have one Barista making the drink while the others are doing God knows what. On many occasions, I stand there with other customers while we stare at each other wondering why one person is making 10 drinks. So basically, there's a lot of errant activity from a rather young and irresponsible staff that is totally unaware of what is expected in the service industry. Perhaps Mr. Porto, a very professional and good guy, should focus on this detail and restructure his employee training.. . I know, I know, you read this and say, "Well, why do you keep going?" The answer...good food, close to work, the only decent option for affordable lunch in Burbank. And that's where they get me!
