ReviewID: lskSSEmTA_6mDW8NhQsEwg
ReviewerID: 2pfhCi-ESOpbGAXXVmQsQg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
It's hard to say anything bad about Cantor's. I love Canter's and it's strata of architectural history visible in the upper level fifties-era time capsule dining room that's enclosed in a forties building shell. I also love the naugahyde couchettes, the historic framed photos of the restaurant on the walls, the surrounding, local Jewish culture, the celebs, and quasi celebs, the wide-eyed tourists, the L.A.natives, the deli, the brusque, impatient waitress'--but, I'm NOT in love with the not one, but two occasions where I was served scrambled eggs that had a curious palatal note of Windex brand window cleaner! It's not just me! My girlfriend agreed, and she has a friend who agreed.  . . The first time it occurred, I counted my losses and considered it a possible anomaly. Then, on a later visit, I gave the scrambled eggs a second try and got the same Windex special again! This time though, I complained and asked the waitress to send the meal back and replace it--something you learn you don't want to do at Cantor's. The waitress' . incredulous stare alone, told me I was completely nuts! She issued the standard Canter's waitress "heavy huff" as she snatched up my plate. While I waited for my new eggs to appear, I sat there waiting in mortal fear they might be the same, and what would I do if they were! I couldn't bear to face the same hostility again.. The eggs returned with the eggs, I waited for her to leave out of sight, and timidly tasted the new ones: WINDEX AGAIN! She shortly returned to ask how the new eggs were, to which I lied and reported that they were "great". I had already resigned to eating the bacon and toast only, and I artfully messed-up the eggs to create the illusion that I at least ate some portion of them. To further the deception, I left my used  napkin on the "finished plate". Forgetting the Windex for a moment, I recall hearing that not "cleaning" your plate alone can inspire the Jewish mother wrath inside the Cantor's waitress. They might ask if you're aware of the children starving in [fill in the current starving third world country]?   . Many years ago, I had another, more personal encounter with a Cantor's waitress, where she disallowed to order a dinner for the reason that I'd already had my desert (a vanilla shake) and stormed away from my table.. In spite of all the hidden Jewish Mother protocall and politics involved in Cantor's dining, I still love the place, but, beside not eating desert before supper, and clearing my plate, I've made a personal vow to never order the scrambled eggs again...on the other hand, if I'm ever in the Fairfax District and need to clean my car windows in a pinch...... . --papa tango
