ReviewID: LtCfLNW0tGuC9hngu2Qibw
ReviewerID: HK6L7-0qBwRle08KXlnfXQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Let me get this right out of the way so you all know what you are dealing with here. I have been obsessed/enamored with the World Famous Magic Castle since I first heard of it on a TV magic special as a little girl in Nova Scotia. I never in a million years thought I would ever be able to go. I moved to LA to marry the man of my dreams and have no interest in being an actor or musician or any of that. MY Los Angeles dream was to go to the Magic Castle and be singled out to take part in a trick...AND IT HAPPENED! OMG!! . . Ok, so here's what happened. Through the wonder of the internet I met up with a friend I knew in high school back in Canada. He is here with his wonderful darling wife making his way in this crazy city. After finding out I LOVE the Magic Castle he goes home, checks some things and VOILA we are there but a week later. OMG again.. I spend the days leading up to it freaking out over what to wear(settled on vintage black velvet elbow length gloves and pincurls in my hair), what to do, how to NOT hyperventilate when I go in. The day comes and as we drive up the steep curved driveway I squeal like a little kid. This is WAY better than Christmas! It's all turrets, placards and mood lighting. We meet the rest of our party, introductions all around and head in.. First stop: coat check. FINALLY! I dont know if the rest of LA has heard of this but a coat check is a safe place for someone to store their coat while enjoying your place of business. Its pretty rad, you guys should look into it.(not you Melisse, you have it DOWN). We are also shown a sign that says no pics. boo, but it's OK! (hint, cell phones have no flash and the bathrooms have cool lighting). . next up, heading in.. you gotta know the password.I'm not telling you. *wink*. . The building itself is AWESOME. Replete with paintings with eyes that moves,dark wood carved everything, stairs that seem to lead to a different place everytime you go up them, a thousand little rooms to discover so many things.. We had dinner which gave us tix to the big show. Totally worth it. The food was good, the servings are gigantic! and I have it on good authority the horseradish will make your 'face feel haunted'. The wine prices were not over the top and comes in bottles. heck yeah. We were a party of 7 and had our own little room. Love that.. They don't call it the Magic Castle for nothing..there are people doing magic all over the place. On the main floor there are a few ticketed shows. you cant possibly make them all in one evening so dont even bother trying. it will only thwart your bigger plan which is to just soak up the atmosphere and prevent you from finding what may possibly be the coolest cowboy card trick guy ever, that you CAN shuffle cards with gloves on(me!), and sometimes it doesnt matter how close you are to it, a slight of hand will amaze you like a 3yr old all over again.We also saw Scott Baio, which has nothing to do with anything other than mbooth loves chachi too.. . SoDress up, my minions, a girl in a Sunday dress looked woefully out of place. Bring on the billionaires diamonds, the formal gowns and the tuxedos cuz I wanna head to the Magic Castle again.
