ReviewID: LTDsZlHZzcED1eCVXKe_Tw
ReviewerID: hwhX3l-O_GO7DqWQy1Cspw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Furaibo Restaurant
Category: Japanese
This is my new favorite restaurant!!!! Went here last Friday night and absolutely LOVED!! I could eat here every single night of the week and get something different, but equally delicious! Super cheap too, very budget friendly! Good for a date, or a group of friends. There's the bar, tables for two, four, or larger groups. Really cool, fun, casual vibe going on here-I immediately liked the feel inside... . . I arrived on a friday night at 7:15ish. This must be the best time to go on a friday, cuz it was practically empty!! I though for sure we would have to wait based off of the reviews I had read before coming here...My friend had not yet arrived, so I sat down at the bar and waited. and waited for someone to ask me if I wanted a drink! I had just come from the gym and was dying for a cold beer! I felt kind of ignored, but finally managed to get one dude's attention and he brought me my Sapporo. I opened the menu to take a look and immediately closed it, there are so many things on it that I needed to wait for my friend so she could help me narrow down the choices! . . We ended up ordering: . * asparagus-came in some yummy ponzu-ish sauce, and was soooo good and fresh.very addicting. if we had had more I probably would have sat there munching on it even after I was full. . . * yakitori chicken hearts-YAY!!!! I FINALLY GOT TO TRY THESE! and I have to say that I am totally a chicken heart lover now, or at least Furaibo's chicken hearts! they come with a lemon wedge and hot mustard... . . * pork belly-was totally melt in your mouth, but alot more fatty than I would have liked. It had a different, sweeter taste than other izakaya kakuni recipes I have tried. but I liked it. comes with some kind of green, spinach maybe? I forget. . . * THE WINGS!-WOW, THEY REALLY ARE LIKE CRACK! I could eat these allllll day, only we ordered the spiciest level of spice and it wasn't really that spicy at all. VERY flavorful though, they use and interesting combo of spices. mostly white pepper, I think. wings themselves are pretty tiny, but I really liked the crispiness of them. . . * HAN PEN CHEESE!!!-This was BY FAR my favorite item of all. It's fish cake with cheese in the middle, wrapped with seaweed, breaded, and fried-but not heavy at all. perfect amount of crispy, salty, and melty. kind of like a cheesy fish stick, ONLY LIKE A MILLION TIMES BETTER!!!! I think I could eat hanpen cheese for breakfast, lunch, and dinner... . . All of this AND a bottle of sake, the Sapporo, and another small bottle of sake ended up being $27 INCLUDING tip!!!! There isn't an actual happy hour here (? I don't think) but you'll FEEL LIKE YOU'RE AT HAPPY HOUR! YEAH!
