ReviewID: LU6s-tpLqtCuAYCHmWbtKA
ReviewerID: YSfAlm6XNaym-JOrRjv3Tg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Highland Tap
Category: Steakhouses
I had been craving a burger all day, and after reading all of the reviews here about the delicious version at Highland Tap, it only seemed fair that I give it a shot. . . I spent many days of my youth at Fontaine's, Moe's and Joe's and other nearby establishments, but I couldn't remember ever venturing in to Highland Tap. When I got to the bottom of the stairs, I figured out why. I was the youngest person in the place by at least 20 years. At least. I'm cool with my elders, so it didn't bother me, but it's certainly worth mentioning in this land of bottled blondes (only via overpriced highlights, of course) and North Face, though. . . We settled in to a booth, were cheerfully greeted by our server Becky, and perused the menu. I only had eyes for the burger... and some french onion soup. First up was a beer, and their list was totally uninspired. Name a typical beer and it'd probably be on there. I went with a Sam Adams seasonal and it was served in a frozen (not frosty) mug. Seriously, the beer had ice chips in it. A wee bit overkill, but the second was better (isn't it always?).. . The french onion soup was hella salty and as a result that was really the only flavor I could get out of it. Sad, as I love a hearty version. The burger was good (and I loved that you could get it in a mini version) but honestly nothing that I'd fiercely recommend. A good pub burger, yes, but nothing far beyond that. I did love that I could get it topped with avocado, though! And three cheers for having 1/2 french fries, 1/2 onion rings as a regularly priced side item. The fries were pretty tasty and the onion rings more flour-y than crispy, but still good. . . I could see this place being pretty special 10 years ago, but with the strides that most bars have made in terms of their food (hell, I like the stuff at the Highlander better), Highland Tap's gonna need to step it up somewhere in order to get my repeat business. Either a better beer list and go the great bar route or better food for more of a restaurant appeal. Or both. That would be swell.
