ReviewID: LUV7djNBgKziwAivJorALw
ReviewerID: F2ih8wXoUFe2jvva9aE9aw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Crust
Category: Pizza
There was some sort of break down in the systems at Crust when I came here with another couple last Friday, which is why I'm going with such a low rating. It took aver 4 hours from the time we arrived till when we left, to finish our whole meal. . . We were a part of four, and I went to put my name in for a table outside. The host told me that I'd have to wait for my whole party to arrive, since only two of us where there- totally understandable. He gave me the impression that when they got here, we'd have a table in no time. Well, when my friends did arrive, the wait went up to about 45 minutes. Darn! Not Crust's fault, just bad luck. So they gave me one of the electronic pagers and went across the street for a drink.. . The 45 minutes pass, and we show up. The host tells us we're going to be seated next. We watched as two other parties are taken to their tables. The most annoying was a similar party of four told us they'd only been there 25 minutes. The host comes over to apologize, probably sensing our angst or realizing we were forgotten(?), and offers us a round of drinks at the bar and an appetizer, which we accept and enjoy for another 30 minutes or so why we wait for our table, while the restaurant empties out for the night.. . Finally we sit down, order pizzas to split and enjoy the back patio. It's spacious back there, and I'd recommend it if you're looking for outdoor seating plus pizza. The pizzas come, and we realize that one of the pizzas was the normal shrimp, not the special, so it gets sent back. Another blunder, but our waiter is very gracious the whole time. In fact, everyone we dealt with all night was like that. I've only been to Crust a few times, but the staff all seem to be unpretentious and warm. . . So there's more waiting for our correct pizza to arrive, then the bill. That also needed clarification, because of the replaced pizza and comped drinks and appetizer, but I didn't get all the details because I let the others in my party work it out. . . So again, there was some sort of break down in the systems that night. The manager never bothered to come apologize to us, which I know made me feel like our patronage wasn't valued. The food itself was great- especially the carbonara pizza. I want to come back just for that one, but it will be hard with this experience in the back of my mind.
