ReviewID: lVDlEVh_i8bZ8OTJxK0Kqw
ReviewerID: sRL_xmG3bSgWkVvGI0t7sg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
The pork based soup lived up to the hype.  It was indeed rich without being salty.  The noodles had the perfect amount of chewiness.  No wonder they only need to serve one type of ramen here.  I got the ramen combo with a small bowl of oyako don for $10.50.  The ramen itself would've cost $7.50.  This is costlier than what Koraku charges a block away, both a la carte and combo since Koraku's combo could be had for $7.75.  The portions of the ramen did not seem overly generous, but with the rice, I was overstuffed before all was said and done.  I also saw a bunch of people order their combination bentos...2 items for $9.95, 3 items for $11.95.  I haven't heard much about their bentos, but it looked good, and almost tempted me.  Service was great also, since they got our noodles out within 5 minutes.  The oyako don followed a few minutes later, and the staff was attentive enough to check in with us, collect empty bowls etc.  That's more than I can ask for in that regard.   . . However, on this relatively cool LA evening, I did find that the ventilation and AC in the restaurant was completely unsatisfactory.  It was so hot in there from all the cooking, that not only was everyone sweating from eating their ramen, but I also found myself smelling like food after I left.  They didn't even bother putting a fan out.  And like I said...this was a cool night.  What happens when it really is hot???  Since how I rate a restaurant depends very much on the entire dining experience, not just the food, I have to penalize Daikokuya for this.  I don't care how good the food is, if I can't enjoy it in an acceptably comfortable environment, I would not be adverse to take my business elsewhere.  I agree that their ramen is quite good, but since I wasn't totally blown away, I would gladly sacrifice a little taste in favor of a more comfortable meal if I'm going to sweat like a hog eating here.  A Koraku for Daikokuya tradeoff would be an easy call for me if this heat thing proves to be more than an isolated incident.
