ReviewID: lvv5UgslDmbkjPHN-6ioiQ
ReviewerID: Amt7BSRNRlnjN1OloR82ww
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Varasano&#39;s Pizzeria
Category: Pizza
I went varasano's last night on sunday March 29th, I figured I would wait a few days after it opened so they could work out the kinks. I wanted to go to this place at its best after the owner Jeff made it public in the ajc that there was no good pizza place in atlanta calling out the  likes of Fellini's, Moon River, Oz pizza, Rosa's, Marrietta Pizza co, Bella's and so on....  So my wife and I went there sunday night around 8, very nice  place clean very trendy, friendly people. The pizza not so much !! I had the classic margharita pizza, and my wife had the peperoni calzone. The only thing I can say is I did not know if I was eating pizza or was I sipping up pizza soup? The pizza was super thin in the middle I almost had a puddle in the middle of my pizza, it was the first time I ever  had to eat a pizza with a knife and fork. The cheese was alright but the tasteless water down sauce ruined  it for me. My wifes calzone was very big! The dough was just tasteless, and the whole bottom of the calzone was covered in flour, you could take your hand and wipe the bottom of the calzone and come up with a nice coating of flour on your hand!  She also asked for a side of sauce with her calzone and the server brought out a little cup with  cold sauce that was straight out of the can no spices or anything, and the server told us she did not have the means to heat up some sauce  for her which was not good. What gets me more upset than anything is the owner Jeff has the nerve to rip every pizza place in  atlanta, and then take pizza out of the his oven that is not even comparable to all the pizza places that i listed earlier!!  Those are regular ny pizza places not a pizza place that serves soggy watery pizza that you cant even pick up it is so thin you have to eat it with a knife and fork. So my advice to the owner  is maybe you should not try and compare apple's to oranges, and just open up your pizza place and try not to rip others with  diffrent better product that have been here for years.
