ReviewID: LWWt6k3OWkhQPxIeQrNLZg
ReviewerID: Tw7xJTcOYVDYdX8Y37lxGA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kevin Rathbun Steak
Category: Steakhouses
I know. I know. Why would a vegetarian go to a steak house? We came here recently for a work Christmas party, and even though, yes it is a steak house, I was really excited because I know what an awesome chef Kevin Rathbun is. The restaurant itself is absolutely beautiful! The wood work is amazing, the lighting is beautiful..he's created possibly the most beautiful restaurant in the city. The waiter's were exceptional! We had this one woman at our table (she could have been helping the entire room, but I wasn't paying enough attention) who was so helpful and attentive. . . On to the food! Drinks were really good and bread was super yummy (any place can win me over with their bread. Yay carbs!). The appetizer were shrimp with some sort of creole sauce on a bed of shredded lettuce. The people around me enjoyed it and they enjoyed my portion. One of my neighbors after I asked how it was asked me if I'd ever had a Big Mac (?) I'm not really sure where that was going but he seemed to really enjoy it! Next was a salad. This looked really yummy and fresh. Unfortunately mine did not come with salad dressing so I mixed a few lettuce pieces with my boyfriend's to give my dry salad a bit of flavor. A simple mistake I'm sure. For the entree the carnivore's had a choice of prime ribeye, tazmanian salmon, or duck. Most everyone around me ordered the steak and they all loved it! I was presented with a menu of veggies and side items and told that the chef would make them vegetarian and add his own vegetable to it as well. I ended up getting a nice size spread of veggies, mashed potatoes, and jalapeno creamed corn. They were all very good, but I have to say that the majority of it wasn't what I told the server I wanted. I assume they were a few things that were not able to be made vegetarian, which I totally understand. But the server should have known this and limited my choices. Dessert was decent. We had a choice between a creme brulee and a chocolate chocolatey thing. We always choose to get one of each so we can try each others and share. The creme brulee was to die for! The chocolate dish--unless you haven't had chocolate in the last 20 years and you're really wanting it, I mean, realllllly wanting it then get it. Otherwise, I'd stick with the creme brulee due to fear of overdosing ( it's a bit rich!). . Overall I had a good experience at Rathbun's steak. I would just recommend maybe being a meat eater when you visit. (duh!)
