ReviewID: LXaJlYdphCnMu7tF0jU6gQ
ReviewerID: 1F0o_vgecqTcvT0yxzYJTA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I've been a fan since my mom took me there for my junior high graduation (yes, I know I'm aging myself....it's currently called Middle School) letting me take along my best friends. It used to be across the street that long ago  and they moved across the street but it still looks identical.. Any way, i have a long relationship with Lawry's.  I'd always request it for my birthday. I'd learned from yelp reviews that you can get a special VIP card and they pretty much send me $25 - $50 certificates a month. My kids and I go as often as once a month! So we get a good deal. . Since the kids would want to go on a school night, we usually go during blue/ purple  haired hour (5pm) when there are no clients under 70.. When you arrive that early, they make you sit in the waiting area until the clock hits 5pm exactly.  I actually once sat next to a table where all the waitresses were folding napkins and one was even filing her nails.. . I feel like I've written this review before .....but here are some updates.. . I only like my prime rib medium rare.....but I was carved a very fully cooked cut.  All brown. . Side of spinach is a must.  I ate half of it but realized...why am I embarrassed to tell them I got a fully burned cut when I  asked for medium rare??  The wait staff here are usually older women who call themselves, Welcome to Lawry's, my name is miss Smith, Miss Brown etc.. . They wear the weirdest uniform with nursing shoes.. .  This was the first time I had a younger Asian guy who said, Welcome to Lawry's, my name is Mr. Chang. (or whatever)  When I complained, he brought me a brand new prime rib which was a little pinker  and rarer than my . liking but that was super impressive. ...because I had finished most of my well done prime rib.. Last week was my birthday, and the night before, I spent it with a bf who blindfolded me and took me to where we had our first date, Primitivo. .  Impressive.. Next day, my daughter and I were sitting at Barnes and Nobles and she made me read a book called Skinny Bitch.  Her friend had lost 20 pounds on it.  There is also a guy version called the Skinny Bastard.. It was interesting....it talked about slaughter houses, and how you are what you eat etc. Give up meat, dairy, ....the whole shebang..  I seriously believe my fellow yelpers would NOT be interested in them.  So we read the whole book at B &amp; N without buying it....and she decided Let's go to Lawry's for your birthday tonight!  I went on a a shopping spree at Anthropologie and Banana republic. . And what can I say?  I can repeat everything the wait staff says. They are trained to say the exact same thing each time. . my favorite waitress is Miss Dryer.  If you can ever request her, do it.. She gives you double of everything. Extra horseradish, extra dressing, extra yorkshire pudding. etc etc.. Sorry, i know I've written this review before......during Christmas season, they have a X'mas carol that circulates the table. You tip them 5 bucks and they'll come right back after 5 minutes.. A bit annoying because you have to pretend you're listening to them while you're trying to eat.. Any way, I had the best birthday last week. Ever!
