ReviewID: lYcZAcu7g3F_ECKj4JHiuQ
ReviewerID: VQTzt2ROhmNWFUeG5ypRfA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Kogi, taco truck, blah blah, Twitter, hype, blah blah.  So I finally went.  And there was a whole lot I loved and one major thing I didn't.. . Let's start with the many positives:. . 1.  The short rib tacos.  Definitely something special.  Quality tortilla with tender, charred meat, tangy sauce, crisp vegetables, sesame and a splash of salsa.  This was the first thing I ate and my immediate reaction was that I had never tasted anything quite like this.  It was that "ohhhh Korean Mexican food.... I get it..." kind of moment.  It's no wonder this is the item that got everyone talking in the first place.. . 2.  The blackjack quesadilla.  The pork was so tender, the cheese not overpowering and the green salsa with sesame seeds a perfect accompaniment.  And they really know how to char the tortilla beautifully.  I was smelling it all the way home.  I split one that night with my husband and had another one for breakfast the next morning.  I'm not as picky as a lot of folks about reheating such things and I enjoyed it immensely, both times.. . 3.  The salsa roja.  !!!!!  I can't scream about this enough.  Since I like things spicy, I asked for extra when I picked up my food at the window, and he quickly ladled enough in one of those cardboard containers to fill up about a third of it.  (Side note:  I managed to drive the salsa home with my food without spilling a drop, even inside the bag.  Skillz.  I haz them.)  The salsa is unbelievable.  The mix of sour, spicy and sweet is just... well, truly, I have no words.  I would pay (or maim) someone for this recipe, in a heartbeat.. . Now on to the bad:. . The spicy pork and short rib burritos.  Do not like.  I should have read the online menu more carefully before ordering these, as I would have realized they are served with eggs and hash browns.  No.  Just no.  I wanted a regular burrito, not some strange mix of breakfast and dinner.  The short rib one was downright offensive - where the taco meat was spot on, here it was far too sweet.  And mixed with mushy, bland pieces of egg and potato, it turned into what my husband called "an abomination."  Even I was shockingly turned off by the entire mess.  We threw half of it away.. . You'd think I wouldn't have bothered, but I did eat the spicy pork burrito for lunch the following day.  I was prepared to go out and buy something else in case it was just as disgusting as the short rib one, but it was edible.  At least it didn't have sugary meat.  However, I still wasn't a fan of the eggs and spuds and I wished in vain for a hint of spice in my spicy pork.. . In conclusion:. . I would love for Kogi to make a burrito without eggs and potatoes, but otherwise I think most of the food is pretty awesome.  The novelty is not lost on me.  I don't even mind the prices.  Think of it this way.  I paid $30 for dinner for two, and breakfast and lunch for me the next day.  Not too shabby.. . As for the infamous wait?  Oh, there was a wait.  And I considered complaining about it (it took a very chilly 2 hours and 10 minutes out of my Thursday evening from the time I stepped out my front door to the time I returned home with the grub), but I expected it.  It's Kogi and I knew what I was in for.  I had Mel M. with me and some lovely folks in front of us to talk to, so it made the wait go much faster.
