ReviewID: LZ4ni4pel8mazzIZuOg0Sw
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Uncommon Ground
Category: Bars
One part coffeehouse, one part restaurant and one part rockin' little music venue gives you everything Uncommon Ground. . . Fortunately for my fabulous threesome looking to dine out 'healthy style' we were able to experience a little of all three! . . First up was dinner and how lovely it was! Sitting outside on UG's street side patio was a divine backdrop for the tasty, organic, family farmed eats offered up by the Uncommon folks. We all opted for salads (snoozeville, I know) despite the fact that the crispy braised pork belly and bacon wrapped meatloaf were practically jumping off the menu page and slapping me in the face. Uh... one Sunshine Salad - with chicken - please. Healthy it certainly was and I had to give myself a pat on the back for it! The "Sunshine Salad" is literally a heaping plate of super fresh veggies, sprouts, seeds, a splash of barely there dressing and absolutely none of the "fun stuff". You know, the stuff you usually pick around the the lettuce to peck for: crunchy bacon, creamy cheese, little happy bits of salami. Nyet. Not here. This dish is for the ultimate fresh farmers market enthusiast and for the $18 price tag (with the chix) it sure feels like a lot of cash for not that much sunshine. Psst! I'm coming back for you, Mr. Meatloaf! . . Next up we moved things inside by the cutesy fireplace for coffee and talk. Coffeetawk! The coffee house element is very inviting and the UG servers make sure you're warm on your drinks without making you feel rushed or pushed out the door. Love it! A handful of spiked coffee drinks (like the Devil and Robert Johnson, a vanilla infused whiskey espresso concoction) and, of course, your standard lattes, cocoas and cappuccinos ensure everyone a hearty and delicious caffeinated fix! . . Lastly we met Steve :::::swoon::::: the Jordan Catalano-esque crooner who was playing acoustic that evening in the music space next door. A little ditty with your java Miss? Don't mind if I do. . . Sunshine, Coffee and Sweet Ass... Uncommon Ground, making the world a better place since 1991. Cheers to that!
