ReviewID: LZaVKvpH1PxdSdDYIqYM0g
ReviewerID: sfAI0i5T_zTYHzcGOXxt9Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Review from . http://epikbabies.blog.... /. Check it out!!. . Luxury at its limit! Not really, but Lawry's is definitely no ordinary restaurant. This place is the PEAK of all prime ribs. A go-to restaurant when there's nowhere to go when visitors come from out of town. A perfect place to spend a nice, romantic dinner, or to simply celebrate an occasion. Or...to just have a nice dinner out...if you have money growing from trees. Yes, Lawry's is a bit pricey, BUT Lawry's comes HIGHLY recommended...by me.. . Located on La Cienega Boulevard in Beverly Hills, Lawry's Restaurant is best known for its AMAZING prime rib meals. However, unlike other "specialty" restaurants, Lawry can be remembered for more than its prime ribs. The service at Lawry's is unbeatable; The creamed corn is a MUST; and best of all...waiting to be seated has never been better. Lawry's has one of the best waiting rooms in the WORLD. While waiting to be seated, you can either wait at a bar (if you're over the age of 21 of course) OR you can wait in the waiting room where delicious meatballs and other snacks are served...for freeeee!!! It only gets better from there. Before being served the amazing dish of prime ribs (cut of your choice) and creamed corn...Lawry's waitresses toss the best salads. They specially toss it in their chilled bowls and they toss it right in front of you so that it is FRESH.. . The only setbacks to this restaurant is the expensive valet parking. But rest assured, your car is in good hands. Lawry's has its very own underground parking to keep your car safe, unless you drive a Ferrari or Aston Martin, I'm sure they would want to display it in the very few outdoor parking spots in front of the entrance. Also, this restaurant is a DRESS UP restaurant. You can't walk in with jeans and a T-Shirt. You must dress casually nice, as in khaki's and a collared shirt. They don't do it anymore, but back in the day, they used to kick people out if they were underdressed.. . -EpikBabies
