ReviewID: M2U1aGv-weaPYs4RlPQ2Fg
ReviewerID: wwsTBKSWhtE2rc1alEkyJA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Rosebud
Category: Southern
I hate to do it to ya Rosebud, I really do.. . I love coming here every week. I either hit up brunch or the Monday night special. The food? It's always five stars. I have dreams about their grits, the tomatoes they use in the breakfast bowl, the turkey burger with goat cheese &amp; grilled pineapple, those onion rings, shrimp &amp; grits. Mmm. Everything I've ever had I wouldn't turn away. It's all good food, and you can taste the localness in it.. . So why the 3 stars? Why only A-OK? Well...to put it politely...the service (for the most part) stinks. BAD. Unless you're blessed with Sunny or you're sitting at the bar with Jeff, you can count on your glass sitting empty, part of your order being forgotten, or some scowling faces.. . I should note that even if I eat the $5 special - I tip on what the price of the meal would have been, something above and beyond what is necessary. And if you just remember my order, get my drink in a timely manner, keep the water glass refilled so that I'm not begging you for a refill, and make an effort, I give 20%. Always. And if you can smile and be polite and even remotely accomodating, I most likely tip you more.. . Now, to set the scene last night, I had one of the most scowly waiters in Atlanta. Not just at Rosebud, but Atlanta. I've been treated better at Yoforia across the street. A group of three of us started eating in the bar area, to be joined about 45 minutes later by 6 other people. We had to pull some tables to let them join us, but in my mind that makes us still our party of three, and that party of six. Items on our order were forgotten, drink orders never arrived (I don't blame Jeff the bartender, I doubt they were ever entered), and waters that never got a second fill.. . I planned on leaving a polite 15% tip, and letting Ron the chef know that while the food and drinks were lovely, this is about the fourth time I've been unhappy with the service. You can imagine my shock when I got my bill and a 20% "service charge" was tacked on. I don't believe in throwing the "I'm a Yelper, I'll give you a bad review" card and I certainly wouldn't want my entire meal comped....because I do want to pay for the food I ate, that is indeed fair, in my opinion. It is my understanding that our later party of six had their meal comped after complaining about the service and I feel badly for the chef, bartender, and cooks who will miss out on their cut of that meal. They certainly did their part right.. . Will I keep going to Rosebud? Of course, because I do love the food. But I hope that the Chef will consider taking a long hard look at the servers and keeping the ones who want to be there and finding others to replace the ones who obviously don't. I don't believe in disregarding a restaurant for something such as that, but I go out to dinner because I like a good experience, and this one unfortunately left me with a bad taste in my mouth.
