ReviewID: m2UmC6OzZLWtZjw5KAF_yQ
ReviewerID: U1e7IE9A_358yG4pNBjmMw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
Freakin delicious!!! No wonder this place was voted the #1 breakfast spot in La..... . ....though I didn't order breakfast, haha. Still, not the point. . . Parking sucks. Period. You're chances are upped if you go up a couple blocks from Melrose and find street parking, then walk to the cafe. It was really crowded, though we did come on a Saturday morning. I think we waited an hour before we were seated. We got a lovely table outside on the edge, so at least we didn't have to uncomfortably sit there and eat while people waiting oogled us. The service was friendly and attentive, but the food was fantastic. I ordered a bowl of the split pea soup and half a gourmet sandwich- you get to choose which kind. I was pretty bummed they wouldn't let you get the soup and sandwich combo with the ahi tuna, but what I ended up with was yummy, so who cares. I got the turkey with avocado, cucumber, and cheese on delicious bread. First of all, the soup- AMAAAAZING. I'm a huge fan of split pea, but it's hard to find a good one that's not too pea-y but not too watered down. This one was perfection, let me tell you. Every spoonful was heaven, and the huge parmesan croutons were a great garnish. The bread was great for sopping up the deliciousness that my spoon just couldn't scrape. How much of a pig do I sound now?. . When the sandwich came, I was almost disappointed that I was going to have to take my taste buds away from the soupy goodness, but once I bit into the bread, I somehow rose higher than food heaven...if you can imagine that. The bread was perfect, soft inside and crunchy outside. Delicious blend of flavors. I, of course, was full off the soup alone, but I refused to waste the scrumptious sandwich. I somehow managed to shove most of it down, and I was busting out of my dress on my drive home. But do I care? NOPE!!. . ps. my friend ordered their iced chai tea and it was DELISH as well!!!
