ReviewID: m3_FEod8VaQ1eRjKUVeBaA
ReviewerID: mmRVIJYTNEhCDStGgirS2Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
So you're thinking about becoming a vegetarian, huh?  Oh what's that?  You just don't know if you can give up eating meat in order to begin your quest.  Well guess what?  It's your lucky day because I have the perfect solution to your woes.  Go eat at Fogo de Chao and never turn your dial from green!  I bet  when you're done there, you'll willingly swear off eating meat long enough to dive head first into your foray of vegetarianism and won't ever look back.. . Now if you're a proponent of the Atkin's diet, you should seriously look into recruiting Fogo de Chao as the Atkin's diet spokesperson, or spokesrestuarant - lol.  All the meat your little arteries could handle, sans the carbs.  Thankfully I was blessed with a kind disposition and weigh in at a solid and healthy figure fitting for someone of my athletic stature and supremely chisled muscles.  Okay, so I'm not as chisled as my college soccer days, but I have a very forgiving constitution.  Phew because I eat like a mac truck!. . My first time at Fogo de Chao had me flittering with excitement and giggles and then anxiety and panick when the meat just wouldn't stop coming.  The disappointed looks on the men's faces when we rejected their meat or turned our dial to red was heartbreaking and so we kept it on green.  I could hardly keep up!  Chew-swallow, chew-shallow, crap just swallow!  Hurry, they're coming . . . agggggghhh!  But in the flurry of the meat bringing, meat cutting and meat eating, I and everyone at my table was having a blast.  It makes me want to say, "Oompah!" and yet at Fogo de Chao, we aren't even remotely close to anything greek.. . The meats are succulent, juicy, tender, melt in your mouth, drunken your mind good.  The bacon wrapped tri-tip and chicken are my absolute favorites because I gravitate toward anything wrapped in bacon.  But carnivores beware, if you don't scrutinize every cut, i.e. the "sweet meat" you could end up eating the testicles of some animal.  Uggh, D-I-G-U-S-T-I-N-G!   Ignorance would not be bliss in that case.  The salad bar is phenomal, but remember to pace yourself, or you'll be sitting the bench before the actual game even begins. And, if you're willing to go into overtime, the desserts are tasty too.. . A trip to Fogo de Chao will prove to be one heck of good time for everyone you're with and once you digest all of that meat in like 3 months, you'll be ready to go again.. . Green Light: Bring on the MEAT!
