ReviewID: M4cjARH-PMlMIAWtVmBf4g
ReviewerID: ypm9IB9iZkwY71FKkYeLkg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I haven't had good pizza in a loooong time - there just isn't any where I live (the OC), where the best pizzas you find are from costco!  California just does not do pizza well, but Mozza certainly does!  This is an upscale, trendy pizza joint so sit yourself down, get some wine, and enjoy.. . SERVICE - 5 stars. We got seated at the bar and the guy tending to us was super nice and very knowledgeable.  He always refilled our water glasses and made friendly banter with us.. . DECOR and AMBIANCE - 5 stars. It's not your everyday pizza parlor that's for sure.  The walls are painted a nice rustic red and the bar has a nice wooden furnish.  Everything looks so modern yet it retains a nice, homey ambiance at the same time.. . FOOD:. Caprese Salad (starter) - 5 stars. Has got to be one of the best Caprese Salads ever.  Fresh mozzarella and lightly baked tomatoes on the vine with a perfectly balanced drizzled of olive oil and basil.  Delicious!. . Fried Potatoes (starter) - 4 stars.. We ordered this thinking it was something like french fries but they're literally fried thickly cut potatoes.  Came with a bunch of fried garbanzo beans and fried sage leaves too.  Even though it wasn't what we expected it was still pretty good.. . Pizza Marguerite ($13) - 5 stars. Your very basic tomato sauce and mozzarella cheese pizza sprinkled with basil.  Very fresh ingredients and the crust is deliiiiciiioooous!!  Thin and crispy, but not quite NY style.  It's more like the pizza you'd find in Italy, with that slightly bubbling crust.  So good!!  The friends I came with ordered some other fancy pizzas that had fancy names topped with stuff like prosciutto or homemade sausage and fennel, but I still thought my simple, straightforward pizza was the best.  Sometimes simple is better and tastes more authentic.  The crust was all spot on though.  . . After we finished our entrees, our bartender/server gave us separate dessert menus.  We noticed that they had their own in-house pastry chef, so that of course meant we had to try their desserts.  . . Key Lime cheesecake with lime caramel ($9) - 4 stars. My friend ordered this. Even though I don't like cheesecake in general, I tried a bite and I have to say it was pretty dang good.  The cheesecake was light and fluffy and it had a nice balance of lime to it that wasn't overpowering.  . . Butterscotch Budino with sea salt &amp; pine nut cookies ($9) - 4 stars. I got this at the recommendation of our server.  This was a pudding-like dessert with caramel and topped with whipped cream.  It was good but super sweet - you can actually taste the hint of sea salt in here.  Sea salt desserts are supposedly all the rage right now.  They put two small cookies on the side... they didn't taste all that great by itself but if you scoop a bit of the pudding onto the cookies its perfect together!. . Big PSsst - don't order soda here unless you're craving it like crazy!!  I got a diet coke and its one of those places where its not from the tap and they don't give you free refills.  They actually have bottled diet coke here and each small bottle will cost you a hefty $4!!!
