ReviewID: m5J0YB3iy5Z_RVFfUAC4RA
ReviewerID: 7QEKQJ30LyBNTaG-ocdGzw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Greek Islands Restaurant
Category: Greek
Their gyros platter got the best of me, the voracious meat devourer  that I am. I was here on New Years' Eve many years ago and it was my 1st time ever to any Greek place. Now, my Greek food experience was limited to gyros and baklava, so I was perplexed when I saw all the fish and other seemingly intimidating menu items.. . The fool that I was, I took the safe bet and chose a gyros platter. And a gyros platter it was, piled high with strips of meat and raw onions, with maybe 2 pitas. The pitas were eaten quickly. With that formality out of the way, the imposing platter of gyros strips and raw onions stared me down. I reached for my fork and didn't blink.. . I went at it with the intensity of a Japanese guy at a hot dog eating contest. One strip, 2 strips, 4 strips, 8 strips, 20, and so on. I dueled with the gyros platter, pausing every so often for a sip of Coke. Carry-out in a doggy bag was no longer an option as I went into a zone.. . As the last scrap of gyros surrendered to the mercy of my fork's wicked prong, I had prevailed over this dinner that probably could have fed 3 or 4 starving Greek children for a day. And a great platter of gyros it was. . . I waddled out of the restaurant and came home to bring in the new year, the weight of the gyros still slowing me down. I went to bed, waking about every hour to drink some more water and burp out a pungent concoction of onions and gyros. The battlefront had shifted from plate to digestive system, and I could not quit now. I realized my culinary life had reached rock bottom and passed out till morning.. . On January 1st, after skipping breakfast and only eating a very small lunch, I imposed a personal ban on all gyros products for a year. Now, when I have a modest gyros sandwich maybe once or twice a year, I think back to this day and have to say, "Boy do they have a heck of a gyros platter at Greek Islands."
