ReviewID: m796k8L4PPmFGyLrUjviRA
ReviewerID: 6wCncsqMkevDrPGajCqo3w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Mermaid Inn
Category: Seafood
Really adorable place with cute bathrooms.  Very, very crowded and noisy though.  I could hear the conversation of the couple two tables away (which probably had more to do with their speaking volume, but still).  My friend and I shared the mussels as an appetizer.  We usually like to each order something different so we can have a taste, but we were both craving a lobster roll so that's what we got.  Or rather, two lobster sandwiches...at $24 a pop.  Was it worth it?  Hmm...not so much.  Not that it was bad, it just wasn't amazingly outstanding and if I'm paying $24 for a a small entree like that, it better be.  It was gone in a few short bites.  What can I say, I'm a Pearl Oyster devotee.  The only other lobster roll I've craved as much were the ones I ate in Nantucket - huge rolls (not sandwiches) overflowing with mighty chunks of lobster, straight from the fishmonger for a mere $13.  You can't beat that with a stick (and why would you want to do anything other than eat it anyway??)  With that said, the Mermaid Inn lobster sandwich was good but not memorable.  If I'm in the neighborhood and really craving seafood, plus have money to burn, then I might go back.  I'll have to try some other dishes to see if my mind changes, but for now, it's not going to be a destination dining spot for me.. . **Update 9.27.07: Decided to give Mermaid Inn another try with my mom last night.  I was already past the point of being hungry, verging on crashing, so against my better judgment, I ordered the lobster sandwich again.  I still found it to be pretty anemic - I definitely tasted more bread than lobster with each bite, and that's not what I'm ordering a lobster sandwich for.  The Old Bay seasoned fries, on the other hand, were perfectly crispy.. . My mom ordered the shrimp and scallop spaghetti, which looked really good.  The noodles were a bit on the dry side since it was sauceless, but the shrimps were good and the scallops were very plump &amp; sweet.  I'm not a big fan of broccoli rabe, though, and felt that it didn't really add anything to the dish.  For appetizers, we tried one each of the West Coast and East Coast oysters, which were both tasty, although I'm no oyster connossieur by any means.  Also, the flat bread with black &amp; white sesame seeds was fantastic!. . One thing I would like to note is how thoughtful the decor of The Mermaid Inn is.  I didn't really notice it before since I sat right by the front window.  The mid-level lighting fixtures attached to the walls provides just the right amount of lighting to the tables, and the mermaid hooks are great for hanging purses or coats (much preferred to placing a purse on the floor or on the chair back).  With all that said, I think I'm comfortable with bumping up my rating to 4 stars.
