ReviewID: m7AxVp9Gi34N7oqKa4zS6w
ReviewerID: zgqi7Ryo7L5VTKonEVkRwQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
The service was great, the food was quite good but I am deducting a star because it wasn't as good as some other Italian places costing half as much like Osteria La Buca which is further east on Melrose.  As well, it was very loud in the restaurant so if you don't mind screaming to your tablemates, then this is the place for you.. . As for the food, we went with the egg and ricotta ravioli in browned butter per everyone's suggestion here on Yelp. It was divine!! I was afraid that it would be overwhelmingly rich but it was just the right combination of flavor and texture to produce a gastranomic wonder. Be warned: it is one large ravioli (rather than several little ones) and there is an egg yolk in the middle...we had assumed that the "egg" referenced in the ravioli meant "egg noodle" not actual egg. We also had the mozzarella tasting...too bland on its own...try the various mozzarellas with something else like Burata with prosciutto or something. Mozzarella is just too bland a cheese (even though it was quite delicious here) to savor on its own which is why it is usually put on or with other dishes. Then we had the grilled beef tagliata which was nicely done although a little sweet (understandable as balsamic vinegar was used in the reduction). The dessert though was super-yummy...we had the sauteed strawberries which were wrapped in a delicious crepe. Absolutely divine! mmm....i could taste those strawberries right now! . . All in all, this place is one for clients or in-laws to impress them and have some good food at the same time but there are better restaurants if you want to focus on impressive food. I would give this place 3 1/2 stars rather than a full 4. I do have to say that this is the best of the celebaurants that I've been to in Los Angeles. Spent about $180 for two with a bottle of wine tax and tip. We were able to find parking on the street...good thing because I heard the valet was exorbitant.
