ReviewID: m7TbRDEjUd8mQo1xLygR8Q
ReviewerID: w-hrD3-YJXbDUlvBwrpWtA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
First heard about Cut from a coworker that took his wife there for his anniversary dinner.. . Did a little research and within a few weeks we had reservations.  Staff was very friendly and considerate (my friends were 30 minutes late).  They did not give away our table as I would've expected since there were people waiting without reservations.  . . Glanced over the menu and then the waiter came by with a tray displaying the various grades of beef.  It was amazing how the well marbeled the True Wagyu was.  Now up to this point, I have only had the American Wagyu which I thought was already amazing.  I had to jump at the opportunity of trying the True Wagyu ribeye.  My friend opted for the American  ribeye.  We also ordered a few starters, the steak tartare, maple glazed  pork belly, and the tuna tartare.  All of the starters were good but the best was yet to come.  The steaks were brought over along with our sides the creamed spinach with organic egg, potato tarte tatin, and the chanterelle mushrooms.  I think the best side was indeed the creamed spinach.  The potato tarte was a little too heavy for me.  Finally time to try the Wagyu.....cut into the middle and noticed that it was cooked a little more than I had liked.  Called the waiter over and sent it back.  Manager apologized and explained to me that they don't recommend serving the Wagyu any rarer than what was brought over to me as the center does need to reach a certain temperature as to heat up the fat.  They did however, bring me a new piece.  I thought that it was weird, but after consuming the ribeye...the man was right.  This would've been the first time I would've preferred my steak cooked a little bit more.  My friend and I did a taste comparison between the American Wagyu and the Japanese Wagyu.  There is a night/day difference between the two.  If you can afford the True Wagyu....you definitely need to try it once.  It is life changing!  The girls however ordered the American Wagyu filet.  They both said that it was good....but definitely not as good as my ribeye!!. . Ordered the chocolate souffle and the vanilla creme brulee.  . . Another great steakhouse to add to the list and luckily it's close by!
