ReviewID: M9ITZfaT9QzWuLgjwYfD_Q
ReviewerID: KMfLcj021gd55naYESzSkA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
Excellent KBBQ!  Excellent service. A Rated.. . Our party of 23 took over 1/2 the restaurant and they gave us one section of the restaurant that has 32 seats with 5 tables so our group from . http://www.AsianFoodie....  had a sorta semi private KBBQ party.  That paired with the 1/2 off Soju, our table rocked! . . We had a table of 5 and we ordered the $80 Combo B. It was great. The meats and presentation was all very high quality! Love the King Oyster Mushrooms... wished we had a few more slices of the mushrooms. I also ordered the Chap jae and it was also great... I do wish it had some black fungus and a bit more beef, but it was very tasty nonetheless. I ordered a plate of the spicy marinated pork which was probably my fav. Bold flavor, a little heat and very tender. I'm very glad we ordered it because it was one of my favs, but we probably shouldn't have as we were so full it was over the top. We drank a LOT of Soju taking full advantage of the 1/2 off special deal. The service was excellent and especially great because fellow Yelper Alyssa was working at the restaurant this evening and was very helpful with our order selection. Food and service definitely 5 stars.. . Just a couple minor suggestions... In addition to the rice noodle wrappers and the pickled daikon to wrap the meat, I'd suggest you also add lettuce. (Update: Alyssa said that they do provide lettuce free upon request) I didn't request lettuce and you might serve if we had asked, but that would be nice. I found it weird that the server didn't want me cooking our food. I was a little annoyed when he took away the tongs to make it more difficult. Some diners enjoy/prefer to cook themselves and should have that option. . . The restaurant is clean, modern and a good menu. The panchan was all good. The bean paste for the meat was excellent. This is the most important sauce as it will make or break the flavor of the meats that don't have any marinade. . . Our BBQ grill is gas and charcoal with good ventilation. No smokiness, no problems. I thought is was a gas only grill. They put a water pan under the coals which I'm told also helps reduce smoke.. . Prices are average, maybe a little higher than average, but the quality and quantity of the meats make it an excellent place and fair value. The beef had absolutely gorgeous marbling of fat! Our table cost us $30/person after tax before tip. A good price considering we over ordered and drank a ton of Soju. I think we could have been full and no Soju for under $20 before tax/tip. So with this quality, it's a far better deal than most AYCE KBBQ joints which has meat quality many notches below this place.. . We are definitely coming back here again! This place is in my top 5 KBBQ places in K-town! With the Soju special it nudges ahead into my top 3. I had Steph at my table... the Spice Princess, so we could have used some really hot peppers/spice for her.. . I didn't use the restrooms but the place does have an A rating. I set the meeting time for 7pm, but in the future, I'll set it for 7:15pm so that if you arrive at exactly 6:59pm you can snag free street parking on Vermont. Otherwise pay $2 for valet parking or look on 9th for free parking after 6pm which is what I did. No valet, free parking from 2-5:30pm.
