ReviewID: MANLvjK0YnjHUBcHtUyOwA
ReviewerID: hLZhIcq9qupYTeW5FHInEA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Mr. Sang Yoon, you criticized the attempts of Ms. Lo on her "imaginary burger" concept via Top Chef Masters. Your signature burger, wasn't that impressive either.. . I came here out on a whim, since I been dying to try this place and I had some unfinished business meetings on a Sunday afternoon in LA, might as well take advantage of it. Ms. Soybean made a rendezvous with me here tasting and discovering whether or not we appreciated the joints burgers.. . The orders were as follows:. . Drinks. . -1 Mexican Coke . -Water all around. . -2 Classic Father's Office Burgers consisting of: (Dry Aged Beef) caramelized onion, applewood bacon compote, gruyere, matag blue cheese and arugula (description courtesy of . http://menupages.com. ). . -1 Basket of Frites "A La Cart" garlic parsley aioli (description courtesy of . http://menupages.com. ). . Mexican coke, Ms. Soybean finished the whole thing with satisfaction. Water is water. Now the burger, it was tasty (the aged steak), wrapped around the caramelized onions and gruyere. The flavor profile was complete, however my disdain in blue cheese has gotten the better of me. It added a strong bitter after taste (which would compliment the applewood bacon) but didn't wash away nicely without beer or that mexican coke. . . The fries were offered in good portion and tasted decent, however the aioli condiment didn't have enough sauce to finish dipping the fries in. Shoestring in appearance and crispy in texture, however it can easily go cold if you sit outside on a cold afternoon like we did.. . Overall, I spent about $32.00 with tax and tip. Service was prompt in serving the food, coming out in 20 minutes. It's clean in appearance and has a unisex washing area from my recollection. 1 Hour of mediocre burger tastings, awkward silences, and a disappointment in a bleu cheese infestation they call a burger. Man oh man... LA's been disappointing me a lot lately, in terms of food quality to challenge my palate. 2.5 (round up for 3 stars barely because of service).. . Hopefully Umami Burger will stand up to my wrath...
