ReviewID: mBJuWHs0DNLelazFIN1koQ
ReviewerID: EKdyI4jpUF29YtPkKiCtcg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yuca&#39;s
Category: Mexican
3.75. . im surprised yuca exists in the heart of los feliz ... . . ANYWAYS,. . this is how mexican food SHOULD be... . . hole in the wall, cheap, taco trucks, taco stands, etc etc .... . the owner, is this elder lady in her 60s named dora .. she's quite a character, extremely blunt and to the point .  she sits in front of this lil shacky looking eatery and says, "what you want?" i kindly tell her to hold, and she snaps, and goes to the next person ... the next person is also stuck in what to order. she sighs. go figure. . . patience senora, patience! we ain't no speedy gonzales, ya know? dont be "arriba-ing" me... :(. . she takes your order, scribbles down what you want onto the paper plate and gives it to her people -- good luck from there -- ... i say this because you have to be a queen at multitasking... you order, yet you have to be on a look out to see if a table opens up ...  there's like room for at most* 10 people, and you're most likely sharing a table with another group. at one point, i saw dora telling these 2 guys to leave because they were just chilling and telling them that others had to eat. lol. it was funny ... . . 5 minutes later, my burrito and taco come out ($6! cheap! and good! -- i'm happy!) and i kindly ask for some napkins. she snaps again, and says "i give you already, on plate!" i thank her, and scarve that sucker down, as if i never had a so cal, mexican burrito!~ no tapatio, no tabasco, you're looking at pouring that habenera sauce mister, whether it be roja or verde, omg, i was literally sweating ... worse than my 2 hour pilates workout alive!. . i finish using my napkins, since i wipe my forehead due to all the sweat (hey, now, it wasnt THAT BAD, but it was 103F the other day, plus that habenera!! killed me royally!) and ask her for a lil more. cars are driving by, so i figured she didn't hear me, so i point over to the napkins to the people in the back. she snaps again and tells me, "i give you!" i smile and say, "ok"  ... normally, i wouldn't tolerate this sorta service, but i accept the fact that it comes with the territory.. . it wasn't that bad overall, service, could be better... can't complain in having a great parking lot in the back, and boo for not having my horchata!!!
