ReviewID: mbNlKJSCIrieuqW-axI8Bg
ReviewerID: bRgMrDmI5BSeanxT6oqSfg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
HOLY COW, GET THE ELK!. . After hearing about Sepia from a friend, I decided to try it for my birthday dinner.  I now have to invent another reason soon for going again ("it's Tuesday, better make a res.").. . The Great:. Our 5:30 res allowed us to have nice dinner conversation without the next table (about five inches away) hearing all our juicy gossip.  . . The Octopus appetizer was beyond stellar, as was the elk chop (as the server said "if you enjoy a boldly flavored steak, this is for you."  Well, I am all about boldly flavored steaks, so I got my elk on).  Amazing!. . Service was high, but see below for the full report.. . The Not-So-Great:. . Sepia is a booming success, and they have the res book to prove it.  Jam packed from 5:30 to close most nights.  Thus, we felt a little "over-serviced," as if we were being hustled along (the bus boy started saying "may I take your plate" about five bites into the elk, while I was in gastronomic ecstasy and trying to savor the moment).  I also felt that the service was a bit hard-sell.  But hey, how else do you get a two-top to drop $154 in 70 minutes?  Also, upon being seated, the server was right there before my ass was even sunk in to the banquette.  No time for idle chatter, he launched in to his rap and kept hovering over us like we were two year olds playing with a pair of barber scissors.  And his heavy patchouli waft made my eyes water like I was attacked with serin gas.. . One Yelper described the hit and miss of the desserts, so I stayed away from the chocolate tart and went for the recommended bread pudding (with "Happy Birthday" written in chocolate sauce--nice touch).  It was "decent" but in no way in the same league of deliciousness as the elk or octo.  The server described the ice cream that accompanied it as "gelato-like."  Well, as someone who's first job was in a gelatoria, it was icy and a bit greasy on the palate...so about as UN-gelato like as one could imagine.  That pastry chef would have gotten a beat down if on Top Chef.  My recco would be to save the $26 (dessert for two) and go get some REAL dessert elshwhere.  . . But, despite the aforementioned annoyances and crystalline ice cream, you gotta try this place!!
