ReviewID: MbNMDoBux9Q-S-URnVF4LA
ReviewerID: XV1RzZls0eu4y39gCjjspA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
For my birthday Super Hot Boy mentioned that he was going to take me out to Mozza. I didn't know if he was talking about the Pizza side or the Osteria side and was just happy that he even remembered my birthday period. Turns out it was for the Osteria side and it is now official - Super Hot Boy has now been upgraded to Super Studly Hot Man!  . We started off with the Mozzarella Tasting and OMFG!!! Imagine being able to put soft clouds in your mouth. Next, for our Primi course, we had the Fresh Ricotta and Egg Ravioli w/ Brown Butter, Super Studly Hot Man was making caveman love to this dish while I (insert orgasm here) devoured the Tagliatelle w/ Wild Boar Ragu. At this point we should have just stopped and been healthy in moderation type beings, I mean that would have been the European thing to do...right? But being the over indulgent, over the top American pigs that we are, of course for our Secondi we get the Porcini-Rubbed Rib Eye Bistecca along with a Contorni of Yellow Wax Beans in Soffriti w/ Salsa Verde. First off, the Rib Eye was enough to feed a family of 4 - every bite was flavorful and juicy thanks to the Porcini rub, but the fact that today in my refrigerator I have the remnants of that magnificent steak just waiting for me to inhale makes me tinkle every time I think about it he-he! I have to note that the beans were so-so, a little too salty and oily for me - I'd go for something different next time (and yes there will be a next time!) . Now at this point the thought of more food completely repulsed us, so naturally we couldn't pass up the Dolci - which ended up being a chocolate lava cake with rum and candied almonds. Thank god that ended up to be a wee little thing that we scarfed down in two bites. . A closing highlight to my birthday night was when the couple next to us got into a fight - This huge football type guy goes to a skinny LA blonde in a really aggressive tone, "Is this about the drugs?! Is this about the fucking drugs?! Are you about to pull the trigger? Are you about to pull the trigger right here? Oh hell no!" He gets up and just leaves this poor little blond hottie all by herself about to have a mental break down, probably scared for her life, while simultaneously trying to be strong and hold it together for the sake of being at Mozza. "the Osteria side" for crying out loud! Next thing I know she gets up and walks out after him...in her defense I have to say she gave good face, like a deer in the headlights. That was the best after dinner mint, a total palate cleanser. Then Super Studly Hot Man and I look at each other and both laugh at other peoples misery, it amazes me how he completely satisfies me on a gluttonous and sick level. Oh what a glorious night!
