ReviewID: MCgXpEr4URV361zsGWnBJw
ReviewerID: E9GIXD6rVF0oZublcl7jLQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
I don't get why people hate on Manna so much. I actually really enjoy eating here even though it's not like "real" KBBQ and doesn't have all those gross vittles and vitlens that some other AYCE KBBQ joints offer. I'll pass on those exotic items such as pork belly or intestines. It's really kind of a stretch for me to even eat the bulgogi. I wouldn't mind it though if they offered squid.. . For $17 (the price keeps going up doesn't it?) you get Unlimited (read: AYCE) meat. There are some other a la carte items on the menu like shrimp, seafood or kimchee pancakes but the only way to go is to do the AYCE. You'll get unlimited amounts of short rib, beef brisket, pork belly, marinated pork, marinated chicken and marinated beef - you just tell them which kind of meat you want more of. Ask for the side of egg too, it's free and sooooo good. They've got a coupon on their website right now that will get you $1 off but the stipulations are kind of tricky. You have to go in on a Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday and only then will you receive a coupon good for $1 off your NEXT visit on a Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday. Doesn't sound particularly useful to me but maybe someone out there could put it to good use.. . I do have to complain about the blatant discrimination and poor service the last time I dined here. I came here with about 6 friends to celebrate my 24th birthday (in Sept. 2007). Immediately my friends and I were seated in the BACK ROOM, not the main room and when we looked around it was plain to see that THIS is the room where they stick all the non-Asian looking people! I take special offense the times when I'm discriminated against for not looking "Asian enough" and this was no exception. The people in my party were a black/Mexican guy, a white guy, me, a filipina/Russian girl, and 3 Vietnamese guys. I guess our mix of ethnicities was not stacked to their liking. We looked around and everyone at the tables around us were either white, black or latino. Hmmm, I wonder what's going on here...Add that to the fact that our table's buzzer didn't work and nobody cared when we mentioned this to every single waiter who passed our table (which was a rare event in itself) and you've got some obvious discrimination baby. The website even says that if it's your birthday you'll get a free bottle of champagne (that they spray on you when it' popped open) but when the waiter checked my ID he said nothing...and this was ON the actual date of my birthday!. . So service that time sucked but the food was still freakin' great (just be warned that you'll smell like a campfire the rest of the night). Make sure that when you go your posse is rolling deep with the Asians so you'll get good service. Oh, and make sure you do the valet parking. I know, I know, it sucks to pay a couple bucks just to park your car but otherwise you'll end up hoofing it for at least half a mile.
