ReviewID: MCLDjVl69lTjanrE7igI_w
ReviewerID: F7vgCzNV-cSGvTn4szQDuQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Best Fish Taco in Ensenada
Category: Mexican
coming soon when i sober up! the owner got me drunk. then he flipped me off. then he told me to leave cuz he closes on mondays cuz he's hungover and the place closes when he feels like it. but it's not monday. then he gave me some tequila.. . ok. review coming soon!. . UPDATE!. . ok now i am somewhat hungover and dizzy but let me finish my review.... . so this spot is the best. why? because they just mastered what they are good at. my buddy vinny took me here cuz he's buddies with the owner and told me i had to try this spot. then he asked me if i heard of yelp cuz yelpers love this place too. i said i never heard of it.. . it opens when joseph comes, it closes when he leaves. just like how a real taco stand should be! he knows all his customers and if you bring your girlfriend he might steal her. what a guy!. . first thing you need to know is, you can only get tacos here. thats it. nothing else. and only 2 kinds. fish and shrimp. i asked joseph the owner what else was on the menu. he pointed at the sign and asked if i was a moron. its only shrimp and fish! get it? . . so these 2 tacos they have perfected! i didn't want to do anything to piss joseph off, for he was my taco dealer. their salsa bar also, ridiculous! freakin good! and i normally hate corn tortilla, i've never had good corn tortilla in my life. not even in mexico. but i got it here! where its toasted and crunchy not soggy and chewy. and he only has spanish ladies working there. that makes it even more authentic!. . also you get your tacos one at a time so it keeps the awesomeness longer. so when you want more, come get more. its cash only to help with speed. and they don't do take out or delivery, to maintain that quality. cops love this place so that tells you something. oh btw never mention baja fresh or wahoos and good fish tacos in the same sentence here. . . so it totally has that beach taco stand vibe, but in the middle of los feliz. joseph is a taco artist, so he also supports local artists there, and all the drinks there get recycled to help children of the world.. . i needed to know how this guy from hollywood found the best fish tacos in ensenada? so i asked him and joseph told me the story.... . he was in mexico one day many many years ago. the details of why he was there were sketchy and shady and had to do with some bet and a donkey. so he was in mexico. in the desert, riding his donkey. alone. he had to deliver this donkey to a bar in the desert for their show. so he did and he watched the show. and there were hookers there. and joseph had some money. and long story short he woke up alone, no water, no donkey. just a sombrero on his head, and a half a bottle of tequila with a golden worm in it.. . now joseph was walking back, trying to find civilization. drunk on tequila. no donkey to ride on. he was in dire straights. . . when things looked bleakest, when he was dreaming about someone making a movie of his life, possibly directed by terry gilliam and starring johnny depp. this is when he saw the women. sessy the salsa girl.. . she looked like an angel in the desert. he ran to her and she offered him life saving fish tacos. he bit into it and it was the most delicious thing he had ever tasted! she gave him horchata to wash it down with. he asked where this came from. she said ensenada. he asked where that was. she pointed over there.. . he thanked her and starting walking. when he turned around to wave by, she vanished. all he had left were fish grease on his hands. he licked his fingers dry.. . he never did find ensenada.. . why i asked?. . he said cuz he just invented this story right now. . . joseph you cocksucker!. . then he proceeded to pull out a bottle of tequila with the golden worm and well... the rest is history.. . (ps: if you care and my review isn't enough, it was voted best fish tacos by la weekly!). . (pps: sessy says don't be a donkey and tip generously). . update again - . . if you say you heard about this place from sam from yelp, he said he will let me back in!
