ReviewID: MD3RGaTkdnIpWoxOzefZLw
ReviewerID: tzIXMXadrzQ4i7TGgIroOw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I am so glad that Sepia was participating in Chef's Week. It gave me the opportunity to try out a place where the pricing would normally scare me away. BUT, to my surprise, the prices were still rather reasonable. . We sent on a Sunday night after having made a reservation less than an hour before. We waltzed in and were seated in Tangie's section. She was great and totally sold us on the desert of the day even after having the Prix Fixe menu with desert. . To start we had the Grilled Squid "salad" thing and the Scotch Duck Egg with wild rice and arugula along with cocktails, both had the Maca Ouro. I didnt try the Squid, but the egg was great! The flavoring was perfect with the rice. The cocktail was delicious. The aromas hit you before even taking a sip and reminded me of something that you could drink heated in the winter. Yum.. For entrees we had the Bacon wrapped Trout  and the Cider Braised Pork Belly along with a new round of cocktails, the Sepia Mule and the Dutch Hum Punch. The Mule tasted like watered down ginger lemonade. The Hum Punch was pretty good. Bacon Wrapped Trout was completely deboned(yay) and was perfect with the potatoes that came with it, and was great with the cocktail. The Pork Belly was yummy and the barbeque lentils were pretty great too. . For desert we had the Citrus Meringue Tart and the Vanilla Parfait. The Meringue was one of my favorite deserts of chef week. Yum. Yum. And Yum. The raspberry sorbet was a bit tart, but still, overall. . . oh so good. The Parfait was good too. . Then there was second desert. The desert of the day was Malted Milk Chocolate Mousse, Peanut Crisp and Peanut Maple Sauce so yes we had to have it. It tasted like a grown up candy bar. The crisp was nice and light. Very good. . Overall, great experience. Great service. My only complaint is the time we waited for our drinks. It was not busy and it took a good 10 minutes each time, in a place where most people had ordered bottles of wine. Sorry man, but pick up the pace. . The decor had a nice mix of rustic and formal elements (I hated the chairs but LOVED the chandeliers)
