ReviewID: mD6KQ_eEGRoxrz03xnQ0xw
ReviewerID: qwONwL783a0hvPQl2TVWjg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
I don't understand people's fascination with this place...i think its the name that gets people coming back...because for me it was just mediocre.... first off the place is filthy...even for me...whose used to living in filth...plz...my mouth alone...what comes out of this mouth is just constant garbage...but this place is pushing it...if the food was fabulous i'd overlook this misstep as i always do when there are diamonds in the rough...my motto a little dirt never hurt nobody...but that only applies to little hole in the wall places that are dirt cheap and have amazing food...this place falls flat on its face.... now anyone who knows me knows i love me some chicken.... i swear i was reincarnated and in another lifetime i was black...or mexican...cause i love me some southern soul food and some mexican food.... i love me some chicken...i am a connoisseur of chicken...i know a good chicken when i taste one.... I"M A CHICKEN SLUT...i've been around the block with some chickens in my day...and this one wasn't that fabulous...it didn't have the nice golden brown exterior or the flaky crispy coating...or the delicious juice that dribbles down your chin when you eat it bitching hot you can barely hold it in your mouth...but its so freaking good you don't spit it out...you just do that "woo ha" in your mouth trying to not burn the inside of your esophagus.... I ordered a two piece with a waffle...it was good...the waffle had a slightly crispy texture but i wish it was crispier...it has a hint of cinnamon and nutmeg that i enjoyed...it was probably the best thing..a little pat of butter...some syrup...yum... overall the waffle was the best part...together with the chicken it was good..the waffle being its saving grace....i just wished the chicken was better.... also considering the ambiance and what not you would expect the place to be cheaper...but its kind of expensive for being such a cruddy place and the parking is terrible...lol.... god...who do i have to blow around here to get a good parking spot..... jeez....
