ReviewID: Mdv8BhHskEDSCDFBcNHbTg
ReviewerID: nNG_as7Jb60TIwM4fbX9ow
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ajna Bar
Category: Lounges
Go for drinks in the early part of the week, sit by the bar in one of the many secluded nooks, or perhaps on one of the tables facing the bar, and marvel at the atmosphere of this place. . . The drinks are expensive ($15 is the norm) and inconsistent ("Buddha Scroll" with mint, red grapes, and lemon was an unsuccessful take on the mojito; "Pink Angel" with muddled raspberries was much better) but served in a large glass, so at least you are getting some of your money's worth. But to sip in such an oppulent, sexy, dim-lit cavern, the price of the drink is absolutely worth it. Consider it the price of admission to see something as unreal as Buddha Bar. You will no longer be in NYC; especially if you go mid or early week and it's not that crowded, you can be lulled into another state of mind, and that, my friends, is worth a $15 cocktail with a fancy name.. . The first thing you'll notice once you find the place (it has very discrete signage and you could totally walk by it) is the incense. It's a distinct scent that fills the place but doesn't overwhelm. Then the hallway lined with buddhas. The dim lighting. The warm red glow around everything. The dining room to the center, dark, secluded despite the size of the place. The lounge to the left: visions of "Raise the Red Lantern," silk fabrics, robes, lounges, settees, an opium den of the highest magnitude...red fabrics covering low chairs arranged in intimate little settings. And the bar! The magnificent, long bar with stools that look like mushrooms, covered in more red silks. Candles everywhere. . . The music, of course, is very good: global sounds that are the tempo for flirting, seducing, and relaxing. The Buddha Bar mix CDs of sexy, downtempo world beats have been famous for sometime, and this bar is based on the French original by the same name. . . I only sampled a sushi roll, BBQ Chilean Sea Bass, and it was ok. I paid over $80 for 4 drinks and a roll. Expensive, yes. Worth it when you want a completely different experience that stimulates ALL your senses? Yes.. . But I would dare not go on a weekend.
