ReviewID: mF572wO3FwCJVg8LqosTog
ReviewerID: -X8jUFNnEmh43pFZSFClpQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
I was warned by many many people about the service at this restaurant , but because I wanted to see Thai Elvis, I ignored the warnings.. . Some people think that it's great that the servers are so attentive, but what they don't seem to get is the fact that they're attentive because they want to turnover the table to the next customer as fast as possible.  Which in a sense isn't terrible but they did it in such an ugly way that's it's too ridiculous.  I understand wanting to turnover the table, but we weren't even taking long to eat and yet over and over they asked if we were finished!. . I was celebrating a birthday dinner with my family, asked the server to take a picture, the server looked totally annoyed and said "after I'm done packing your left-over in the box"  5 seconds later, she left without even acknowledging us.  All of the sudden those servers that kept swarming by our table to see if they can clear our table was gone.. . The owner isn't any better, in fact he's the one standing on the stage toward the side to get a better view of what tables the server should start pestering, speaking into the walkie-talkie handset.  You think the reason they had those headset walkie talkie was for customer service, but it is quite deceiving.. . Even if they had the best food (which they did not, it was just OK), I would never go back to this place.  How the servers kept coming over to see if they can clear our plates away over and over even though we weren't finished  was humiliating.  Beside what's the point of having an "Elvis" entertainment when you can't even sit and enjoy the show for a couple of minutes because they're trying to rush the patrons out?  . . The seating arrangement are terrible as well, I saw them seat a couple at  a table seating for 6 people, then they sat another couple at the same table, so they were only a chair apart...kinda awkward to be sitting, talking and dinning next to strangers.  But that's how greedy these bastards are, cramming as many parties as possible.. . I know a lot of people come to this place because of "Elvis (according to many reviews), but you could barely really hear Elvis singing anyway, it is done on purpose!!! All strategies, they lure you with entertainment but unless your seating in within 20 feet, you'll barely hear what's he's singing.. . This place left a bad taste in my mouth, it was my birthday I tried to make the best of it, but it  was an too much of an  uncomfortable dinning experience. I'm warning you just like I was warned by many, STAY AWAY FROM THIS GREEDY PLACE!!!!!! Don't patronize a business that does not respect their customer.
