ReviewID: mfFZiU4tHtVVIcNRO3XH-g
ReviewerID: DhFSh5r6BqEgwg8QbYVroA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Yard House
Category: Bars
SERVICE IS SUB-PAR!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! MANAGEMENT STINKS...This is Directed to BILL!! My friends and I were having dinner and catching up over some drinks. The night seemed to have gone smoothly, until the waitress' switched out due to one ending her shift. We were pretty much ready for the bill and the second waitress brought us the bill and we informed her that we already handed the credit card to our original waitress....we wait twenty minutes and conclude that the waitress is avoiding us..we wait some more debating how much of her tip is dwindling away with every passing minute. Then the manager approaches our table, Bill was his name. He informed us that the original waitress went on break (later tells us her shift was over, the story wasn't very straight) apparently she took the credit card with her in her work apron. Honest mistake, we understood so Bill offered us a free round of drinks while we waited for her to return from her break he said about 10 minutes. . .we wait 20 minutes and by this time our 8pm dinner lasted till 11:30. tired and wanting to leave we hunt Bill down and ask him what the deal was... he said she went home and she was rushing back....this changes the whole matter. we were worried about identity and security issues with the credit card and how we understood mistakes happen but we don't know where the credit card has been or where it is now...he was not understanding of our concern and as his waitress pranced in in her pajamas he still continued to charge us and would not let us leave till we signed the bill and assured us that his waitress was honest and trustworthy...we don't know Her nor him how can i be sure. He obviously did not handle the situation to the right accord. We left with an uneasy feeling about the credit card and immediately cancelled it. We will not be returning to this yardhouse, BEWARE of CREDIT CARD SNATCHING WAITRESSES!!!
