ReviewID: mFJV8sbeaOKTCALXyz9_-A
ReviewerID: aUYmylsgZYLXTUoYYw9UIQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yamato Restaurant
Category: Japanese
Incredible how diverse the reviews are!  Well, let me start by saying, before Yamato, we had absolutely no problem spending $50 + a person on sushi... then we ate here.  We can order whatever the heck we want (and we do, always try something new every time we go) including drinks and still can't break the $50 total for the bill (for 2 of us including tip).. . So, yes, it's not AAAA quality sushi, but seriously? It's happy hour all the time, so for the price you really can't beat it.  Plus they whip this stuff out so fast it makes you wonder if they're psychic or something!  Their whole business model is to provide Japanese food to everyone- so that means it's affordable, good and in a classy environment. . . We always joke that this is the perfect date place- just come in, request the Romeo and Juliet table on the side overlooking the sushi bar and order for your date.  She'll think you're a big spender and be quite impressed!  . . We love a variety of different dishes- but our new favorite is the garlic edamame... yummy!  Arari chicken- little chicken balls with a kiwi sauce that's amazing!  Sandra roll is deelish, same with the BSCR-it is basically a CA roll with Scallops on top, but OMG it's so good!!! Caterpillar and firecracker roll are also big winners.. . Basically, come here and go nuts- you still won't break the bank and what's so wrong with that?  . . Now that we found you Yamato, we just can't justify going anywhere else for sushi.  You won us over!. . Oh and to the person who added a little history about this place... it was actually originally a office for the Janss company - the guys who pretty much developed Westwood, the 2nd floor (back in 1930's) was the first male dorm at UCLA.   The same architect who designed Royce hall designed this building.  It was then a bank, then it became a Contempo then the Warehouse (remember the old record stores?) and then it was Euro Chow... which bombed big time!  . . Who knew this place had so much history!?
