ReviewID: MgeZvWOipqGEoaWg2KRT7Q
ReviewerID: 9wlYxT-jCfJKcKchCjcEJg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
I LOVE me some Argentinean Chorizo. I profess my love to the Lala Chorizon! Thus far, it's been the only chorizon that I crave on an everyday basis, isn't too greasy, and is 100% satisfying... oh and it also doesn't fall asleep when I'm all done with it ;) (who said that??). . The food:  . . The first time I ate here I started off with an appetizer. The chorizo was described as a grilled sausage and it was $2, so I gave the go ahead. MMMM, it was really really good. It kind of tasted like an italian sausage. It was cut in the middle and crispified. It came with freshly diced tomato in lemon juice. *mouth waters* It was really good. I strongly recommend it if you like italian sausages. . . For the main meal, I ordered the "Pollo Picante A la Brasa." The chicken was very crispy (just how I like it) BUT the sauce had a chipotle base, which wasn't indicated on the menu description. I was very disappointed, but only because I've never liked chipotle based products. My friends liked it. I just felt like it had a burned charcoal taste. I took the rest home and it didn't last in my fridge very long. My mom and my sister went at it. They are so good to have around when dieting! . . I decided to give Lala's one more try yesterday. Remembering my love for their chorizo, I ordered the chorizo sandwich. They sliced three sausages in half (lengthwise) and added lettuce and tomato. I wasn't in a bready mood, so I ate it breadless. It was sooo good. I am still in love with Lala's chorizo. The sandwich came with a choice of salad, fries, or mashed potatoes. The fries were crispy and topped with finely diced parsley or cilantro? I couldn't tell the difference. Whatever. No harm done. . . My friend ordered the Melrose salad, as she always orders it and says she stays true to it. I didn't taste it bc I don't like feta, but she raves about it. She also ordered a side of mashed potatoes. Of course I tasted. They were creamy, buttery and gone in like 2 minutes! . . Overall, Lala's is pretty good. A solid 4 stars in my book. . . Tip: If you don't want to pay the $5 valet, keep driving up that little street that it's on, pass the first block and if it's after 6p, you can park in front of that school. I've parked there both times I've been there and haven't gotten a ticket. It's Weho, so pay attention to the signs!
