ReviewID: MgH0IG0EhyIBJH_h4GZKbQ
ReviewerID: dbh_9Xy5-jSJ5aXNOzHonQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
My friend brought me here for my first meal in LA in over a year. She warned me that this place always gets super packed during lunch time and that parking is kind of a nightmare here despite the parking lot designated to it. She was right about both. There is so much drama in the parking lot. Haha... . However, there are two sides to this place when you enter. One appears to look like it serves hot food, and the other side appears to look like it's designated for bakery. BUT! You can go in either line and order whatever you want. So if you find yourself following everyone and standing in the longer line for lunch, go ask the worker there at the door (at least when I was there, there was someone at the door handing out menus for ppl to look at in line) she was the one that told me to go in the shorter line. . . I got the midnight (medianoche) sandwich which is just like the Cubano but it's on sweet bread rather than the Cuban bread which was delish. I had a bite of my friend's sandwich was the cubano to just try the bread and it's just crispier and not sweet whereas the sweet bread is much softer and sweeter. I liked mine better, and it was a dollar cheaper too! (3.65) SO CHEAP!!!! And I also had a potato ball since that's all the rage here. Didn't floor me, only b/c it's just like those potato croquettes that I get from the Korean bakery and at 85 cents a potato ball, I prefer to just get my potato croquette for a dollar which is more bang for my buck and I don't have to go to LA to have it. The plantain chips that came with the sandwich were off the hook, just wish they gave me more. Haha.... . Regrets: I wanted to try a slice of the Cuban pineapple cake but I opted not to since my friends weren't ordering much and I didn't want to look like a fatty. I'm so sad. It looks so good. I wanted to try the 3 leches cake too. Sigh......... I'll live. My friend says she always gets her birthday cakes here tho.. . Seating is a little tough to find, and there's not that much space. I wish they had a different system for delivering food to their customers... ehhh . . Would I come back? Sure! With sandwiches that cheap I'm down anytime if I was in the area. I don't know about dining in tho.
