ReviewID: mH8g5RKQKJGUhNMMlqJRMQ
ReviewerID: Fk3f48UhMngZayJc7VK_ZA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
So I've been on this kick to try out new places to eat on the weekends, and this weekend I decided to try out Oinkster's in Eagle Rock after reading some good reviews on Yelp.  I was familiar with that area of Eagle Rock (love Casa Bianca), but didn't remember seeing that place while driving down Colorado Blvd, but it was easy to find and was able to easily park (their lot is a little small, but I was grabbing a late lunch so not too many people were there).. . I dig the retro feel to it.  The little "lounge" area in one corner with a flatscreen TV is a little interesting, I guess they get a fair amount of happy hour business during the week since they seem to heavily promote it with all the specials they have for it.  They also seemed to have a lot of nice shaded seating outside as well.. . I ordered a House Pastrami sandwich combo to go, which came out to be $10.50 plus tax.  A little pricier than I imagined, but I can handle it.  I go to get my soda at the fountain, sit down and wait for my food.  After a little while the manager comes out to tell me that they're waiting on more pastrami to be ready and it will take a little while.  Hmm, that seemed a little odd, but I could wait it out.  The sign says "Slow Fast Food" out front anyways.  Well, a couple more minutes go by and a cook packages up a cupcake and gives it to me, apologizing for the delay.  That was super cool of them.  Finally, when my food was ready (it probably took 10 minutes total, which really isn't *that* bad), he said he gave me a large fry instead of a regular.  OK, I didn't really need extra fries AND a cupcake, but I appreciated the generosity, thanked them, and took it home.. . It probably wasn't ideal to transport the sandwich 10 minutes before eating it, as the roll had gotten pretty soggy by then with the meat's juices.  But the meat itself was very tasty, very juicy (obviously), and had a nice spiced taste to it.  I got the regular version of the sandwich without the cheese/cabbage/onions...not sure if I'd want that on the sandwich or not.  The fries were crispy on the outside and soft on the inside.  I liked the texture to them, and they tasted pretty good as well.  Totally forgot to get any of their many sauces, but both the sandwich and fries tasted good enough without them!  Wasn't able to finish the massive amount of fries obviously.  I tried reheating some later,  but by then they lost their crispiness and everything, oh well.. . Just tried my free cupcake as well.  I wasn't really sure what kind of cupcake it was since the guy just randomly grabbed one and gave it to me.  The cupcake is about medium size, and it's got a pretty big glob of tan frosting on it with some peanuts sprinkled on top.  I take a bite into the frosting and it's peanut butter flavored.  OK, peanut butter cupcake, interesting.  I take a bite into the cake portion, and inside it's filled with jelly!  I can't say that it's the greatest cupcake I've ever had, but it's pretty good, a cute concept, and hey it was free!. . Definitely recommend checking this place out.
