ReviewID: MH8tsWTv0MutqoeMsI6jcQ
ReviewerID: hU46otnbSfdU5oI0zhJGoA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
Sushi Gen is kinda like the "office hottie" that everyone talks about:  You hear a lot of things around the watercooler &amp; only half of them are actually true but most of it is urban legend rooted in something someone said long ago... and kept alive by the same people that forward "email petitions" &amp; "medical warning emails" around the office.. . A DOWNTOWN BUSINESS LUNCH HOTSPOT. Sushi Gen, as it is today, is pretty good.  It's blown up ridiculously since its inception but it's still a good restaurant.  It has the added benefit of being easy to get to from downtown &amp; having plentiful parking.  Sushi Gen got absurdly popular after being repeatedly listed in the LA Times &amp; the LA Weekly as being one of Los Angeles top sushi restaurants.   It's also listed as one of SushiMasters "Top 10 Restaurants in California" so LA locals know about it &amp; the rest of the America has seen it listed on Zagat LA &amp; we all know that Zagat is where restaurants go to become generically mass market so that pretty much means that anyone passing through town that can flip through a 3 1/2x8" book trounces through Gen's doors.. . BEST FOR BUSINESS LUNCHES?. To its credit, Sushi Gen operates somewhat like a Tokyo kitchen - very efficiently &amp; quickly.  Some believe their sushi to be the "best in Los Angeles" based on discussions I've had with folks there.  I don't think it comes EVEN CLOSE to that but it's certainly better than joints like Beverly Hill's Nishimura or La Cienega's Koi at half the price.  Sure, it's in the upper third tier of sushi restaurants for certain;  &amp; if you need a business meeting restaurant, this is probably a good choice being that:. . 1) It's got reasonably good sushi &amp; authentic Japanese dishes (i.e. no bulgogi or kimchee here). 2) It's got a variety of dishes that'll please the Japanese foodie as well as the "I don't eat raw fish" types. 3) They "put the hold" on the sushi nazi routine for noobs making it friendly for high maintenance types that usually bitch about 'not enjoying the experience' or 'rude service'. 4) It's on the higher end of the price scale but you won't care since you'll be able to expense the meal as business. . WHAT'S GOOD?. For starters, the wasabi is real fresh grated wasabi root, and miraculously they serve high quality Maeda-En tea, instead of stock Yamamotoyama. . . The good news is that because they churn out so much fish across EIGHT sushi chefs, they generally always serve fresh fish.  In other words, there's very little chance of you being served something that's been in the refrigerator longer than a day or two.  . . And when you know that the fish is going to be fresh, it's best to side with the dishes that are hard to screw up when fresh.  For example, the Ikura/Salmon Roe is quite good.  Additionally, Yellowtail, Albacore, &amp; Salmon are all generally always good, (since most of the crowd orders a ton of it) &amp; again, consistent in bulk.  What is served on Monday will be the way it is Friday with completely new, fresh fish.  Ask for Toyo-san - the older chef in the middle.  . . WHAT'S BAD?. Sushi Gen is akin to a conveyor belt production line which is good for speed of service but ultimately weak for quality.  Preparation is often sloppy:  The rice is occasionally dry, the fish cut is very consistently mediocre unless you sit at the bar, knife strokes sometimes seems to be almost with the grain, I've had fish w/ a small bone in it, etc.  All you really have to do is visit during lunch to discover how often the 'ball' gets dropped.. . Also - something to know is that while their fish may be very fresh, it's usually of arbitrary quality.  Generally the chefs themselves go to select the fish but I really have to wonder when it comes to Gen.  And this is a point that seems to be lost on a lot of reviewers - FRESH fish does not equate to GOOD fish.  I think they serve so much sushi that they virtually become indiscriminant about the fish they select to serve.  It's probably because of all the "business lunch" traffic they get, who they figure can't tell the difference anyway.  (Apparently very few Yelpers seem to be able to as well, judging by the reviews.  I would not '5-Star' this place.). . For example, one of their 'specialties' is Otoro &amp; Chutoro... &amp; most of the time it's laden with tsuji.  (fibers)  I shouldn't need to chew my sushi to this degree.  I order this for customers I bring but it's always the weakest parts of any meal here.  Also Sushi Gen serves very poor Uni.  It's usually firm, bright, &amp; well textured... but ultimately bitter/tasteless instead of being sweet.. . CONCLUSION:. I'll have lunch here &amp; I'll take my customers because it's convenient &amp; they serve a broad range of dishes.  The sushi's not bad &amp; the atmosphere is electric.  But when I'm on my own time or I'm aiming for quality, I go elsewhere.  For those looking for alternatives, Sushi Go 55 &amp; Komasa downtown are more meticulous about what they serve.  Or Hiko on the Westside.. . 3 1/2-stars. (Rounded up)
