ReviewID: MHe-1SjInjVyIm4Xfl4gvg
ReviewerID: lW3uQd0dl8Jn5iFZNNd3aA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
One word: YUM! Porto's Bakery is like the bakery that all other bakeries want to be like. Even in this type of economy, the place was packed! They have sandwiches, smoothies, and coffees. But what they are most known for is their plethora of delicious and drool worthy pastries. . . They have these croissant things called cheese rolls and they are totally worth the sometimes long wait. It's a croissant filled with sweet cheese and then topped with sugar. It is completely addicting! They also have chocolate croissants, (croissants with a chocolate filling), which are pretty good. The ends of the croissants are dipped in chocolate and the croissant itself i nice and buttery. They have an amazing amount of different types of croissants and danishes. Just today, I saw apple and cream cheese danishes, cream cheese danishes, guava and cheese croissants, guava croissants, strawberry croissants and I'm pretty sure there are more that I've forgotten. We also ordered a slice of strawberry shortcake that looks delicious and some macaroons that I have yet to try. They also have different types of breads, cakes, napoleons, eclairs, shortcakes, cookies and so much more. . . We also got some sandwiches to go and they were delicious! I got their Pan Con Lechon sandwich, which is pork sandwich with onions and a garlic spread on a cuban roll. I've been craving that for a while. BF got their steak fajita sandwich and it's exactly what it sounds like; steak that have been grilled with bell peppers and onions and piled on a cuban roll. . . The place can be a little confusing if you've never been there and plan on ordering sandwiches and drinks. There's an express line for those who know what they want to order and don't need to see the pastries (they have a display though). Next to the cashier is a long table where you have to wait to pick up your sandwiches (they call by the order number). On the other side of the express line is the bar for where you pick up your drink order. . . Again, one word.. YUM!
