ReviewID: Mi55VGem4d-lSh5x-NChcA
ReviewerID: vqKLzj_SGdnBEnG2wSuGyg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Dojo Restaurant
Category: Japanese
I went here last night during the winter storm 09'. It was a cool spot (literally) to be, in such drastic weather conditions. My friend and I took a booth by the window; we could see the squall brewing around us. Passersby frolicked and fought with snowballs. Sloshed students slipped and slid and fell constantly. So it was great entertainment; that mixed with my friends "Useless facts" app (did you know that Q-tips were originally called Baby Gays??), made for an incredible evening. Unfortunately, it was hardly an edible evening.. We both ordered the Yoshiba, or Yakitoba, or whatever the noodle, veg, and meat (chicken) combo is called (im bad with names). I do not recommend it. It was bland, the chicken was quite gristly and had some hard "bone-like" pieces mixed in. The vegetables were al dente, which was good, but they were few and far between. The noodles had a weird consistency for me. . I asked for it spicy, and was told that they couldnt do it. The waiter brought me some hot sauce, but it was like texas pete or some equivalent. I mean if your name is Dojo, and you have an entire page of asian cuisine, you should have some sort of asian hot sauce (sriracha, chile's, something). Am I wrong here?. I ordered the chicken fingers (when I called them tenders, i was corrected), which is the dumbest name ever; but I digress. They were actually quite delicious. I also ordered a vanilla, cappuccino yogurt shake.... Pretty tasty. . On the weekend they have an all day happy hour ($2 draft, $2.50 bottle), which is pretty sweet. I got Kirin draft, but I think they are only like 10 oz, but whatev. . The service was practically non-existent. I ended up staring at the remnants of my gristly meat Yakitockytoba (??) for so long that I had to put my plate to the side. The server didnt even take it away until we were leaving. I was never asked if I wanted another drink, which I probably wouldve ordered, as Im a sucker for cheap beer (no matter the stature).. But the food was cheap, the view was sweet, and the milk-shake, a treat. I'd probably go back, but I'd change up my selection.
