ReviewID: mIm5sEBVgo0jv1PA3zjdDw
ReviewerID: D2setZ2_pKZ9CWEb0IgrOQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: one sixtyblue
Category: American (New)
3.5 stars--nothing wrong with one sixtyblue at all, it just wasn't mind blowing, though I will say that my dining companions were more impressed than I was.  . . I started with the "key lime vegan caesar", which was not key limey at all, and tasted suspiciously like a real ceasar salad, which made me skeptical, but the lettuce was crispy and the dressing wasn't too heavy so ultimately I kept my mouth shut and was pleased.  That said, the croutons get a C- for their small stature and lack of flavor.  Others went for the watercress and endive salad w/ flying shrimp.  I would have been totally down, but it a) came with shrimp, which I don't usually like in a salad, and b) came with that standard fruity American dressing, in this case apricot.  I am a separatist.  If I want fruit, I'll have fruit, and if I want salad, well, you know the drill.  That salad was slightly larger and more artfully presented.. . For din all four of us went for the walleye, which came with purple potato mash, snap peas, and morels.  Fish was delicious--flaky, mild, and paired well with its array of accompaniments.  As per usual, I wished there had been about 3 more pieces of fish on my plate, but such is life.. . Skipped dessert, nothing sent our hearts a-palpitating--though they did have a coconut curry sorbet, the sound of which made me vom in my mouth a little.  On the upside, they give you complimentary cookies with the bill!  Chocolate peanut butter.  Delightful.  . . Other addendum: lovely host and hostess--very flexible--but they should have been, given that the restaurant was only 1/2 on a Friday night in the fine city of Chicago. . . Quiet when we were there--was with the matriarch N., who is 80 now, and she was able to hear all of us comfortably.  Worth a special trip?  Perhaps not, but strong food all around, just nothing that fills me with a desire to effluence glowing remarks about the experience.
