ReviewID: mJ__M3w2fVSLbRc1daFGpQ
ReviewerID: SxMl4eI39C0PGaxBOM5X7A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
I'm an on-and-off vegetarian who a) thinks there's too much meat in the classic deli sandwich and b) passes up burgers more often than not. So it took a little arm twisting to get me to eat at a place called Oinkster selling pretty much only meat. They do have a couple of salads but once you get in a place like this, it seems preposterous to try the greens.. . I had the pastrami, the gourmet Oinkster version with Gruyere and caramelized onions. In hindsight, I wish I had gone with the Reuben special on rye with sauerkraut. The pastrami was very soft, juicy and melt in your mouth. Not like the tough stuff I'd come to expect from my limited experience with it. But I've also come to expect pastrami to be salty. Not only was this not salty, it was a little -- I hate to say it -- bland. Now, I blame it on the sandwich. The Gruyere and onions were on the sweet side and balanced it out instead of punching up the meat. I spread some of the garlic aioli on it and it was much better. I tried my dude's burger and it was delish -- in the same category as In-N-Out I'd say. The fries are the best part. They're cooked in beef fat -- the old fashioned way -- and I couldn't stop eating them. I am a fry connoisseur and these may be the best I've ever had. The homemade ranch is divine.. . Now overall, I liked the restaurant and the experience but it's different. They have a lot of beers on tap which is cool and definitely not something you'd find at In-N-Out but the seating arrangement is more fast food than brewpub. It doesn't really encourage lingering. Then again, the food is not that fast so you do have to sit a while to get it. If I couldn't find a table to wait at, I think I'd be a little grumpy. And after sitting that long, you expect something better than fast food. While it's definitely better than 99 percent of fast food, I think it's debatable whether it's better than In-N-Out.. . I went during Happy Hour -- based on the Yelp page -- but once there didn't remember what they had for HH. It's not posted anywhere and it was busy so I didn't want to decide at the counter. After checking when I got home, I was bummed that I didn't remember the pork tacos. I bet they're really good but I didn't even see them on the menu! Will have to try the Oinkster again.
