ReviewID: MjUrGI4DtyckBrWlVBMrVA
ReviewerID: XSlSBYjvAQ8EcoeXEv492g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Elements Café
Category: American (New)
Awesome, well thought out and simply but beautifully executed food.. . Sadly this place suffers from the same problem Auntie Em's does in Eagle Rock..... . The snot nosed, whiny clientele.. . REALLY.....Do your homework folks. . . If you want to be served in a microsecond, fawned over for days and seated in under 30 seconds GO SOMEWHERE ELSE.. . This is NOT what elements is about. It is a small place that serves artisanal food. It doesn't have a menu like the Cheesecake factory and thank goodness it doesn't!. . I was mightily impressed by the attention to detail as far as the menu and the actual combinations of flavors blended.. . The pulled pork was lovely...somewhere between a cuban and a new orleans style pulled pork. The pork was slightly tangy, perfectly moist..with a black bean paste, sweet sauteed onions and plantains TO DIE FOR! The bread was soft and slightly sweet and the chips on the side were fresh and crisp. All the way around a big hit for me...that was until it was knocked out of the park by...... . OH. MY. GOD. . Wild mushroom and truffle oil mac and cheese!!!!. *faints*. . I am a southerner and I take Mac and Cheese as seriously as religion. I have eaten enough of it that by all accounts I should be 550 pounds. I live and die by the Paula Dean credo "It's all better with a little more butter". . . This mac and cheese actually silenced me. I don't think I spoke at all while I ate it. I ordered another one to go. I lost my mind. It was a beautiful, horrible thing and I can't wait to try the tomato and chicken mac and cheese as soon as I can go over there without embarrassing myself. Creamy, deep, earthy butteriness.  An explosion in my mouth of salty cheesy happiness. The definition of comfort.. . LOVE.. . I only gave Elements 4 stars because even with a small staff and small kitchen the wait was a bit on the long side. Not obnoxious but I was glad I was there with someone I really love chatting with.. . PS Note: this is a perfect place to hit during the week between 1:30-3:00 the crowds die down. I would imagine brunches can be a zoo.
