ReviewID: MKI2Pwxfof0UAor9NdiCXw
ReviewerID: qZqPq0Iv48OwbOCKPo8FEA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Let me break it down for you, Fred 62, like my compatriot Dan W. states, has fairly average food and a strange over-reliance on kitsch over quality. When I would go there I'd pretty much only order breakfast items like the Egg in the Hole which reminded me of my mom's specialty breakfast or The Fred McMurray which is an ironic play on our dearly departed Republican lead actor of My Three Sons and internationally famous fast-food chain, McDonalds. Groundbreaking stuff, I know.. . One time my friend Jon and I went into Fred 62 after a night of drinking and Jon had to urinate badly. He went to both bathrooms on the left and right side of the restaurant only to find that both of them were locked. Jon, being a somewhat loud and rambunctious drunk, started making a huff, but grudgingly waited. Minutes went by until he again attempted to enter both bathrooms. The left was still locked, as was the right. This is where Jon lost it, and starts hollering obscenities and causing a scene about how it is LITERALLY impossible to take this long to go to the bathroom, how this is a TRAVESTY of modern life, and that whoever is taking THIS long in the bathroom surely must not have any hands or something. After Jon settled down, the door to the right bathroom opened, and out came a customer with hooks for hands. HOOKS FOR HANDS!!! There have only been a few choice moments in my life when time has practically stopped the events unfolding in front of me so I can witness all of it in it's full glory, and watching the hooked-hand man walk straight from the bathroom, straight out of Fred 62, right past Jon, amidst the silent customers, is definitely one of them. All the customers were shocked, APPALLED at Jon. All he could do is stand there, looking like a poor man's Larry from Three's Company, shrugging his shoulders saying "WHAT? like i'm supposed to KNOW the guy doesn't have hands?" Awesome.
