ReviewID: mLpJQQXQus2UD9WvrKgpAw
ReviewerID: bS61QwzLfsyGvNfDl4-Ebw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
If you want to feel like royalty for a day, you need to come here.  The original Mastro's, I brought my family here for a mother's day dinner because I wasn't too impressed with the one in Costa Mesa and I was told that the one in BH tasted much better.  There's a door man at the door that specifically opens the door for you.  As we got there, only half our party was there, yet they were already ready to seat us.  We asked if we could wait for the rest of the party.  "Sure! No problem, just let us know when you're ready and we will seat you immediately."  Wow, thanks!!  As our party trickled in, they took us to a back private room for our party.  That was pretty cool..and it had a window that looked into the kitchen and you can see more than 20 chefs scrambling around making food.  It was like an inside window to the inner workings of a restaurant.  Our waitress was so cute and was the best.  She had a winning personality, joked with us and completely took care of us.  The food was, amazing!!! We all ordered steaks, my bone in ribeye was so juicy, cooked perfectly with a right amount of char on top of hot melted butter...it just melted in your mouth.  They filled our water glasses immediately, and served us our sides.  The sides were ok.  Creamed spinach and creamed corn (I still thought of Lawrys), garlic mashed potatoes was ok, sauteed mushrooms ok, and gorgozola mac and cheese...I'm not the biggest fan of that cheese and the mac and cheese was a bit dry..so a bit disappointing.   Dessert....the warm butter cake...DIVINE.  my sister ordered a plate of berries and it was served with a plate of homemade whipped cream. MMM...I could have spooned that into my mouth all day long.  To top it off, LL Cool J was there eating with his family. MMMM second dessert.  Somebody called today to thank me for dining with them the day before.  Wow.  You're welcome!! It was a great dining experience, which is almost hard to say with these snooty high end places in the Hills.  !!
