ReviewID: MMGTvFs9akQKMb7Ekc_tNw
ReviewerID: wCtf5_zG8EpWiBp_Oi7P0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
Cuban lesson of the day: sides available "rice and beans or moro" So what is moro we asked? "well it is rice and beans" So the options are rice and beans and rice and beans? "yes" ha ha basically moro is them mixed together, go figure!. . So I HATE that I can't give half stars...so really this place get 3.5 stars but i'll round up for the amount of food you get on your plate ha. . You have to come here hungry and prepared to eat A LOT. The bread they bring out first is lightly dusted with a garlic butter sauce and it is so warm and chewy and toasted a smidge and if you aren't careful you will lose valuable room for your entree if you eat too much of this goodness! . . But after being impressed by the free bread, their croquetas with ham and cheese were not up to par. The outside was not crunchy enough and the inside just seemed like a semi messy puree of some sort, so I would pass on those next time. The tamales however were pretty tasty even though tamales seem like a spanish or mexican food to me and not cuban but then again the glory of cuban food is all of the influences that came together there to create its food--a little bit of everything from spanish to french to mexican to soul food ha.. . My pork was cooked very well but the garlic mojo sauce criollo sauce was lacking a bit in the garlic flavor overall and my friends thought their famous garlic chicken was more lemony than garlic as well. Maybe they ran out of garlic tonight??? ha ha But these dishes were massive and came with rice and beans and plantains too!!. . And my other friend could have married her rice in the arroz con pollo, she wouldn't stop raving about it in the car on the way home! Oh and get the sangria, because it is decent and actually not too pricey for LA . . Cons: no water service, i guess he was lazy but he never brought us any, lack of garlic flavor, and the waiter getting mad at us for using four cards to pay for our bill.......hey we were paying were we not??? next time hold the attitude and bring me MORE GARLIC! ha ha
