ReviewID: MmiWZKqdN584ktp7on4__A
ReviewerID: NI8PcbML_ljaE1m1_jGOdA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: ilili
Category: Middle Eastern
Never in my life have I described any dish as "orgasmic" but you should know that I practically came eating ilili's brussels sprouts. . . There, I said it.. . A group of us ate here for a friend's birthday and we all were quite satisfied with our dishes. Personally I have a big soft spot for Mediterranean food and was curious to try a Lebanese take on it. It would have been nice to have the $38 prix fixe dinner but it's only available Sunday to Wednesday. We were all happy ordering mezze, which are shareable appetizers, plus entrees. None of us realized that labne, strained yogurt drizzled with olive oil, comes automatically to the table (delish, btw) so in addition we ordered a couple of hummus apps to start and had a nice intro to a fabulous meal.. . A round of sangria was ordered, and then another. As I don't eat meat, I ordered mouhamara, a puree of walnuts and peppers, which was perfectly spicy, as well as the aforementioned brussels sprouts as my main. I really wasn't kidding about what I mentioned earlier!! They are fried (but not deep fried), drizzled with a dill yogurt and a fig sauce and topped with walnuts. Yummm!! Friends were more than pleased with their lamb kebabs and cod. . . For dessert there was baklava, surprisingly shareable as they are pre-cut into bite-sized portions, the ilili Candy Bar was good but too rich for me, and the Napoleon-like dessert of crunchy noodles sandwiching the clotted cream was good but too heavy on the noodles.. . The atmosphere here is sexy and sophisticated; you could take a date or parents. Service was excellent, our waitress was great helping us choose dishes and was nice as well as professional. . . My only complaints are that though the food was fantastic I truly think it was overpriced. To drive that point home, pitchers of watery sangria turned out to be $45 each! What?? Stick with wine, better. That left a sour note on an otherwise spectacular meal, once we saw the bill!. . I'd love to come back for restaurant week or to try the prix fixe menu.
