ReviewID: mO03VslQBLMCXqXnR-ed5A
ReviewerID: lZ9onjC5i5y3cDCXbX0vOw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yard House
Category: Bars
A day doesn't go by when someone asks the question, "Peter, what is your favorite restaurant?"  My response is always, "For what type of cuisine?"  There are many great restaurants in Southern California. I love going to a restaurant that is friendly, well maintained, has good food and one that I don't have to stop and clean the ATM out to enjoy a meal.  I have been asking you... My loyal readers to share with me your favorites.  So I thought I would share with you a few of my favorite responses.. . Reader Elizabeth Wing of South Pasadena likes Madre's in Pasadena.  She writes that Green St. is quite ordinary but she loves the Steven Sandwich and Diane Salad, wow pretty good writing Elizabeth, she also adds that good memories count for something. The Oak Tree Inn in South Pasadena is good for large groups and is drama free.  Hmm where has she been eating?. . La Fiesta Grande in South Pasadena Elizabeth likes for its non foo foo food, and writes that she has never had a bad meal there.  She gives thumbs up for the all you can eat taco bar with guacamole, you always get your monies worth.  Great comments Elizabeth I know who to call when I go on vacation to fill in for me.. . Jonathon Dunlap responded to this paper and my article on bargains, he loves Zu Robata and Il Moro, both have an excellent happy hour.. Zu Robabta  offers tapaps and small dishes. This is a popular west side eatery . located at 12217 Wilshire Blvd Los Angeles, CA 90025 Phone (310) 571-1920. Il Moro  is located at 11400 West Olympic Blvd, Los Angeles, CA 90064. (Entrance &amp; Valet Parking are on Purdue) Phone (310) 575 3530. . Jeff Gates from Pasadena, says Luigi Ortega's is the place for bargains... A pint of Firestone for $2 plus all draft beers are 1/2 price Monday through Friday. They have an alligator pizza but watch out for the teeth, well we'll check that one out Jeff.  Thanks Jeff.. Luigi Ortega's is located at 1655 E. Colorado Pasadena. Phone (626) 396-9669. Janine of Pasadena offers this on Yard House  she likes Monday - Friday3PM - 6PM Select Half-Priced Appetizers Domestic Pints $3.25. Craft/Import Pints $3.50 Well Drinks $4.25 House Martinis $5.50(yum). Wine By The Glass $2.00 / OFF. Panda Inn in Pasadena.  I have been a regular there for the past 15 years. I just enjoy the entire dining experience at Panda. Are there better Chinese restaurants in Chinatown or on the Westside? Arguably yes!  But Panda offers terrific food, a well maintained kitchen and extraordinary service - it's the Panda Inn for me.. . This past Sunday I visited the Sunday Brunch at Panda Inn, they have raised their prices. slightly to $24.95 but they still one of the better values in town.  The buffet includes just about everything on the menu and also offers  if you aren't driving includes Mai Tai's and Mimosas, if you would like to enjoy a cocktail.  My recommendation is to go directly to the shrimp cocktail and sashimi.  Yum Yum I really think they lost money on me that day.. Panda Inn Pasadena is located at 3488 E. Foothill Blvd. Brunch Hours are 11 AM to 2:30 PM. Phone (626) 793-7300 to view the menu go to . http://www.pandainn.com.   This is also available at Panda Inn Ontario
