ReviewID: mPmn6jG2o4hr3hcZounALw
ReviewerID: urFojDQXEJtGqwtWjS94VQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I came to dinner here with an out of town boss. She had wanted to goto Shaw's or Smith and Wollensky's, but I really wanted to introduce her to a little, big city, non chain cuisine. Avec was packed, so we settled for Sepia, as I had heard great things.... . The cocktails were delicious. All of the appetizers were extremely underwhelming. I ordered the grilled squid, dry, but tasty. Other apps ordered were the white asparagus salad (why anyone attempts cooking these, I will never know) it was semi-redeeming with a deliciously soft cooked egg and Serrano ham. But, seriously, there are oodles and oodles of delicious green asparagus. Why even attempt these bitter, stringy abominations? The grilled shrimp; very mediocre. . . Entrees were the pork porterhouse and the duck breast. The pork was decent, not great. The greens they were served with were way too vinegary. I had the duck and the server had mentioned that it was a new item on the menu and if he'd come round again to ask how things were I would definitely had recommended some tweakin... The greens (kale) were so salty (please note that I carry fleur de sal in my purse at all times) that they were rendered inedible and the carrots were practically raw, not a vegetable that lends itself to blanching.  The duck itself was cut strangely, straight across the grain which made it extremely chewy, and the fatty delicious skin...  not very crisp, just flabby. . . Dessert was, by far, the star of the show. A coconut creme brulee atop a slice of almond cake with burnt apricots, sorbet and granola. Extremely memorable. . . The server was well versed with the menu and suggested a great wine, but never once checked in with us after we received our food.. . Overall I was a bit embarrassed that I suggested the place, as no one was very pleased with their meal. I would not return for anything other than drinks or dessert.
