ReviewID: Mqeblzh6pVGytAS1wDs_gQ
ReviewerID: kPTbv2EV0HAmweUyh7kAoA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
My parents and brother were in town last weekend, and on a drive through Beverly Hills we passed The Stinking Rose. I vaguely remembered reading something about a garlic-centric restaurant, and thusly we decided to give it a shot.. . The decor was warm and kitschy, and I can see where it might bludgeon one about the head (if one is concerned with this sort of thing). I'm generally not, however the creepy anthropomorphized garlic-woman painting was certainly attempting to weird me out. No matter, on to the food!. . Right away the menu scored points by clearly delineating vegetarian options. I do eat eggs and dairy, but I had to leave the meaty dishes to my family. We ordered the garlic french fries as an appetizer, and fresh rolls appeared tableside post-haste. The rolls came in onion, garlic, and plain iterations and went very well with the accompanying garlic olive oil and garlic pesto spread. The garlic fries were, "addictive" according to my father. His proclamation was greeted by sounds of happy chewing from the rest of us.. . I ordered the house salad, which was unremarkable save for its slight tendency towards dryness. Just a bit more dressing, please! Still, it was a good size and the ingredients were fresh.. . For dinner, I ordered the neon ravioli. I have come to expect very little from ravioli over the years. Generally, if it's good there is too little of it, and oftentimes it is overcooked or undersauced. I was definitely not disappointed by this dish! There was a generous portion of pasta and the garlic basil alfredo sauce was light and savory, and applied in just the right amount. Delicious pasta, on the whole.. . My brother selected the filet mignon rare, and said that it was cooked to his satisfaction. He mentioned that it was nicely seasoned, too. My father chose the lasagna and proclaimed it very good. He is a diehard Italian fan, and said that he would order this dish again if the opportunity arose. My mother had the chicken and asparagus pasta, yet by this point she was burning out on garlic. She mentioned that if she had just this dish she would've been fine. We also ordered a side of spinach, and I was quite impressed with its flavor. Actually, I want some right now. Yum.. . We concluded with the garlic ice cream (more for the novelty than an actual desire for dessert). My assessment is that it tastes like vanilla ice cream with a little something extra. It was fine, but I'm not about to go demanding that Hagen-Daaz manufacture it. I think I'll skip it on any return visit.. . Overall, the food quality was great, the concept was novel and pleasing, and the service was good. The Stinking Rose is doing a good job of backing up their very specific theme, and this would be a great place to take a date you're comfortable with (garlic breath, anyone?) or a small group of fun people. There was plenty of street parking available when we went, but there's a valet if you're into that sort of thing.
