ReviewID: mqEmn_XzKxaXTr2R7MtaVg
ReviewerID: fIfKT5J7OWnr_sNP7VKkAw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Native Foods
Category: Vegan
It was love at first site when I rolled into Native Foods and saw the big ass chalk drawing of an elephant explaining how awful the circus treats him and other animals. You speak the truth chalk elephant, I feel for you, and I will carry your words of the evil circus forth from the chalk board podium. . . But the animal respect while warming to my heart is not why I'm madly in love with this restaurant. I've tried many a restaurant motivated by animal activism and sometimes the food blows. If the food sucks I ain't one to lie, and while I appreciate their work on the political side I still don't want to eat lame food. . . This was not the case here, oh no. The Portobello &amp; Sausage Burger.... ohmahgod. Is it wrong to become sexually aroused from a sandwich? To yearn for it like a lost lover when you're left with nothing but it's memory? To lounge under the sun's rays writing haikus dedicated to it's beauty? If that's not right I'm glad... or if it's wrong I'm right..  or whatever that phrase is supposed to say. . . I was as giddy as a 12 year old lass with front row tickets to a Jonas Brothers show upon finding out Native Foods makes their own seitan and tempeh. I'm so over tofu, we broke up a long time ago. I could no longer feign interest. Tempeh and seitan hold my heart now tofu, move on with your life, find someone newly vegetarian who might still be impressed.  Actually, those 12 year olds crying with glee at catching a drip of sweat from the brow of Joe Jonas have nothing on me, I topped that level of excitement. The in-house seitan was that good. I was also blessed with a sampling of the nachos as well and I could not be happier. Word to the wise, scarf the nachos quickly as the chips can get soggy covered in all kinds of goodness as they are, but nachos like that generally don't last long anyway.. . If I lived near this place I'd be screwed. I'd be broke and homeless, clutching a Native Foods to-go menu in my first like a used hyperdermic syringe. Dirty on the side of the road with a cardboard sign reading "Spare change please, I'm addicted to Native Foods".
