ReviewID: mQp-j9QbHMCI8fUKlYYteQ
ReviewerID: RmXIjppHNtVveguN10iO1g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
The boy convinced me into ordering the Caprese although I felt like we had enough food with just the Deluxe Dutch Fries and the boneless chicken breast on fire.  Lo and behold, I was right (as usual) because it was a ton of food... and yet, down the hatch it all went.. . Given how chilly it was toward the end of November, even in LA, it was pretty cozy outside with their heat lamps and sheltered by the clear plastic tarps.  Our server was super nice, too.  Quite efficient, to boot.. . When it comes down to it, though... the food here was pretty forgettable.  Not to be confused with "not enjoyable."  It just wasn't a huge stand-out meal in comparison with some of the other joints we went to while we were in town.. . The Caprese was pretty typical - generously large slices of fresh mozzarella, thick cuts of tomato (possibly beefsteak?) and giant leaves of basil splattered with oil and balsamic.  I kinda of wish they'd given us a little more basil, though.  With the heartiness of the tomatoes and cheese, there wasn't quite enough basil to pair.. . My favorite part of the chicken dish (although the chicken was quite nicely done, with a little char on the outside and some great tender texture) was the rice and beans on the side.  Good stuff.  Far superior to the mushy fried plantains that came with the dish.  Eh.. . The winner, I think, were the Deluxe Fries.  With melty Gorgonzola and crumbled cheese on top, it was kind of ridiculously decadent.  Utter win... while they were fresh.  The challenge with melting any sort of cheese over a starch product is how quickly the starch product moistens and becomes limp with the gooey cheese.  It's a challenging fine line to balance.  Even mushified, the flavor of the Gorgonzola made consuming the remaining fries an enjoyable chore.. . Recommended eats for this neighborhood?  I'm not sure what other options there are.  Definitely a reasonable value for the price, but can't say I'd be excited about going back.
