ReviewID: MQW1XVJnN-I63CjTDWRq7w
ReviewerID: q-XIjEYIdhlKHY2QzQlYxQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Ahh...the famous Kogi truck! I finally tried the food from this truck last night in Carson, CA after working out at Magic Johnson's 24 Hour Fitness and I basically gained all the calories I freakin lost, but it was all WORTH IT!. . For a while now, I've been hearing about this place via Yelp. MY friend Victor would always let me know whenever this truck was close by, so like I said, I finally tried it last night.  I ended up waiting in line for damn near an hour, but I've waited in longer lines for a way longer time back when I was younger, attending different concerts, so I actually didn't mind the wait at all.. . THE LINE:. Ok, while I'm waiting, you can catch other fellow Asians driving by with their rice rockets trying to show off to people in the line and/or doing some "I'm with the DJ" type ishhh, but instead "Ohh...I'm with this person..he/she's holding my place in line" type of bull.  There were young people with skinny jeans and trendy crappy clothing around playing the ukelele, which was pretty annoying, because they played "I'm Yours" the whole damn time. I mean, shiiiiza...play some Jewel or Michelle Branch or Eagle Eye cherry or some heavy metal with that freakin uke instead of the same ol' crap people play on youtube! LOL!. Seriously, some people in the line can get pretty annoying, especially when they hold up the line for stupid crap like when some people use someone else's credit card, so they hold off the line because they gotta get the person (who's in the damn car) who owns it to come to the front to pay for it...yes, this actually happened last night and it held the damn line for damn near 10 minutes!. . Other than that, my 1st experience was like The Miz...simply "AWESOME".  I LOVE how they actually TAKE CREDIT CARDS because I didn't bring any cash with me.. . THE FOOD:. I had 3 short rib tacos and 1 short rib burrito. DAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAMN! It was sooo different and sooo GREAT simply because it tasted different from your usual tacos because it was short rib and it has some pieces of tofu, kimchi and other great Korean stuff on it.. . CUSTOMER SERVICE:. VERY VERY COOL, laid-back and friendly. The person who took my order seems like he really cares about taking your order. He asked if the wait was bad. Possibly the best customer service I've ever had from a taco truck!. . Will I ever eat here again? HELL YEAH!
