ReviewID: Mr2nztH0ZSwjHTPy8iZOVg
ReviewerID: dUCI0KPqAm0zKddIF2O6nw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Baoguette Cafe
Category: Vietnamese
I just had a few bites of their BBQ Chicken sandwich only moments ago, and I just HAD to write my first yelp review! . . First of all, the chicken was not BBQed in any way. It was bland and tasteless; like it had been boiled. It was not juicy or flavorful in any (good) way, in fact, it tasted more like chunked tuna than anything (probably aided by the pungent fish sauce, which I wouldn't mind if the chicken flavor could stand up on its own), and the texture made it seem like they'd hacked-up some boiled chicken pieces and left them sitting all day in a steamer. It was strangely mushy -- yet, dried out; spent (texture and flavor-wise). My boyfriend just took two bites of his sandwich and said that he thought the meat tasted like it had "expired." . . I also HATED the way that they assembled the sandwich! I don't know if it's just me, but I HATE when all of the meat is pushed into the left of right side of the bread, and the veg is on the other, so when you bit into it, you either get a mouthful of veg only or meat only. That sucks! Sandwiches should be distributed evenly from only top to bottom, yes?? I'm only a one-bite-at-a-time kinda girl, and I don't want to stuff my face with multiple bites to get a taste of everything all at once! . . Also, they didn't give me more than 3 pieces of cilantro when I specifically requested "Extra Cilantro," after having read some of these yelp reviews and their tendency to ration out a mere sprig or two of the good green stuff. Don't mess with me and my cilantro fix, Baoguette!!! Especially when I'm eating Vietnamese food!!! . . Okay, and the julienne of picked daikon / carrot mix was waaaay too sweet, and about 2/3 of the stuffing. It tasted like they'd made a halfway normal-enough looking sandwich, and then drowned the whole thing in syrup like we were at IHOP or something. Unpleasant! . . I will say though, that this was my first Baoguette experience, and I don't know as if I'll ever try it again, but if I do, I will never order the BBQ Chicken (gross!!), and will stop by the Lex store to see if they're sandwiches fair better before I even consider swinging by this East Village location. . . Save your money and patron Banh Mi Saigon instead (the one inside the jewelry store on Mott St) for some killer banh mi (their chicken banh mi (banh mi ga) is fab!). . . Oh! And also -- my boyfriend was able to find out that the owners of the closed Bamn! Automat are the same owners of Baoguette East Village. They just closed up that shop and opened up this one in the same space. I went to Automat twice and it was pretty gross, and not very well done. I mean, I love, LOVE, LOOOOVE the idea of a modern-day automat but it's not worth it if done poorly. Apparently, even the late-night EV drunksters felt the same way, and drunksters will eat anything! So, when my boyfriend told me this after we'd had a few bites and both found it very disagreeable, it made a lot of sense. . . + 0 stars for a grotty, un-cilantroed, unevenly distributed more-than-one-bite-at-a-time, "expired" chicken/tuna meat, sugary IHOP syrup sandwich . + 1 star b/c I haven't tried other things on the menu, and it was my first time eating here and I LOVE banh mi, so I am willing to stay optimistic about a place that some people seem to really enjoy and seems busy all the time....  Oh, and it was cheap at $5.. + 1 star b/c they're open late, and I like places that are open late for "just in case." . - 1 star for such a long wait (15 min wait for an order to-go)!. . So, now I'll end this, my very first yelp review, with: . . BANH MI SAIGON!!! . . =)
