ReviewID: MsJI97PnErlYd6zZusBQeA
ReviewerID: 37Nb842bvuOHAYUhiiZ_vw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
After hearing about this upscale burger joint due to all the press about former Top Chef contestant Richard Blais, my hubby and I took a rare opportunity out by ourselves in our hometown to try it. It is a really cool space that is sort of the mix between a Krystal and an upscale restaurant. We ordered cocktails -- a Peach Sweet Tea with Firefly Sweet Tea Vodka and Peach Schnapps-- and one of their special nitrogen martinis--a Root Beer Float Martini-- and these were not only fun and creative, but yummy to boot. The nitrogen martini came with the disclaimer, "Please don't drink it until it stops smoking." You've got to love that. . . After perusing the menu of creative little 5.5 ounce burgers, we ordered 3. One hanger steak, brisket, &amp; short rib-based beef burger called the butcher's cut with caramelized onion, blue cheese, red wine jam; a chorizo burger featuring the spicy pork sausage, romesco ketchup, hash browns, fried egg, manchego cheese, and smoked mayo; and one meatless mushroom &amp; swiss, which was a "wild mushroom patty, swiss cheese, lettuce, tomato, onion, red wine ketchup." We rounded out the meal with an order of vodka-battered onion rings.. The beef burger was tasty due to its toppings, but the beef, although properly cooked to a nice pink medium and not dry, was a bit on the bland side.  The mushroom burger was delicious and well seasoned, the mushroom flavor not overwhelmed by the condiments. But OMG, the bite I had of the chorizo burger was a flavor bomb. Mildly spicy, eggy, cheesy, potato-y goodness. Like breakfast on a bun, but better. The onion rings were hot and crisp on the outside and the onion was soft an buttery on the inside with just the right amount of greasy. And don't tell me onion rings shouldn't be greasy. . . We topped off the meal by splitting a burnt marshmallow and nutella shake, which they kindly distributed into two little glasses for us so each of us could have their share of charred little mini marshmallows. My hubby doesn't even like nutella and he enjoyed all of his. And as for me, mmmmm. Though they could have even let the marshmallows char a wee bit more to get good and gooey.. . We sat at the far back corner booth near the front door and had a bit of an incident with someone coming in to ask for money, but we didn't let it bother us and the hostess, who had been seating someone when he came in, promptly asked the guy to leave. Our waitress and the manager came right over to apologize, which really wasn't necessary, and were really nice. The manager and I chatted about Top Chef, as I shamelessly asked to meet Richard, but alas he was not there. He promised me a signed publicity shot, tho! :D. . All in all a fun place to try some really creative food and drinks.
