ReviewID: mSNCAnv5-W40MoH8VL_VYQ
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Leon&#39;s Full Service
Category: Gastropubs
I don't know if I really want them to check under my hood or change my oil... But these dipsticks while friendly can top off my fluids, as in my beer, a little quicker. Mebbe this century... And don't charge me $80 per hour to do it, pweez. . . The space is fine, decent vibe (worth the drive to Dickhater?) but the menu is like a Japanese bike mechanic at a Harley dealership... It's lost in translation. Might as well rename it to "Ernest Goes to France", a mossback trying too hard to have a cool sounding menu with a mish mash of global flavors that's poorly executed. The name throwing is dizzying... From Benton's, Niman Ranch, Ashley Farms, White Oak Pastures, to PEI.  . . Various bites were had all around, one taste and that's all you need to know... I would actually lose weight eating here. . . Bacon in a glass - Nice smokey flavor and tastee but stop pushing the friggin peanut butter to get that extra dollar outta me. It's worse than Mirza with the mango lassi at Panahar!. . Currywurst, grilled, local beef frankfurter, madras curry catsup - WTF, curry catsup? Had to investigate... Yup, taste as lurid as it sounds. The wiener sure was local... From the local Kroger.. . Pub frites - Canyon Burger laughs at their fwies. 15 ridiculous dipping sauces that were bland as egg whites. WTF happened to ketchup, mustard or just plain old mayo? . . Crispy rabbit tenders, lemon &amp; caper relish, sweet mustard - Everything really does taste like chicken... Touché. This was a real snoozer, just don't pair this dish with a Corona.. . Carrot &amp; cilantro hummus, flatbwead, olive oil, mint - For the love of Allah... It's like a giant orange "Question Mark" head on a plate. . . Niman Ranch pork osso bucco, roasted butternut squash, braising greens, gordon DIPA jus - Nothing a good pressure cooker can't accomplish in 20 minzies... While tender, it lacked the aromatics of a true veal osso bucco. Amateurish at $14 a pop, I think Alain got "jus'd" on this dish.. . White Oak Pastures grass-fed burger, tillamook cheddar, catsup &amp; mustard, bread and butter pickles - Prolly the best thing to come from this garage's kitchen. Imagine that... A good burger at a gastropub?. . While it is another nice local addition to the square area... Everything seems to be heading towards the cookie cutter format around here. The uniqueness and individual identity seems to be fading to appease the middling and pedestrian sect. You know it's over when you see kids in here.... . Really 2.5 stars but I'll be nice... This time.. . Now, wash my windshield.
