ReviewID: msxOhPCJofC0nxASieoXRg
ReviewerID: Sr_onHunGl1RRI6lqShzBw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
The first thing you must do before you go to this place is throw stinginess and conventionalism out the window.  If you don't, you'll constantly have thoughts of "what the hell is this?"  Umami is a little pricey and kinda fruity.  So get ready for a burger experience that's a little different, and dare I say gourmet.. . IT'S A SIT DOWN RESTAURANT. That's right, it's not a burger joint, but a burger restaurant.  Waiters, menus, and clean tables.  very unorthodox.. . THE PARKING LOT IS VALET ONLY. What the fuck?!  Although the parking lot might be able to hold 8 cars or so, you have to pay $2 to have some loser park your car.  I'm thinking it's because the valet double parks the cars so you don't have to worry about waiting for a spot.  It's still lame.. . THE PLACE IS TINY. Better not come here when it's busy because there's only a handful of tables, and a lot of people come by.  It's not a good idea to have more than 4 people.  Although the place is small, it's not cramped.. . THE FOOD IS A LITTLE PRICEY. The burgers start at $9 and they are similar in size to a fatburger with thicker bun.  $3 for 9 french fries (steak fries) stacked jenga style (that's what I meant by fruity).  Another $3 bucks for a small drink that doesn't get refills.  Add tax, tip, and parking, and you're walking out about $20+ down for a freaking burger.  One nice thing is that they give an assortment of pickles for free (if they're not, then my friends are sneaky bastards).  It was my first time having a mushroom pickle.. . THEY HAVE A SECRET MENU. Unless you ask, they won't tell.  The secret stuff is usually better than what's on the menu.  For example, they have a bacon and cheese burger and iced green tea with freshly squeezed watermelon juice.  So definitely ask what they have off the menu.. . EVERYTHING IS VERY DAMN TASTY. Fear not, whatever it is you order, you'll get your money's worth.  Can't find a six dollar burger that tastes this good.  The bun has taste, and is crispy inside, and the meat is fresh, and cooked well.  Whatever else is in the burger, it doesn't matter, it'll be good.  What I don't like is that the bun might get a little soggy if you eat it too slow.  Even the fries are pretty awesome.  They're steak fries with a crispy outside.  I never had fries like that.  Ask for their garlic sauce, it makes the fries taste that much better.  Honestly, if you can't decide on what you want, just close your eyes and point to a damn burger.. . THE FOOD IS GREASY AS SHIT. A great solution for this is eating the free pickles.  The only thing that I didn't like was the onion rings.  They are ridiculously greasy, and not very flavorful.  You can actually see oil dripping off them.  In the end, you will have some fucking shiny hands.  Might as well take shots of wesson.. . GREAT PLACE TO BRING A DATE. It's quaint, super clean, and very designer looking.  Umami is the perfect excuse to get a burger on a date.  Tip from the master, face the girl inward, and not towards the window.  The view outside sucks and she'll think the environment inside is pretty.  It'll keep her in a good mood (assuming you're not a weird dork much like myself).  Probably won't get you laid, but it's better having a satisfied girl than adding a bitch who just downed a tub of lard to that $40 burger tab.. . If you want to frivolously spend a little cash on burgers, this is the place to be.  If the burgers tasted ordinary, not good or bad, but ordinary, this place would only get a single star.  Everything about this place seems kinda weird or disappointing for a burger place, but the shit is delicious son!  . . If you're still reading this, there's better things to do, like typing long ass reviews on yelp.
