ReviewID: mtfd4tUkCFBAPokS_wDaQA
ReviewerID: lpKD0hwlYUCi8kmXrKYKGQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
despite the elegant old school feel of the surrounding hotel, cut is, in contrast, modern, with a sleek, sharp design, and modern, abstract paintings on the walls. the staff was extremely friendly, from the hostesses that seated us, to the server, and the wine sommelier as well as the runners and even the chef de cuisine, who came out of the semi-open kitchen to inquire about our dinner from time to time.  we were seated at a booth which overlooked the entire restaurant and was comfortable and intimate. we were able to converse without yelling at each other!. yummy olive breadsticks and also parmesan breadsticks were served to whet our appetites. mini kobe sliders on brioche buns were next on the agenda. then came knishes, which are hot pastry puffs filled with four cheeses and potato, then hot gougeres, egg and flour  pastry puffs with gruyere cheese and cayenne pepper, baked to crispy perfection. these were just the finger foods which initiated our dining journey. lobster and crab louie cocktail with spicy tomato horseradish was creamy, refreshing, and chock full of crab. we indulged in sanddabs which were fileted and de-boned tableside then lathered in a meuniere sauce. mmmmmm. warm organic asparagus came with poached egg, bacon vinaigrette, and a bacon garnish, artfully presented atop a slice of toast. a nice added touch, they poked the egg slightly so the yolk was free to roam about, then drizzled the bacon vinaigrette all around the plate! we shared all these dishes, as well as the main courses to follow: the 6oz. japanese rib-eye slightly charred to perfection, dark pink on the inside, melted in my mouth more than any other steak i've ever had in my life(completely different than the wagu from snake farms which is a hybrid and way less fatty), the bone-in filet mignon was also spectacular, and the lobster with truffle sabayon was amazing. i loved the sides: creamed spinach with organic fried egg(they mixed this tableside for us) and the toasted artichokes and torpedo onions. we also ordered french fries, but i didn't even touch them. there were so many other astounding dishes on the table! for dessert, which magically appeared on the table...we had cherry clafoutis, made with half-sliced ripe cherries and served with housemade pistachio gelato, pear cobbler, mixed tableside with huckleberry jam and served with vanilla gelato, and banana cream napoleon served with chocolate gelato. this was the perfect ending to the perfect dinner. hallelujah! i'm in love.
