ReviewID: mTXvg8mtOGPDxbEj2O155w
ReviewerID: kDc7mDY_LH1r8CFlOBBBBQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
I think I want to live at Portos or at least next door.  Sadly I live 45 minutes away but would still drive here just to get some togo and drive back.  I wouldn't be wasting gas or time for the life of me if these weren't worth coming for.  I usually stack up on my orders.  Normally a wait, but nothing I would complain about after I've realized I'm holding 1 dozen of my favorite potato balls.. . Before I started coming here, I've had coworkers and friends bring them to me to share and I fell in love with the cheese rolls and potato balls.  So, I finally made a trip out there and BOY WAS THERE MORE YUMMIES TO LOVE.  . . Whether just having brunch of ordering for a party, Portos caters to both.. My friends usually order Portos for baby showers, bridal showers, or just birthday parties.  Well besides parties or events, we just go here to order dozens for yourselves!  =P. . Things I recommend ordering to host a party:. . POTATO BALL (PAPA RELLENA) . Mashed potato filled with seasoned ground beef, breaded, and fried . . HAM CROQUETTE (CROQUETA DE JAMON) . Ground ham seasoned with spices, breaded, and fried. . CHEESE ROLL . Flaky pastry dough filled with cheesecake-style filling . . MEAT PIE (PASTEL DE CARNE) . Puff pastry filled with seasoned ground beef . . LARGE CHICKEN PIE (PASTEL DE POLLO) . Spanish empanada filled with chicken and vegetables. Cut in 24 Pieces. . . For lunch:. . Fresh Spinach Feta Croissant (Fresh spinach and Greek Feta cheese baked on a croissant dough). . Cuban Sandwich. (Sandwich Cubano) Ham, roasted pork, and Swiss cheese served with mayonnaise, mustard, and pickles on Cuban bread.. . I've also tried the Porto's cake because my friend had it for her wedding.  Not too sweet, not too bland.  It's just right!. . Basically, you cannot go wrong at Portos.  I would probably try just about anything on the menu.  . . Go the the bakery itself and you'll fall in love with the entire selection.  I wanted just about everything.
