ReviewID: mU0ebvTCLg-PigD5QE5ANw
ReviewerID: HV01nNVkrQDVAWr8hXtr9w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
My visit to Cobras and Matadors is of note not so much for the food - quite satisfactory - or the wine shop next door- small but very solid selection, very friendly service, and very good ideas for pairing wines with C&amp;M dishes - as it is for my inadvertent dinner companions.. . When I arrived at the restaurant, I discovered that they had lost my reservation.  The West Hollywood Chapter of the Hair Metal Toastmasters Club evidently was holding its monthly meeting, and they, their teased hair, and their spandex had taken over all of the inside tables.. . With apologies and a gracious offer of a couple of comped tapas frias, the hostess sat us at a small table outside, then directed us to the wine shop next door.  A few minutes - and a few bottles - of wine later, we returned to our table and started ordering.  Not long after we ordered, a couple was seated next to us: a tall, blonde cooly detached, and - as it turned out - spectacularly dimwitted Russian model and her bottom-feeding industry douche-bag date.  These two? Together? Color me unsurprised.. . As the evening progressed, my companion and I talked, got wine-drunk, and laughed discreetly at the desultory inanities our dinner companions shared as D-Bag tried (and tried and failed) to impress his date - "I had these when I was in Basque.  They're exquisite" - "No, "tapas" has two p's.  Yes, I'm sure.  They got it wrong." . . After a bit, I noticed that they had both begun sneaking looks in our direction.  I braced myself for the inevitable snide comment from D-Bag about our schlubby Midwest hipster sartorial habits, or some hyper-macho dumb-assery.  Neither happened.  Instead, when his date went to the restroom, D-Bag gave us one quick, furtive look, took out his keys, and started scraping the price tag from the bottle of wine on his table.  . . And that's when it hit me: realizing that his date was more interested in our conversation than in being impressed by him, he had then noticed that the prices on the two bottles of wine I had bought for our meal were substantially higher than the single bottle he had bought.  Fragile masculinity wounded near to death, he took it upon himself to glare sullenly at me all night and hold - and lose, apparently - a pissing contest with me all inside his own little head.. . I'll give him points for resourcefulness, though.  Too bad the adhesive residue the price tags left on the bottle drew 'way more attention than the price tags themselves ever did.
