ReviewID: MU2X-BlphhLuL-w4gmzXUQ
ReviewerID: RqR1bGDgdOPyHDnI73LeFw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Nacional 27
Category: Latin American
* I think I was here too early in the night! *. . Ok, I sorely miss this type of food in Vancouver.  . . They brought some nice chips and a salsa that had medium heat level.  But the flavour profile of the salsa was the highlight.  There was a hint of smokiness combined with the medium heat.  Nice.. . My drink of the evening was the chadwick.  It was a pleasant blend of 10 cane rum, lime, fresh mint, pomegranate, ginger, and habanero.  The flavours blended really well and it was basically a very flavourful mojito.  Delicious.  I had two.  . . We started with two of the ceviche.  The shrimp and scallop ceviche was a classic preparation with citrus, avocado and sweet peppers.  The seafood was fresh and took on nice flavours.  The ahi and watermelon was a bit of a unique item. It was good, but call me a traditionalist - I much preferred the shrimp and scallop.  . . Had the carne asada, which was listed on the menu as "gaucho grilled skirt steak."  It was served perfectly rare, with a nice carmelized crust.  It was topped with a poblano sauce that had the perfect amount of heat to compliment the tender meat.  It had a side of crispy potatoes that they called Costa Rican style.  These were nicely seasoned and perfectly prepared.  A really lovely dish!. . I also got to taste a bite of the Cubano roast suckling pig.  This incredibly tender pork was covered in a delightful ancho chili sauce that had a hint of pineapple in it.  The sweetnesses blended nicely with the spice level.  It had a bunch of sides included that I did not sample but they were reported as very good by my dining companion.  They were a carmelized onion sweet potato mash, spicy eggplant, coconut rice, black beans, and chicarrones.  . . As dinner was wrapping up it became clear that this is very much a night spot and we found out that dancing was going to be starting a bit later.  We could stay though as we had to get to a reception.  But it looked like it would be a very fun evening to combine the drinks, delicious food, and dancing.  . . Great spot!  I wonder if they would be willing to open up in Vancouver?!?!?!!!  Chicago is advertising everywhere that it is bidding on the Olympics.  Vancouver already is having the Olympics - so Nacional 27, why don't you just move now?!?!?!?!  . . (Ok, that was my failed attempt to get this type of food into the Vancouver market - a guy can dream!)
