ReviewID: MU8wPbS9jJ9RMEz-z_V3pA
ReviewerID: TN9jtoUuG55vv4tSUmdBjA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
Based on some Yelp reviews, I decided to try to this place out for brunch.  My first attempt was thwarted by impatient family members who did not like the look of the neighborhood or the line.  My second attempt to take an out-of-towner here was successful though..or at least it was for me.. . After a late night, we arrived to Square One Dining for brunch.  It was probably around noon.  There was a long line out front, but I figured this would be true of any breakfast place on a Saturday morning.  Despite my friend's complaints, we waited.. and waited.  I think we waited for an hour.  This didn't really turn me off though, given our arrival time and the fact that this is LA.  . . So we are seated outside in the patio area.  It was a nice, hot day out, so we were happy to see an umbrella over the table.  Our server was pleasant and I ordered the acclaimed french toast and a scrambled egg on the side.  My friend enjoys more savory breakfast foods, so she ordered the potatoes with scrambled eggs and toast, I believe.  There was another long-ish wait for the food, but mine was totally worth the wait.  The french toast is to die for!  Super sweet with just the right amount of crispiness.  I loved it.  The eggs were pretty good too, though verging on the undercooked side.. . My friend was not as happy with her meal.  I didn't try any of her food, but I didn't need to try the potatoes to know that they were overcooked and dry.  I could see it!  Some were even charred.  My friend had a hard time biting through them and they really did not look appetizing.  She wasn't a fan of the eggs either, preferring a more well done scramble.  . . Based on the taste of my french toast and the look of those potatoes, I'm giving this place 4 stars.  I'll definitely return, but make a point to warn anyone I'm with about those potatoes.  . . P.S.  I remember hearing the couple at the table next to ours complaining about their potatoes as well.
