ReviewID: mwLWRbB34DBoRh4jgSXmkQ
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 1
Restaurant: FOX Sports Grill
Category: Sports Bars
This place is horrible.  I have heard that some of the food is actually not bad but I don't see myself ever coming back here.. . First of all, they claim to be a sports bar and they have a bazillion TVs with sports on them yet when we asked immediately upon arrival if they could change one of the channels to show CSS (a sports channel) it took them over 30 minutes to check and inform us that they don't have that channel.  Seriously?  Isn't this a sports bar that shows a lot of different sports channels?  Wouldn't not having this channel sort of be common knowledge?  Shouldn't they be able to tell us this before we sit down and order drinks from several different incompetent servers when all we really want to do is leave and go somewhere that we can actually see the game we want to watch?  Seriously?  In a sports bar?. . While waiting to find out that they couldn't even show the game we wanted to watch, we ordered several beers and I requested tap water.  I was told that I couldn't have tap water because "it tastes like sewage" and that I would have to order bottled water.  Like, expensive bottled water even though a lot of other customers did have tap water and were allowed to at least have the option of tap water.  So, I ordered a large Evian and my friends did, too, because this was before we knew that they couldn't show our game.  So, our beers and water finally come but the draft beers are served in red solo cups (12 ounces) and we are still charged the pint price.  And, they were in keg party cups!  And, it wasn't even that busy!  Why couldn't I have a real glass???? By the time the beers arrived, we had been informed that our game would not be on so we really just needed to finish our beer and leave.  We told our server that we would need only one of our large, unopened Evian bottles because we were leaving soon and she took one back.. . A little later we requested our check (after not seeing our server for a bout 30 minutes), and we received a check with the wrong total.  We were charged for our draft beers (which were not the size they should have been) and for BOTH bottles of Evian.  When we disputed the higher than expected total with our server, she told us it was because of the tax.  Seriously?  No, no, no, no, no.  I can do math.  That's not right.  She argued a bit more and then we convinced her of it and she finally fixed it.. . The best part about this visit was that we got free parking because we had to leave after an hour because our game was not being shown.  I will never come to this place again.  It's horrible - horrible service and horrible regard for their customers.  It might be a nice place to watch a game but I can certainly think of better options.  And, the traffic to get out of Atlantic Station was a freakin' nightmare.  No, no, no, no, no.
