ReviewID: mX8kr3NPHS3g7wWXCHca6g
ReviewerID: 0jjIMcfcMwi8VF-S8GUv9g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Uncle Julios Hacienda
Category: Mexican
One word:  fajitas.  . . That is the only reason why this place deserves 5 stars.  I have tried fajitas in many places around the world (unfortunately not in Texas - although a native of Texas has vouched for me) and this place ranks at the no. 1 spot for me.  I have tried a couple other dishes but once I tried their fajitas, I have never ordered anything else.  . . The atmosphere is great with lots and lots random decorations to keep your eyes occupied if you are not having a great conversation with the people that you are eating with.  This place always seems to be packed for dinner irregardless of what day of the week it is.  I wonder sometimes how much dough they are rolling in because it is always packed during the weekend and sometimes you may have to wait in the bar area for 45 minutes to get seated!. . So...back to the fajitas.  I always order the combo fajitas with both the chicken and steak.  It literally comes out ready to be taken down in about 5-10 minutes after ordering.  I believe the main thing that makes it so appealing is the butter that they use to make the steak and chicken so juicy and delicious.  Also their homemade flour tortillas are also crucial to the taste and they are very very soft  and stay that way throughout the course of the meal (speaking of which - it is very entertaining to watch them make the tortillas with their flaming circular tortilla machine contraption that eventually conveyers it into a container)!  . . I have taken many visiting friends from out of the state to this place and we have always ordered the fajitas and have not gone wrong.  Plus I love their chips and salsa.  The chips are just the right thickness and crunchiness versus some other the other places that are too thick and seem to just come out of a bag.  I am a fan of their salsa as well, which is just the right consistency and is very addictive to munch on while waiting that 5-10 minutes for the fajitas.  . . Their margaritas are decent (although not the best) but their sangria/ margarita "swirl" is fairly tasty!  . . The staff there has been fairly good and I have yet to have a horrible experience there yet.  *knock on wood*
