ReviewID: mZgmne1aJbXrrmY3UO023Q
ReviewerID: OA2boGN1P0iAJvkuEWNPlQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
My friends kept telling me about "this great sausage place."  . "Uh-What?  Pffffffft.  Sausage?  Just sausage?" I scoffed.. "Yah!  Just sausage." Them said.. "Ooooooooookay.  What EVER.". I let them drag me downtown to Wurst-a-blah-blah.. . First off. . . the place is a little disarming? Shall I say?  Upon entering you wouldn't know there's a place to sit and dine in the back.  It looks like, "Where will I eat my mess?  In fact where are all these people in line going to eat their mess too?"  Up front, there's a grill, a glass case containing some of the various sausages, the beers on tap and the cashier.  There are some empty out of place chairs and tables outside the door and inside there are some empty chairs lined against a sort of counter against two small walls.  So, no, it doesn't look like a place to eat.. . Yes, the menu is simple, sausage beer and fries, tis a sausage palace.  And yes, my friends were right.  It is great.  I was stupid and couldn't get over the variety of sausages and totally missed the exotics!  I ordered a gourmet roasted red pepper corn and chicken sausage with caremelized onions and spicy peppers, groot fries with bleu cheese walnut bacon and a chipotle aioli dipping sauces.  I chose the St. Bernardus 10.5% Belgium beer to wash it all down (even though my friend kept telling me to order the Floris Apple Ale, "tastes just like apple cider!" Bleh.  I don't want beer that tastes like apple juice with my sausage).  I'm given a number and follow the rest of the sheep through a long hall that finally opens up to a dining area.  It's all paper lined picnic benches, filled with adults drinking beer and eating sausage.  Like a secret non-bar-feeling-mature-adult-only restaurant.  There are a variety of mustards sitting on the tables to squirt on your sausages.  The sausages are served on a bun that is nothing like those hot dog buns from the supermarket or hot dog vendors that fall apart before you're done.  The bread was a perfect foil for the thick tasty sausage and it's toppings.  Twas heaven.  Indeed.  I'm sorry I doubted you my friends.  You were right.  Wurst-a-blah-blah is a great sausage place.  Next time,  I'm ordering an exotic. . . I'm gettin' alligator.
