ReviewID: mZIvMilFgWMnNX5snMjzfg
ReviewerID: Ko0bGmBzDTWvUrCG2xaneA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Had a really good time here today.  Food was really yum.  Ate here with my sis for a sort of "lunner."  Got greeted by very personable staff wearing a cool peacock feather hair ornament.  Had to wait ten minutes or so for a table - not bad.  Amused myself by gawking at the chefs in the open kitchen and all of the goodies in the market section.  Yummy looking sweets, charcuterie and stuff.  Really liked the interior, high ceilings, classic rectangular shape, but I couldn't help thinking about how they could reduce the NOISE LEVEL - felt like I needed ear plugs up in there.  Looked around and saw some of every hue and age, and from chic to laid back, wearing shorts and sandals to suited &amp; booted.  Looked like a real slice of Los Angeles.  Very cool and comfy.. . Got seated and served by a really cool girl named Tera.  She wants to go to film school, maybe UCLA or Art Institute.  Hope she gets in and we can see some of her flix in the future.  She made the experience very nice indeed.  The menu was loaded with great choices which I will return to try.  Had my eye on the small plates, and want to try all of them, especially the white bean hummus and perhaps the sausage and peppers.  . . Me and sis shared the meatball sliders which had some crazy delicious marinara sauce and cheeeeeeeese!  Sliders came with crispy garlic fries.  Also got the much raved about Portobello mushroom fries with basil aioli.  Loved.  Very crispy and mouth watering. Thought I tasted a hint of cardamom in the seasonings, or something like that.  In between bites, I espied plates of penne passing by with some serious looking shrimp on top, and a plate loaded with a giant chunk of lasagna.  Dawson S. said it's really good, so I must go back and try it.  This guy sitting diagonally to my right ordered some, and dude didn't come up for air at all once the plate was placed in front of him.  Seriously y'all - he was throwin' down and didn't say a mumbling word until the last forkful and his last slurp of coca cola.  Then he sat back in the chair with a pleasant little smile on his face.. . For dessert, I had some of the ridiculously chocolatey cookies and a cuppa joe.  What I loved the most was the reasonable price of our lunner.  Value anyone?  I was very happy to leave the restaurant both satiated AND with some green in my purse.  On a fun note, I saw Fran Drescher there.  I think she was taping some sort of reality show.  Tera said that whenever Fran comes in, a server drops something and breaks it.  Today, a server dropped a water glass.  Applause ensued.  Good times.
