ReviewID: mzLTT91oDT7so5ZZB7_jJQ
ReviewerID: UxsPF9Zmi95x9fausVyxcw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bari
Category: Grocery
~~Update~~. So I remember a fantastic Italian sub that i had eaten, from years ago.  Busting my brains to remember, and it was this place.  Hahaha, trippy;  perhaps it was cuz the sandwich was delivered that the sandwich dried out.  Suppose they got skimpy with the oil.  Either way, I'm sure this place will be a five.  Just gotta try it again.. . I feel bad giving this place a 4.  I always feel something is wrong with me, when I don't fall in line with the majority.. . I guess my main gripe would be the bread.  It's a crusty, flaky, and kinda chewy bread.  A bit too chewy, I was having trouble tearing it.  I felt like some dog having to wave his face side to side...okay I'm probably exaggerating a little bit.  But it was too tough for comfort.  I like bread that holds strong, but has some give to it.. . The ingredients tasted top notch.  I had both the Italian sub and the Prosciutto and Mozzarella sub per the recommendations of my fellow Yelpers.  The italian was pretty good, but not stellar.  I honestly liked Fontano's better...probably because I liked their bread better.. . The Prosciutto and Mozz sub though was the best I ever had, though.  They pack in a fairly good amount of prosciutto, and you can actually taste the salty goodness of the meat.  Since the slices are usually razor thin, I feel many times in a P and M sandwich the P gets overpowered.  The mozzarella was tasted very fresh.  Enjoyed it a lot.. . The size is much bigger than I thought.  I was expecting Jimmy John portions, but these footlongs are more filling than a Subway footlong.  They are packed much tigher and are generally much, much denser than a Subway sandwich.   In that respect, GREAT DEAL.  . . I ordered delivery, and the delivery guy was 15 mins early.  Kinda felt that put me on the spot.  Oh well, I forgive him.  I wouldn't say this place is the best, hands down; but it's definitely one of the best.
