ReviewID: mzQlDpk4Mrynq_fG77AIjQ
ReviewerID: zqD4WFJa0Df2FT343MQKbg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Like many before me . . . I really love the burger. MMMMMM.  The beef is delicious and juicy. The baguette it is served on is crusty on the outside and soft in the middle. I love the gruyere, the bacon flavor, and while some say there is too much caramelized onion going on, I say pile 'em on.  . . Sure, F.O. is a little full of itself in not allowing for any substitutions on the burger and denying their clientele ketchup on their fries, but frankly, I don't want or need to change a thing. LOVE the whole thing just as it is and I dig the aioli mayo with my fries.  Additionally, I do think that for the price, the burger should come with the fries or a side salad or something. Charging extra is kind of a dick move, F.O. Oh, but the burger is just so delicious, I just can't help myself.. . I also love that somehow, I keep reencountering the long lost beers of my limited world travels here.  Now I'm really not a beer expert by any stretch of the imagination, but every now and again one encounters a brew that stands out. The Trappistes  (A Belgian beer brewed by monks- much like Chimay's overachieving older brother) that Hubs and I fell in love with in Toronto and thought we'd never find again, is front and center on the menu here. (It's pricey, I warn you, but it's so good. I'm partial to the #10, but the #8 is very good too.)  On my last visit, I was feeling overwhelmed by the selection and asked the bartender for a rec. After asking me couple of questions, the bartender brought me an Alaskan Amber Ale - a beer Hubs and I tried at the brewery after riding through the Alaskan rainforest in the freezing rain.  Oh, Father's Office, as if your burger wasn't enough, you also keep reeling me in with bits of nostalgia, coupled with new memories of good times with friends. *sniff* Single tear.. . And if I were in danger of getting bored, the other day I caught a wiff of the lamb. This heavenly scent may draw me away from the beloved burger the next time around.
