ReviewID: n-IP2WhFn9Ar1be5aZW0AA
ReviewerID: 7-kypMrvP7E5WH8kog9K7g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I dine at Lawry's numerous times a year. This review is based off of a 12/15/07 visit, though my experience is consistent with my other visits.. . First, I do not know why people sometimes call this place a tourist trap.  It serves awesome food consistently in an elegant atmosphere with great service.  So, why would it be a tourist trap?  I have no idea.. . Anyway, we came here for a family dinner at Christmas time.  We dined on the homemade potato chips and meatballs in the bar/lobby area.  The place is packed at Christmas and you will need reservations to get in during the holidays.. . We were seated and began the feast shortly after arriving.  The only reason you should come here is for the prime rib.  Period.  We had shrimp cocktail appetizers and their famous spinning salads.  . . As the prime rib approached, the side dishes showed up.  We added lobster tails and creamed spinach.  The anticipation built as the master carver wheeled one of their custom made silver carts to our table to carve our prime ribs.. . They offer several cut choices.  I elect to engage in pure gluttony when dining here, so I selected the beef bowl cut (the largest).  This is the cut they give to the rose bowl players prior to the game.  I did attach a picture and yes I did eat it all.  . . Lawry's prime rib is the gold standard for prime rib.  I have tried many times elsewhere all over the U.S. but no one can match Lawry's.  If someone thinks better prime rib is offered elsewhere, please let me know where.. . We finished off with a CC Browns hot fudge sundae.  Not sure who CC Brown was, but their fudge is good.  The desserts are great here, not over the top.  Do not forget the prime rib is the star of the show.. . Service was awesome, as usual.  We were taken care of by Miss Sargent.  We brought our own bottle of wine, a nice 2001 Vine Cliff Napa Cab that paired well with the prime rib.  Their corkage fee is $20 but Miss Sargent waived it after a minor mix up with our seating.. . Everything was excellent here and we had a meal that we will remember for the following year.. . A couple items to note, their seating can be odd.  There are round tables and booths.  Some booths are what you would expect, others are very long booths that are shared between multiple parties.  It is the latter that would concern me.  If I were here on a date, I would really not want to sit here on top of other people.  Be sure to talk to the staff about seating if this concerns you.. . The parking situation does rub me the wrong way too.  It's $5.50 to valet and this is the only realistic parking option.  Lawry's also offers a VIP club that they seem to push a little bit.  I think it cheapens them.. . In spite of these shortcomings, I could not in good faith give anything less than 5 stars to Lawry's.  They are the king of prime rib.  I cannot wait to return and am truly getting hungry just writing this.
