ReviewID: n0bP2xe_51VGjTcifndn7Q
ReviewerID: YQUHGQQUY7Lm0l3wGIHuLw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Coobah
Category: Latin American
Yum! Sampled one soup, two appetizers, a salad, four entrees, and two desserts. Oh, and a margarita. All but one of the above were outstanding. We ordered chorizo/clam chowder (OMG!), fried calamari (that sauce was heavenly), roasted caesar salad (think the marchengo was missing), and the plantain/shredded jerk chicken (pork?) as appetizers. Every single one was over the top good, but the jibarito with"fiery" jerk chicken wasn't fiery at all and I could swear it was shredded pork and not jerk chicken. Nonetheless, it was excellent--and huge. Entrees were hanger steak, stuffed pork tenderloin, crusted tilapia and zarzuela (Catalan seafood soup/stew). The zarzuela was just okay, and I think it was supposed to have had mussels in it but didn't. It was boring, but not altogether unpleasant. The pork tenderloin was enormous and delicious. I had read other reviews complaining about the rareness of the pork and since I like it a little more done than that, I asked that it not be undercooked. It came out cooked perfectly for me and not at all too sweet. The hanger steak was good and served with delectable sweet potato pommes frites. The tilapia dish was very good, so said the one who ordered it. It looked beautifully cooked, and the cranberry sauce served with it was delicious. For dessert we ordered the bread pudding and the churros. The bread pudding was very good; the churros were very good; the sauce the churros came with should be served to everyone all the time. It was caramely with sherry! Caramel and sherry. Who would've thunk?! Next time, I would order appetizers and a salad and call it a night, since we just about had to be rolled out onto the street. The portions were HUGE. The service was attentive, and my only complaint was that the busboy kept waiting for us to hand him our dishes. That bugged me a bit, and I think some ingredients were not exactly as described on the menu, and it's very loud, otherwise it would've been a 5-star review. In answer to those who say it's expensive: It's not pricey at all, considering what you get. I think people just think Latin restaurants should be cheap, regardless of their menus.
