ReviewID: N49dXHhppaBKvY7Fx8PgKQ
ReviewerID: khWps7J16XT6B9YHbXjeZg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
3.5 stars. . -5 because a bit pricey for what you get. -5 because of the long, silly wait + trendy-ville. Not really my scene but it's still nice to go to new places. I had fun talking to my friend; therefore, I guess the environment is acceptable. . -5 because parking is just stupid . . TOAST. TOAST. TOAST. . What I love: . -My friend's egg benedict and the sweet potato fries all looked delicious. If I come back, I'm getting that. . -My Triberry pancakes were okay. Nothing spectacular. And although the three pancakes came on a huge plate, there was nothing else that came with the dish. (For the price, don't you think they could throw in a side of fruit or something?) . -Coffee and vanilla latte were good.. . Met a friend here for brunch on Sunday, I'm not very familiar with west side places, but I would come back here. Parking can be a bitch, there's no lot (is there ever?) and most of the street parking is permit; however, if you drive down 3rd there's usually metered spots (two dollars = 2 hours). (Apparently the city just started charging for metered parking spots on Sundays, too. Damn the man!). . The wait is ridiculous! Silly, silly. There are so many people just hovering/slouching/doing magic tricks on the sidewalk for a table. . . The hostess was calling out the names in a ridiculously meek voice. Hard to hear. And yes, everyone is quite fashionable. Hip. Trendy. That whole thing. But there are also normal-looking people, too. Moms with babies. And lots of dogs. Little puppies sleeping on the sidewalk. No cats though. Guess that's not as trendy, to bring your cat to brunch. (I'm kidding.) . . Apparently there are lots of industry people that go here too. Actually, I guess our convo was sort of "industry" too, so maybe I am one of those people. Gasp. Maybe I am hip, too? And I just don't think of myself as hip? But maybe OTHER people think I'm hip? Could it be? Possibly? . . Nah. . . Oh, and we had a celebrity sighting. (Eh, whatever.) I never see celebrities (or I'm bad at picking them out because it's hard when they just look like normal people. Wait. Maybe they ARE normal people? Ha.). We were sitting next to someone from some HBO show, what's her name/face. She just looked like a pretty humanoid girl and was really sweet, even when I almost stepped on her little dog that was sleeping by the table (it was an accident, I swear!).  . . So, yeah. Check it out. Especially if you live in the area. Why not?
