ReviewID: N5-cY-h1NM4FnHHPaMJf1Q
ReviewerID: FLcNjYOAIrhnxB9jAPgo6A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Bottega Louie is incredible. I don't know how else to describe it. I have been here a handful of times + have been treated like a king every single time. You know a place is good when it attracts all crowds - the corporate crowd, the hipster crowd, the yuppie family crowd, the young professional crowd. Everybody loves Bottega!. . The chic interior is absolutely gorgeous - large windows for walls, tall ceilings, sparkling white floors + minimal décor to give it a clean, sleek look. . . The Gourmet Market out front simulates Dean + Delucca caliber market, complete with a full coffee bar, a pâtisserie, a carving/sandwich station and a collection of candies + other higher-end deli items. Impressive, if a bit overpriced. My favorite drink is their spiced chai, which is not the comparatively bland vanilla chai you can find at Starbucks or Coffee Bean + Tea Leaf, but a flavorful burst of masala chai. The Market opens up to a bar area with an impressive wall of alcohol, not just a lot of alcohol stacked on a wall, but literally a dividing wall of alcohol between the Marketplace + the restaurant proper. Plenty of seating in front of the bar makes it ideal for happy hour. . . The host/esses are all well-versed in customer service, calling me "Mr. D" when my table was ready. The friendly waiters are dressed in white, while the gorgeous general managers are dressed in suits. I felt like I was walking onto a model shoot at some points. One of my co-workers was literally speechless when she saw one of the tall general managers, commenting that he was more delicious than the food.. . I've been there for breakfast, lunch + dinner, but have to say the best experience I had was during lunch. The spot can become incredibly loud, almost overbearing at times, but I firmly believe it adds to the ambiance. The first time I had breakfast here, I ordered the healthy Breakfast Los Angeles, made of egg whites, tofu, black beans, avocado + spinach. I did get it to go, so that may have affected my impression because it was a small portion in an oversized box with limited taste [a particular difficulty when cooking tofu]. Another time I ordered a sandwich with bacon + cheese - absolutely. fantastic. For lunch + dinner, I have usually gone with others, which I would suggest. I also got there early [11:30AM] for lunch to be sure I got a table. Their pizza oven is IMPRESSIVE - apparently it was specifically designed for Bottega. It superheats to some unbelievably hot temperature so that their DELICIOUS pizza only takes about five minutes to cook instead of the usual 15-20. Their pizza is not necessarily the best pizza I've ever had, but it sure is scrumptious. I highly recommend the simple Bianco [arugula, ricotta + parmesan], the flavorful Napoli [red onions, mushrooms + kalamata olives] or the tasty Fennel Sausage. The Clam pizza, with roasted peppers + romano is also worth a try. I further recommend the Chicken Parmesan Sandwich, Lasagna Bolognese + the Penne Pomodoro. The Fettuccine Belmondo was alright, but a bit too light on flavor for me. My co-workers + fellow Yelpers recommend the Portobello Fries. To me, Italian food is a bit difficult to do BAD. But Bottega is delicious.. . As an overall experience, Bottega is wonderful. I completely understand + feel the pain of waiting for a table, but thus far I haven't had too bad of an experience with that. The longest I've had to wait, which could be atypical, was 20 minutes, and we were enjoying the Marketplace so much that we didn't even care. I'd highly recommend Bottega.
