ReviewID: n5pPabOO-XPDBfQshthPjA
ReviewerID: 5s-GYZCI7zlf7O41USUFcw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roy&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Asian Fusion
One of the best restaurants in the Chicagoland area. Hands down. Amazing food at a very reasonable price.. . First things first, put in your order for the *Melting Hot Chocolate Soufflé. Don't think about it, don't question it, don't talk to your dining partner, just do it. It's rich and thick and delicious. This is coming from a girl who doesn't necessarily love chocolate or sweets.. . *Lakanilau Roll- great. The smokey tasting sauce all over the plate really complements the roll and makes it work.. . *Fire Grilled Szechuan Spiced Baby Back Pork Ribs are the only appetizer that involve land animal meat so we had to get it for the meat eating boyfriend. He loved, loved, loved them. Bone-sucking good. Tangy, sweet, just a little spicy sauce on some perfectly good ribs. What's Hawaiian dining without pork?. . I've also tried the *Crunchy Golden Lobster Potstickers and could take them or leave them. No part of the texture or flavor was stand out to me.. . My *Mango Mojito that I ordered before dinner showed up right before dessert. It wasn't very good either- the flavors just didn't mix well for me. Because of the delay they did not charge for the drink though. That was nice. The house *Merlot, bottled and labeled specifically for Roy's, is great.. . On our first visit I had the *Jade Pesto Steamed Red Snapper, which I adored. The flavors mingled perfectly, it was nowhere near overcooked, and it is a good portion size. The next time, I got the famous *Hawaiian Style Misoyaki Butterfish and really didn't care for it. I was told upon ordering that the wasabi sauce was very mild and avoidable. I found it to be neither. It didn't complement the fish to me and ultimately overwhelmed it. I also found it to be slightly undercooked. I eat sushi and am not at all opposed to a rare fish, but it wasn't working with this one.. . Here's the shocker. According to my carnivore, cow hating boyfriend the *Filet Mignon is one of the best in town- second to Gibson's and/or Chicago Chophouse. I had a bite and watched it cut like butter, and it was pretty great. I'm a ribeye girl, but this was good. Don't be afraid to take your seafood hating friends here.. . Though I've never had the prix fixe menu- What a steal!- for the quality of food here, the prices are astoundingly reasonable. If I have any complaint at all, the service was quite slow and could've been more attentive BOTH times we were there- seated in different sections at different times with different waitresses, week day and weekend.. . This is the best way to spend under $200 on dinner in Chicago. Under $100 if you're really thrifty. Let me know if you need a dining partner either way :)
