ReviewID: N6CnetekhtnYnVg7ZN6Svw
ReviewerID: Jy7BwojX8fRcq14_Lmigcg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
I almost want to give them 5 stars because of their ice cream sandwiches but this place is EXPENSIVE, so I'm taking that star and putting it back in my pocket.  Sorry star you're just gonna have to wait another day for your moment to shine.  . . Milk is definitely a dessert lovers paradise.  They have cakes, pastries, muffins, cookies, ice cream, and a delectable selection of all things sugar.  I would say its LA hipster meets throwback ice cream shop, with a side of the unexpected.  Super cool, and soo LA!. . So I tried a fairly eclectic mix of desserts on my afternoon visit to Milk, but none were as impressive as the over sized macaroon like ice cream sandwiches.  As the coffee toffee macaroon sandwich stared at me with puppy dog eyes behind the glass display case, I couldn't help but think that we were meant to be.  I had never seen anything quite like it in my life, and I knew at that exact moment that it would be love at first bite.  . . I can't even begin to describe the thoughts that ran through my mind when it first hit my lips.  It was absolutely amazing.  I almost didn't know what was going on in my mouth.  Was it a macaroon or was it ice cream?  I guess you can say I was in a state of blissful confusion, which ranks right above pleasantly stuffed, when it comes to foodisms.. . I also sampled their red velvet cupcake, which was unnaturally red, almost neon red or better yet Elmo red.  It was crazy looking looking but tasty nonetheless.  The cake was light and the frosting was creamy, just not as cream cheesy as I would have liked.  I'd say good, not great.. . The last of the desserts that I had was the strawberry shortcake ice cream bar.  Now to call this sweet would be an understatement.  It was more like, "hello my name is sugar" nice to meet you.  This thing should come with a warning much like a pack of cigarettes that reads  "consuming this may cause blindness.". . I wish I could have sampled a few more things, but I wouldn't have been able to do so without slipping into a sugar coma, plus I still had to drive home. I was already feeling the lingering effects of my sugar overdose, and didn't want to take the chance of getting pulled over while Hughie you know what I mean.. . Bad Joke, but if for good dessert pop on over for to Milk and grab an ice cream sandwich.  Forget about your diet and indulge in the greatest ice cream concoction since the Ben and Jerry's Chunky Monkey.
