ReviewID: n76kEqy9rgUFY0oiHjWeZQ
ReviewerID: J7fmfD8q5v64eAmHE4dI6w
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
The food was amazing but the attitude and service were appalling!  Two stars only because the food tasted good  (even then it's teetering on almost being 1 star).  Otherwise, I'd have given them ZERO stars!!. . I made a reservation several weeks in advance at Mozza. I brought a very good friend I hadn't seen in a while.  We arrived 20 minutes early for our reservation (traffic was surprisingly good), but I let the host know we'd arrived and would be at the bar.  He informed me I was *very* early for my reservation, but they would let me know when the table was available.   I said, no problem, we'd be at the bar.  For the next 30 minutes, I attempted to get a bartender's attention so we could order a bottle of wine.  It was impossible to get the bartender's attention for 30 minutes with 2 people actively trying.  We did get the bar back's attention (the guy who just deals with the glasses), but he didn't bother to inform the bartender. Thanks.. . At our reservation time, I went to the Host and told him we were still there and ready.  He told me they were running slightly late.  I find that TOTALLY unacceptable at a fine dining establishment like Mozza.  But, I was polite and said, "ok, we're right over there at the bar."  Twenty minutes more pass.  My friend asks what's going on.  They say they are running behind, and he is polite (we both worked in teh restaurant biz for a while, so we understand when it's out of their control, to a degree).  Meanwhile, everyone who was waiting at the bar is being seated except us.  Another 10 minutes go by, and I approach the manager.  I inform her that tonight was supposed to be a special occasion for us and that we've been waiting for at least a half an hour after our reservation time.  She informs me she's sorry and is working on it.  Fifteen more minutes and the manger finally gives us a table.  The table wasn't stellar, but that's not too big a deal.. . We got one "thanks for waiting" and that was it.  Nothing comped at all.  . . I mean, 45 minutes of waiting for a table that I reserved weeks in advance!. . The food was good but there were at least two times I was searching for the waiter and he was missing in action.. . Overall, the service was an utter disappointment. I would never recommend to anyone I know to eat at this place.  I know a lot of people who enjoy dining at nice places as much as I do, and I definitely am spreading the word.
