ReviewID: n873HWLkhdySx21et5uh4g
ReviewerID: 9REJZ4xyMQOJE3fd0BxxNg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Accuse me of being a carnivore and I'm guiltier than OJ. . . So when my firm informed me that a company party would be held at Mastro's -- like a sex addict driving down Sunset, or R. Kelley at a Brentwood girl scout convention -- my mouth reflexively watered at the prospect of making a pilgimage to the Mecca of that which I so sinfully lust after.. . I'd been dying to try Mastro's ever since the the roodies (rich foodies) over at Chowhound and Fel C first sung its praises, but ever since the USC's Finance Consigliere threatened to knock me off "Tony Soprano style" if I didn't repay my loans, I had thought better of dropping change there. But a company party is, by definition, gratis and so I planned on exploiting this money opportunity like a hardlining asian woman at a yard sale.. . In comparing Mastro's to its steakhouse brethren like Morton's , you'll notice it's totally Beverly Hills-ed out in decor, with Maseratis taking up the valet spot and celebrity diners -- actual A-list ones, unlike when you run into Andy Dick at Norm's (true story: in his drugged out stupor, he offered to eat pancakes off my unmentionables). The downstairs has an old-school old boys club feel to it, while the upstairs has the bar (read: sit upstairs) and piano man. Don't be fooled by the trendy factor; there's substance beneath this style (this isn't Sunset's Ketchup) and the wait staff doesn't treat you like you're from Reseda even when it's obvious.. . Of course, Emily Post cautions that when a meal is on someone else, you don't go for the most expensive items on the menu. But this was Mastro's, damn it, and as an undersophisticated kid from gastronomically challenged San Diego, I was intent on-- oh eff it, I'll just come clean: I was two martinis deep which entirely threw out my sense of etiquette. Martini's which, by the way, come with their leftover in the shaker so it only takes one to get the party started. At two deep (which is basically three), *of course* I'm going to order expensive shit like the seafood tower appetizer.. . Server: And what would you like on your seafood tower, sir?. John M: *Points at the menu.* (It later came out with king crab legs, shrimp cocktail,  lobster tail, and blue point oysters. About $80). . And of course I'm going to get the infamous bone-in ribeye.  Always go bone-in when given the option as the extra flavor is easily worth the extra silverware logistics. But how to describe it? Delectable? Hardly. Succulent? Pshaw. Proper words escape me when describing this cut of beef.  . . Cognitive scientists say the neurotransmitter dopamine is secreted from the nervous system when its properly stimulated -- as during sex or while on various controlled substances. I haven't tried Medellin's primary export, but I'd be afraid the impact would be diminished had I eaten at Mastro's immediately prior. This steak was hypothalamus provoking, euphoria inducing, insufflated narcotics.. . I know what you're saying: "Anything tastes better when you're drunk, John M." But its funny how the intensity of certain experiences can render you entirely sober. Seeing a black and white Ford Crown Victoria while driving (within the legal limit, of course) is one of these. Eating a bite of Mastro's steak for the first time is another. And in my sobriety, I can say that was the best meal I've ever had -- lack of financial outlay notwithstanding. The only problem is, like a controlled substance, you may experience withdrawals.. . Someone find me a Mastro's support group.
