ReviewID: n8nq8tyI89NxGz5-uRndBw
ReviewerID: AHKSSaeYZ8h4nOXm5tyWzg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
Coming to Ciudad again after a decade was like pulling out an old favorite sweater to wear after years of storage. It looked and felt the same, but seemed just a little faded from time. The decor hasn't changed one iota from the first time I came here. Very similar to the Border Grill but done in lighter colors, it's a comfortable space and timeless in it's own way. Overall the look has held up well all these years, it still seems modern and vaguely sophisticated without being stuffy. It's a very large space, perfect for groups and parties which is why we were here.. . I've always preferred the food at Border Grill, and the drinks at Ciudad. They are famous for their libations and rightly so. Without a doubt they make some of the best mojitos and caparainhas in the city. Absolute perfection. Unfortunately I decided to try red sangria today, and they're genius with drinks does not extend there. It was completely flat, flavorless, even the fruit was tasteless. Sangria should be loud and and boisterous, it should be like a good relationship: sweet and sour and sparkle but here is was like a bad marriage. Dull and lifeless. Very disappointed.. . As this was a big group, there was a set menu to choose from. The flatbreads to start were okay, chile lime tortillas and sesame crisps with hummus and olve tapenade. Maybe it was late, but they were a shade stale like they'd been leftover from the day before.. . The starters were tortilla soup and lettuce salad. The tortilla soup was fantastic, thin strips of tortilla, grilled chicken and a variety of cheeses melted together. Very Southwestern and reminiscent of Border Grill, quite the highlight of the meal. The Salad was a half head of lettuce with pomegranite seeds, bee pollen and vinaigrette. Very, very tasty, quite light and delicious.. . There were four entrees to choose from, I chose the BBQ beef short ribs. The ribs were substantial, nicely done but not quite as fall off the bone as one would wish. It had quite a unique feel: a little bacon, radish and carmalized onions gave it a slightly spicy sweet layer under the meat. Yam puree filled out the plate, which I mistook for mashed potatoes until I really tasted it. Not a fan of yams, ever.. . Those who order the Pollo Ciudad were happy, felt it had a nice kick to it. Everyone else chose the Pan Seared Char which was much less successful from the feedback I got. Many of the plates were overcooked initially, and the overall impression was indifference. The meal ended with a fairly nice chocolate birthday cake.. . The food has held up pretty well over the years, for a large party it was all nicely done and well presented. It's not the revelation it once was, latin fusion has come a long way since the early days when the two hot tamales started perfecting the idea. Still it's nice that it's survived and thrived over the years.. . Service was another story. There were lots of staff, they were even moderately attentive yet when it came time to serve food and drinks they mixed up probably 60% of the orders. Not a huge deal, but not exactly top notch either. When the bill finally came and it took a loooong time, they initially left part of the total off. Once we'd figured out the split, they showed up with another correct bill. That's just bad business.  Also, prices were a little overpriced for what you get. Flatbread, a starter, an entree and a generic dessert for $54 pp after tax and tip but without drinks is vaguely comical. If you're going to charge Lucques prices, you should have Lucques food. I'm also fairly sure if we ordered off the regular menu, the same or similar meal would be about $8-10 less. You get jacked by having a set menu for a large group. Still, we had a nice time and enjoyed ourselves with some good friends and that's all you can really ask for in the end.. . Food - B. Ambience - B+. Service - C. Value - C-
