ReviewID: n9I_XWZze1grIHLt9DKpvw
ReviewerID: J5tJo-hoZtG6FNvllUDaJA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
Oh wow!  This was our third location in our week of gluttony.  Commis and Gary Danko being the first two.  If I lived in the Los Angeles area, I will definitely come back more often.  Hands down, one of  the BEST dining experience I've ever had!. . Spago sat us half an hour early.  We allotted extra time for travel from the Bay Area, but it wasn't needed, hence the early arrival.  The hostess was VERY NICE.  She took our jackets, and another lady sat us down.  The restaurant is spacious with high ceilings.  Decor wasn't anything special, it's just there. Comfortable.  I was hoping we'd get seated near the kitchen so I can look at the people working, but they gave us a comfortable booth instead.  No complaints.. . We decided on the five course tasting with wine pairing.. . FIRST COURSE: assorted appetizers.  Ahi Tuna Roll, Smoked Salmon blini, and foie gras mousse.  It ended with a palette cleanser, pears with tea.  It sounds weird, but my goodness, it was one of the BEST palette cleansers ever!!! I wish I had more.  I enjoyed every single one of the appetizers.  My only wish was there were more.  Maybe we could go for the 10 course tasting next time.. . SECOND COURSE: Scallops with grapefruit.  I was skeptical at first, but the grapefruit added an extra kick to the meal.  I thoroughly enjoyed this dish. . . THIRD COURSE: Pad Thai and a baby lobster.  I don't remember the name of the lobster, but it was pan fried with light flavoring.  It complimented the strong flavorings of the pad thai well.  Although the food went well together, it's still pad thai!  I can get that for 7.95 for a bigger portion, and it'll taste equally as good.  Oh well, c'est la vie.. . FOURTH COURSE: Agnolotti with pumpkin filling.  I felt like they were being skimpy on the agnolotti, but it wasn't so.  The agnolotti was one of the BEST I've ever had in my life.  The contrast in flavors made such a simple dish so complex.  I have never had anything like that before.  However, the richness of it made it difficult to eat more than ten.  Which was the perfect amount served.. . FIFTH COURSE: American Kobe Beef.  It was definitely not as good as Japanese Kobe beef, but it was still very delicious.  The meat was juicy and tender.  The sauce and sides were a perfect balance.. . SIXTH COURSE:  CHOCOLATE dessert!  Oh wow!  this was the perfect ending to our astounding meal.  The chocolate was rich, but not overly sweet.  It's the perfect combo!  . . The wine paired well with the food.  The portions were adequate.  I have no complaints there.   . . $90 per five course tasting.  $45 per wine pairing.  What a deal!  Although, from my understanding, the price changes depending on the food being served for that night.  . . All in all, do go to Spago!  I loved my dining experience and would recommend it to anyone!  Our server, she was the best.  I loved her friendly attitude, her knowledge of the menu, and she made our dining experience flawless.
