ReviewID: n9IZD5XvnbUnxH_DowH7bg
ReviewerID: tDLOC0OZdW9VAOo5v_1ocg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
We were a party of 10 celebrating my 30th birthday. I've been to the Mastro's in Costa Mesa and also the Ocean Club in Newport multiple times, so my expectations were based on my experiences there.. . 1) Salt - We had very bizarre situation where some of the food was ridiculously salty. My 12oz bone-in filet was perfect, but my sister's 18oz bone-in filet was so salty it was inedible. She let over half it go to waste. One of our sides (sauteed spinach) was so salty someone actually complained and had it taken off the bill. The other sides (mac'n cheese, sauteed onions, sauteed mushrooms, creamed corn) were fine.. . 2) Consistency - Although my steak was perfect, I can't say the same for everyone elses. The same cuts of meat cooked the same came out cooked differently. It was as if half the steaks were cooked by one chef, and the other by another chef. The good news is, aside from my sister everyone else had steaks that were at least edible. . . 3) Roy - Who is that?? At the very end of dinner, the waiter brought out this huge plate with a massive wedge of chocolate cake, various berries, and then their signature cake on the other side with candles on top. It looked and tasted great. In chocolate syrup, they had written "Happy Birthday Roy." The only problem is, we didn't have a "Roy" at our table.. . 4) Waiter - Our waiter was very good. My only issue was that after the "Roy" incident, he came up to me while I was on the way to the restroom and told me that basically because I didn't tell the restaurant that it was my birthday when I made the reservation, that it was my fault the plate said "Roy" on it. I'm not sure why he bothered to tell me that because I didn't even make a big deal that it said "Roy." Obviously the fault was not mine but whoever told him the birthday boy's name was Roy. Also, if they didn't know it was anyone's birthday, why would they bring out the cake? Aside from that, our waiter was good but maybe just a bit confused on proper customer service etiquette.. . The positive thing from all of this is my friends started calling me Roy and then my friend's wife said "Salty Roy" and thats my new nickname and we will laugh about it for a lifetime.. . 5) To Go - now this issue has plagued me at every single Mastro's location. They seem to just royally screw up the food that has to get packed to go. My friend's wife's porterhouse was packed in one bag, and my other friend's wife's fish and a couple of the sides were packed in another bag. Unfortunately, they gave the wrong bag to the wrong person and unfortunately, no one noticed until the day after. I've had this happened before at the Costa Mesa location where my steak didn't even get packed, and at the Newport location where only the steak was packed and not the sides. Overall, I'm sure hundreds of dollars in food has been wasted. My advice - check your to go bag before you leave the restaurant (which is a shame because they take great effort to pack it nicely and put a nice goal Mastro's seal on the box).. . 6) Drinks - drinks were 5/5 stars. Very tasty and prepared well.. . 7) Front of restaurant - I'm sure many of you will think I'm a jerk/snob for this one, but the employees of Mastro's manning the front of the restaurant don't seem to care that transients are pan-handling up front. We had a person come up to us while were getting in the limo and ask for spare change. None of the Mastro's staff did anything. Our limo driver had to come over and tell the guy to go away. I realize Mastro's can't control who stands on the sidewalk as its public property, but this probably isn't the first time that guy has come around and they could have spotted him ahead of time and give him some change to move along rather than standing by and watching him ask for change from patrons.. . In conclusion, there are too many steakhouses in the BH area for me to want to return to this one. I'll stick to Mastro's in Costa Mesa or Newport and go elsewhere when I'm in the LA area. Too many things were not right.. . SALTY ROY signing off for now =)
