ReviewID: nA9JKzkNA21VDOM2hTsjcw
ReviewerID: yG002rouE9uVYJWpPHcC9g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
The burger at Father's Office is quite possibly the juiciest I have ever had. Its onion confit and generous slatherings of bacon compote and blue cheese and heap of arugula make for a unique sweet-salty (even Korean-ish) flavor combination that requires no condiment alterations. I like the nuttiness of the arugula and, additionally, the roll in which the burger is served for its ability to seriously cut the sweetness. Still, overall, it's a rich feat and you'll struggle to finish the entire thing.. . Sweet potato fries were great-- crispy and seasoned nicely, although I could have used more salt. I did not detect any salt shakers in the vicinity, however, and opted to grin and bear it. The aioli was an interesting departure from ketchup; I detected horseradish. I'm pleased to experience something outside of the realms of ranch as a white dipping sauce, but as has been my problem of late, the entire meal could have benefited from some acidic component.. . I love the burgers here. But the ambiance leaves something to be desired. When I go out to eat, I crave human interaction in addition to good food. I don't need one of those gung-ho waitresses to sit herself next to me while she takes my order and certainly don't mind if I have to order at the bar, but the servers seem terrified of interacting with customers and buzz in and out of the kitchen at lightning speed. (Points for getting our order out in under ten minutes, I suppose.) Father's Office seems to have been designed to be a vacuous chamber of self-isolation, from the service that is reduced to the bare minimum to the bare-bones decor which is careful to not clutter the area-- to a fault. It's stark and unwelcoming, a space that gets extremely shrill and annoying at the capacity of customers that it serves. And though I enjoyed my Hitachino White and understand that it is an import, I would have reservations paying $10 for a bottle (not even draft, ho-ho!) of beer in the future, special circumstances aside.. . Since food wins over most things for me, I'm inclined to give Father's Office a 3 rather than a 2. But heed with caution; it ain't all that it's made out to be.
