ReviewID: NAdHXecX46KJDx9-B6A2GQ
ReviewerID: nj3syiLs3lABLtPVyL0ivA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
The claim to fame creators of the Apple Martini, Lola's is a place I've been to a handful of times but I never really felt that I got the full experience besides a martini before hitting the road. . . This night started out with a Pumpkin martini which was pretty damn amazing. Pumpkins and me.. we have a thing going on. One of the best things about this season is the endless amount of pumpkin related recipes and tasty treats. This martini packed the punch of both the flavor of the pumpkin as well as the alcohol content. . . The Caesar salad was excellent, if not a little work needed to cut it up...I know what you're thinking "A knife, with salad? How wacky!" If you need a drink, don't worry. The waitress will come around eventually. The salad had massive amounts of cheese. Which was a good combination because if there's anything I like more than pumpkin, it's cheese. . . Which was a good thing since we had an order of Mac and cheese coming up. I've never had it here and expected it to come in a martini glass. It did not and after eating it, I realize I was denying myself such a pleasure for far too long. . . Following the pumpkin was a bit of a task. How can one choose after tasting bliss? Now, I'm a little hesitant to stand on a yelp box and proclaim the second drink since it was a bit girlie. Then again I had just finished (rather quickly) a flavored martini, so why do I hold back? Bust My Effen Cherry martini. Yes, that's the name of it and I'll say it again. "Bust My Effen Cherry martini".  It was very tasty and with a cherry in it to soak in all that alcohol goodness for that last bite. . . With beautiful company, delicious food and alcohol enriched drinks, the evening out at Lola's was much like the drinks. Only a lot less fruity but plenty cheesy. Yum! . . The only reason why I'm not giving this a solid five is because it does seem that the crowd was a bit loud for a Monday night and for the wobbly table. When you're dealing with long steam glass on a table, you don't want to mess around with any balance issue. Especially if you're getting alcohol into people. . . Well, I can't really blame the table since I did smash my finger in the swivel chair picking up a menu off the floor. So who knows if my pain is what caused the glass to fall and shatter... OOPS! But they were quick to clean up and service was top notch.
