ReviewID: nAILfPMVScIf-BzsXRkgJQ
ReviewerID: ZipJHNT9QLDHVibJ6azwwA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
I was going to give it a 2 star, but didn't want to be generous but honest. . . First off there was a line that wrapped around a small building. We did talk to some people about the hot dog's some said it was great and some said how can a hot dog be worth this line and left. Menu has random names of celebrities with random topping. I tried the planet Hollywood with mushroom's, bacon, onions etc.. .  I personally was disappointed. There is allot of hype because of celebrities and because it off melrose. I did notice that people were hyped up because the line was long and because of celebrities that pass by. Honestly the Pink Hot Dog is all hype for tourist like. . . Pink hot dog sells because they do give you allot of topping and an over sized hot dog with no real flavor. Throw allot of onions and bacon and mushrooms with a long hot dog and wow its big but no quality.  Looks good but tastes like a hot dog we can make at come.  So disappointed. Go to costco for a Hot dog and it 20 times better.. One good thing is the workers because they work so hard helping the customers. Hope they get paid allot. All Spanish workers, were helpful and working hard to make the line go well. The reason there is so much hype for this stand is its hype. . . Small building to make the lines look longer and pictures of celebrities inside. Honestly for tourist only or for people who can't find the infamous hot dog lady.  Go when the lines are not long and make sure you don't hype yourself up because all it is  is hype. Topping are just put on the hot dog to  make it look good, and also stay away from a regular hot dog an pick y the toppings you like and you'll be surprise you won't even taste it. . . 2 Stars for a below mediocre hot dog and five stars for the hype, I call this false advertising. Go to Costco or hot dog lady, which I haven't tried but anything better than than a pink hot dog.
