ReviewID: NARL-TZaciq8oLIZkqXsDw
ReviewerID: TE4nfiP4r7M_JI3342aNOg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Counter
Category: Burgers
Well, the day finally came where I had an experience worthy of popping my Yelp cherry. Unfortunately, it took one of the worst carry out experiences I've ever had to get me there. The place is appropriately named The Counter, as you'll stand in the doorway staring longingly at the counter, wishing you could just get up there to take your stupid burger. . . I walked up to this place and put in my initial order after a ten minute wait in line. This wait in line was not a comfortable by any means.  This line has you standing in the doorway being pushed one way by the folks exiting and pushed the other by folks walking in only to learn of a 45 minute wait for a burger joint and then pushing you again as they exit and complain. I finally get up and place my order, which was relatively painless minus the $10.31 charge for a single burger. . . 15 minutes later I return for what I expect to be an amazing burger based on previous reviews. I cannot get in the door as the owner is chatting up some friends in the doorway blocking the entrance. Eventually I squeeze my way through the set of doors only to find a line of eight parties placing orders ahead of me. I see my burger behind the counter, but nobody seems interested in giving it to me, not anyone working the bar, not the owner, nobody. TWENTY minutes later, I finally reach the counter and am given my burger. The whole time the owner is wandering around the place entertaining his friends while I get beat up in the doorway waiting for the opportunity to take my food. My burger was cold by the time I finally got it and I was so pissed that I wasn't really even hungry anymore. . . So, here's the summary:. Worst take out experience ever. 45 minutes and the buger just wasn't that good.  . 10 minutes waiting to place order for burger. 15 minutes for burger prep wandering up &amp; down Diversey.. 20  minutes getting pushed around by an angry crowd to get an average burger. . Burger was not even as good as major chain restaurant burger like Red Robin or Champps and was more expensive than either of those establishments. . . This place maybe good for dine in, if you're willing to wait 45 minutes, but avoid at all costs for carry out.
