ReviewID: NBuc4KbiUI7kG90peCasQw
ReviewerID: Ygr_c6So7Aba0kDQW01FDQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
The finale for my big birthday week.... . Sitting high atop a hill in the heart of Hollywood, Magic Castle is a world unto itself.  Mind you, it's not some big, flamboyant castle of medieval lore - it's more like a big converted house decorated with trellises and lights and other cute touches.  Yeah - the castle is CUTE more than GRAND.. . On the night of my shindig, there was a big event going on at the Castle.  Apparently, the entire downstairs was rented out to some bigwigs, with a lot of celebrities in attendance.  My friends spotted a couple, but as I'm celebrity-clueless, I didn't see anyone that I recognized.  Either way, valet filled up pretty quickly, so half of our group had to wait outside for nearly an hour as the rest of the group drove around looking for alternate parking spaces in Yamashiro and Hollywood/Highland plaza.. . Magic Mike, a truly awesome dude, totally hooked it up for me and 25ish of my greatest friends.  Eventually, we all got inside and with a giggly "OPEN SESAME!" we entered the hallowed halls of magic.  We had a blast during our private show (he and his friends are so freaking hilarious!), and despite the crowds, it was nice that we got a little tour of the castle itself.  It gave everyone a chance to see the castle in its entirety.. . After our private show, we broke off into smaller groups (this is not a good place to try to do everything as a large group) and explored various magic acts.  Of course, I couldn't be in 10 places at once, but the magicians I saw were funny, personable, and very old-school.  I personally LOVED the old-school vibe of some of the magicians (I felt like we went back in time), so that's where I parked my butt.  Others explored the larger shows and whatnot, and the boys were practically plastered by the bar.  The upstairs bar was DEFINITELY less crowded than the downstairs bar (which isn't saying much, as the place was so crowded it was practically a fire hazard), but the best place to be was.. outside.  There are many concurrent shows here and there throughout the joint, but the lines were long, and the hallways were crowded.  We were entertained by random people who were just standing in the halls, though, ready and eager to show us some of their magic.  Every corner, there's something to look at, something to do.... . Apparently, they charge a cake cutting fee here - so instead, we just did my cake outside on the benches (we're ghetto like that!  Haha!).  I didn't drink any alcohol, but I was told by the waitress that my Coke had free refills.  I doubt that the same rule applies for alcohol (you wish! haha!).  I've dined here before, and the food was just BLEH.  That's why we ended up having dinner elsewhere (which was equally BLEH).  . . There IS a mandatory dress code - which they are pretty anal about.  Some might find it stuffy, but I think it's great!  It just adds another touch of class to the whole World of Magic experience.  The boys all had to wear suits with ties (one friend took off his tie once he got inside and straight up got a TONGUE LASHING!), and the girls just had to look pretty.  We wore full on gowns, only because it was my birthday and I thought it would be fun to go all out, but hey - so long as it's a nice pantsuit or cocktail dress, I think girls will be fine.. . All in all, it was a wonderfully special way to celebrate my big 27th birthday.  Everyone had a blast (as most of them were Magic Castle virgins prior to this weekend), and we're already planning a repeat!. . Yay for Magic Castle!
