ReviewID: Nc7at-bPII4UUMFpSXbwGw
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Original El Taco
Category: Mexican
To me, the name sounds too much like Del Taco and brings back memories of late-night drive-thrus, crappy tacos and too many packets of Del Scorcho sauce.  Despite the similar name and its connotations for me, The Original El Taco is decidedly different from Del Taco.. . To start off, the staff is friendly.  Very friendly.  The host/hostess stand people were nice, the bartenders were nice and our server was nice.  Our server was also efficient and we received our food quickly, although she did get a few things wrong about the menu (she recommended an item that didn't exist and made a questionable recommendation on a substitution) but overall she was fine.  And, she made sure we had enough chips and that we were aware of when we won our cheese dip - woo hoo!  The cheese dip was good, too, and probably even better because it was free.. . We stuck to tacos and I tried three of them: the fried chicken, rellenos and the fried tilapia.  The rellenos taco comes on a crunchy corn shell but our server highly recommended substituting a soft flour tortilla instead.  I think this was a bad recommendation.  The chile relleno is very soft and it would have been fantastic with a crunchy corn tortilla.  It was still pretty good but I think it could have been better and I do want to try it again.  The fried chicken taco was very good, probably my favorite.  The tilapia taco was good once I dressed it up with the sauces and condiments from the salsa bar.  My friends did not dress theirs up and they all commented that it was bland.  I also ordered the grilled corn and it was very tasty (I put extra cilantro from the salsa bar in it, too).. . And, we had the frozen mojitos.  They earn a star unto themselves.. . The rest of the menu sounds interesting and it is all still pretty reasonably priced.  I do plan to venture beyond tacos on future visits.. . The decor is nice.  I like the casual setting, pretty reasonable prices and potent drinks.  It's fun.  I think it's a good neighborhood spot (TONS of kids in there with their families around 6:30 on a Thursday) but I will venture here again even though it's not in my neighborhood.  I also like the big parking lot and that I do not have to valet park my car.
