ReviewID: NcC-3YopdZiMo3W_Gq9c6w
ReviewerID: dqE7pNanuOomZbW8sVNsqg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
$16.99 for a all you can eat Korean BBQ buffet is pretty okay.. not to expensive nor is it cheap. I've been here twice and both my experience has been alright. The food is alright but I LOVE the bulgogi. I believe that is the only thing that has flavor. The Pho looking a like meat is so plain but if you dip it in the soy sauce it's pretty good and the and the Galbi was a bit to thick to eat, but that was also good. Their glass noodle is the best! :D Most of the mini dish is good the salad needs a bit more dressing. The pineapple soju is good, It may taste bad at first but the second time it taste sweet. Everytime we call for a waiter/waitress they seem to be quick with everything but they don't look to happy about it.. Maybe that's their whole point of pouring champagne bottles down on the birthday people. . . If you want to get back at a friend, come to Manna's.. FIRST they brought out a sushi rolls spread out on a big plate it's their "cake" to you, with candle on it than after the fun begins. Than in a bit they play the hippie happy birthday song goes on and out comes a waiter with 2 bottles of champagne first they open it to poor it in a cup than they shake it and pops it and pour it allllllllllllllllllllllllllll over you!! ohh boy I came here yesterday and our birthday boy got so scared. but after that they give you a wet nap towel.. . . Overall it's very fun.. some meat are tasty.. But i'll admit the place is pretty dirty the kitchen or whatever it is that they keep the meat is out in the open for you to see and it does kinda gross you out. This place gets really pack esp fri-sun so call for reservations a head of time if you have a big party. You need to bring a cake or whatever in order for them to do the whole champagne. . . &amp;one more thing this is a place where you cook your own meat.. so if I were you I wouldn't wear anything nice you wouldn't want it to get dirty/stans bring an extra shirt or something or the oil or whatever will get on to you.. and yes you will smell like bbq.. :) from head to toe.. even my purse smelled like it!. . &amp;&amp;OHHH!!! ON MORE THING!!! make sure to tip them at least 15% because they will literally chase you out to the parking lot and ask you for 5more bucks or what not.. That's what happen to me for my first time.. I believe 15 ppl for $60 tips was good enough maybe even more than enough for them.. because they didn't chase us down last night..
