ReviewID: ncSCZnXp9riKZEi97dlbLw
ReviewerID: LJU6OpofN4suyK73MhNEFg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I'd heard of Father's Office's strict no ketchup and no substitutions rules and thought they were ridiculous, but I still thought this place was a pretty alright place to have a drink... until tonight.... . We went here for my friend's 27th birthday and were all ordering beers, burgers, fries, etc. and chatting, when I made the mistake of taking A SINGLE CUPCAKE out of my bag and presenting it to the birthday girl.  As soon as we were done singing "Happy Birthday," the woodsy hipster Father's Office door-girl came in and said that they have a strict no-outside-food policy and we can't have that cupcake in here.  We asked if they served any cake/dessert items that we could order instead and she said no, but that we still have to put the cupcake away.  We said okay, put it down (nobody touched or actually ate it), and continued chatting and carrying on.  A few minutes later, the woodsy hipster door-girl returned to say that the cupcake cannot be on the table and that we need to put the cupcake AWAY because she could get "in serious trouble" if we didn't put it away.  She then suggested that maybe we could go PUT THE CUPCAKE IN SOMEONE'S CAR.  We were kind of taken aback by the ridiculous request, but agreed to put the cupcake away.  At this point, the birthday girl seemed to be getting a little stressed out, so my other friend told me to pass the cupcake to her under the table, and she proceeded to eat it piece by piece from under the table.  It was so ridiculous.. . I don't care how good your burgers are, or how crispy your sweet potato fries are, or how extensive your beer selection is - nobody goes to a bar to pay for overpriced food and drinks and then be repeatedly scolded for something so stupid.  You'd think that Father's Office's employees would view the situation as, "Gee, this is a party of FOURTEEN people who are willing to spend a couple hundred dollars at our bar, maybe we should shut the hell up and not make such a fuss over a cupcake that they're giving their friend for her birthday."  But no. Father's Office's maniacal enforcement of their pretentious rules serves no purpose other than to sour customers from the entire experience of being there.
