ReviewID: nCTerfO730iEIIAXsvpB9g
ReviewerID: 7xt-iwSbUXsz5docmtvhlQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
Sun Wah has always held a special place in both my heart and my childhood. A few of my distinct memories from growing up includes trips to New Chinatown (i.e. Little Saigon) with my Mom. Making pilgrimages out to Viet Hoa for groceries, and then stopping by Sun Wah on our drive back into the suburbs to ensure that our BBQ purchases would still be piping hot by the time we ventured back home.. . Granted this was back in the day when the restaurant/BBQ joint was no larger than a grounded double-wide trailer. Where when you first walked in you were engulfed with the chaos that were Asian men and women calling out their BBQ orders, all vying for the choicest and freshest bits in the "butcher/BBQ" portion of their place. All the while as they all trampled upon cut open cardboard boxes that served as "floor mats" in a crammed little space which resembled a hallway where the only thing that separated you from a gluttonous haven filled with hanging ducks and pigs was their stainless steel counter.. . It was dirty. It was dingy. It was chaotic. The food was delightful.. . Now let us fast forward to their new location, chefs and owners.. . The new restaurant off of Broadway is easily 5 times as large of a space. My family and I went for lunch on a weekday to celebrate my birthday. None of us had been to New Chinatown in years and we wanted to see what it had developed into. The restaurant was much more open, with the skylight taking full advantage of the sunny day. It was aesthetically appealing with the exposed brick walls and dividers. It still had the traditional ducks lined up in front of the window, and I appreciated how it had not gone completely modern and commercial.. . We were seated immediately and in a matter of moments a waiter was there taking our order. My mom ordered in Cantonese, which may have returned us with better service, (our water glasses and tea pot never ran empty for longer than 2 minutes -- contrary to many other posters and their gripes) and even then I give it a 1 out of 5. . . Chinese food is meant to be devoured family style, which is why they bring out plates of food as soon as they have been prepared, as opposed to the American way of "each person orders their own plate". Obviously the BBQ food came out first. We had Roast Pork and Spareribs. The roast pork was over cooked and extremely salty and tough in some places - a far cry from the moist and succulent pork that their namesake would create. The Spareribs were meatier than BBQ King House, yet the flavor bland and did not penetrate the meat quite as well as their competitor. . . We also ordered Beef with Bok Choy, Tofu stuffed with shrimp, Chow Mein, House Fried Rice, Sweet and Sour Pork, a special squid dish as well as a few other dishes. . . Everything was under seasoned and borderline bland. The Noodles in the Chow Mein were literally burnt, as if they had been scorched - destroying the flavor of the dish. The Fried Rice was bland and tasteless, and the squid was actually undercooked. . . My mom and my grandma still went out of their way to order more BBQ to bring home to eat for the week. My Mom ordered half a duck and the next day found that it was inedible. There wasn't any meat, and what was there was dry and tasted strange. . . It was an incredibly disappointing experience. My only wish was that I could have left my childhood memories where they were, in happy times reliving family moments at Sun Wah. I do not recommend this place and wish that I could give them negative stars. It was a waste of a birthday lunch and quality family time that I could have happily spent somewhere else.
