ReviewID: NDQpRQv6OtJYzec_qAkV0g
ReviewerID: LyrAjv8V6HWkceuTB4Xtkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
I LOVE this place.  No joke.  It's seriously one of my favorite places to grab a quick bite or to enjoy good Greek food when I'm in LA.  . . What do most people come here for?  GYROS.  Yea, it's that big piece of rotating meat that you see in a lot of street food carts, fairs, and other restaurants, but none can compete with Papa Cristos.  Somehow it's just different.  The gyros sandwich comes with a big portion of carved pieces of meat with onions, tomatoes, and lettuce wrapped by an awesome pita bread.  It comes with a side of tzatziki, which is a Greek cucumber yogurt sauce that adds so much more to the sandwich.  The gyros can be salty at times so the yogurt sauce cuts down the heaviness a lot of times and it definitely adds a refreshing feel to it.  . . They also have a lot of other Greek and Mediterranean items on their menu.  I've tried almost everything and I love their kabaabs are well.  Grilled right on the spot, generous portion, and you can't really complain about the flavor you get from flames.  Salads are good as well if you want something that's healthier.  Traditional fare when it comes to salads.. . They've got a big selection of desserts as well.  Right next to the tiny kitchen/restaurant, there's a market that carries all sort of items from the region.  EVOO, spices, canned items, dried and fresh foods, and desserts just to name a few.  Baklava comes to mind when you think of Greek desserts, and this place doesn't disappoint either.  Sometimes it's a little too sweet for me but definitely a must-get for people with a sweet-tooth.  I also love buying fresh pita here.  For the EVOO fans, they also have a lot of these... "speciality" oils (as I call them) that have many different flavor profiles for different purposes like cooking, for salads, or just for dipping your bread.. . Go there for lunch and sit in the outside patio if there's seats or there's always the big dining room filled with all sorts of decorations.  For a place like Papa Cristos, they've definitely made a name for themselves with the consistent high quality of food.
