ReviewID: NdUkob4qCpqOV7y3UCiPWQ
ReviewerID: z7KMjTjuZMjYX7OWPsMwzw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Chego
Category: Korean
This restaurant reminds me of high school where everyone loves the popular kid but really, he's just an as*hole who was blessed with good looks.  Chego is this popular kid who got lucky beating everyone to the food truck craze and had a great girl who knew how to market.  As a result, they have lots of friends who will say great things bc they are a likable company.  If you're like me and happen to listen to them, you will discover the truth and spread the word so that others won't flock like sheep.. Here's my experience:. Pork Belly Bowl:  You'd be surprised to learn that this was owned by an asian man, because this is one asian man who doesn't know how to cook rice.  The rice in my bowl was not the nice fluffy yet, slightly sticky kind seen in the usual bim bim bap but it was one solid block of mochi like madness.  Your mother would be ashamed of you, sir!  There were about 12 pieces of pork belly in my bowl and all but 4 had no actual meat on them.  The rest were cubes of pure fat.  Some may love that, but not me.  A definate bust.. . Cup o pickles:  This was better.  I ended up dumping this all over my pork belly bowl to make up for the substance lost after picking out all those cubes of fat.  Such a small portion, not worth $4. . Rock yer road: The nuts were good.  Otherwise, absolutely not worth it.  The marshmallow goop they put in it was pure nastiness.. . The service was very slow even though it was not busy (only 5 other customers there with me).  But the servers were super nice and the owner greeted us as well.. . That doesn't make up for the food though and that always comes first.  It seems these days that success in the restaurant industry has more to do with who you know than what you're serving.  I think Chego has a loyal following and that's definitely helped in this case.. . My hope is that they read these reviews and make changes as necessary bc that's what great restaurants do.  Chego has great potential, but if they want to last thru the hype some changes gotta be made.  I'm rooting for them but I can't in good conscience recommend them right now!
