ReviewID: nE3yhM_QAPzg5kaGYLQpgw
ReviewerID: Hrv-CNWHSRRNU5-PB6jiow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
The waiters' shirts say "I survived the wait" on the back of their T-shirts. If you get there during peak hours, you'll understand why. . . So, go off peak hours. The place will be quieter, you won't have to wonder if you'll be able to park, and you can waltz right in and grab a table.. . They have a nice Sangria, and mojitos, too. And beer. And tropical fruit milkshakes like mamey. I was boring and just had a beer.. . You might think the only thing worth eating on the menu is the Famous Half Chicken. Not so. . . The chicken is marinated in a sour, garlicky mojo sauce (sold at the register in various sizes, in case you were wondering) - but chicken is not the only thing blessed with this sauce. Like the proverbial chicken, you can cross the road and explore.. . They have a big menu full of wonderful things. And daily specials written on the wall. And, at least when we were there, people order them. Ropa vieja ("old clothes"), stringy beef slow cooked in a tomato based sauce. Lechon Asado (my favorite), tender, moist pork with the same garlicky mojo they use for the chicken. Chicken with rice, steaks, sandwiches, shrimp, fish... . . You can move away from the chicken. Don't worry. You might have some adventures, but you'll also discover some wonderful food. . . Remember, this is Cuban food - so don't expect chili or masa based dishes. You can bring chili-averse friends here without risk (read the menu descriptions), although the waiters will bring you some hot sauce (Tapatio?) if you beg for it.. . Most plates arrive accompanied by white rice, black beans, rounds of raw onions and fried plantains. You, of course, knew this from the other reviews.. . As you eat be creative. Put some beans on the rice. Mix some onion with your meat, maybe a piece of plantain and some sour mojo sauce... Your taste buds will thank you.. . Oh, and to the guy who thought he could eat the yucca tree in his yard, "yuca" is the Spanish word. The plant is cassava or manioc in English. Please don't try to eat your yucca tree. It's not the same plant.
