ReviewID: neS8Snxb_YM8RuGljhhBMw
ReviewerID: SStNwTUsMygnloETwHyQsA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
Since I live around the corner from this jazzy gem, I feel that this will be an ongoing review, and love letter of sorts, to the experience that is The Foundry on Melrose.  My first experience with Le Foundri was vis a vis the most excellent hostess, Anna.  She was polite and informative and even hooked a brotha up with a table when that brotha had no business getting one at 8pm on a Friday.  Props.  Secondly, the live jazz is robust and lively, creating a mood that, in my nascent culinary Los Angelisto forays, is rather fkn unique.  The starters included a lobster gratin, which forever ruined me if anybody else was bothering to create a lobster gratin in my future.  Best.  Ever.  That's how you start a meal.  It took all my power to not order the prix fixe, but since I was I was dining with three halibut eaters, the decision to not disrupt the pace of the collective experience was made.  Speaking halibut, which was served on a bed of melted leeks, side of lemon risotto (in a cast-iron ramekin, nice touch) and touched off with lobster foam, you'd be hard-pressed to find a such a well-conceived and executed plate.  It was borderline transcendent, and they boys in the back brought the thunder from down under on that one.  Not to be outdone, I rocked the duck, which was perfect.  I've found that some canard is a fine way to apply ye olde litmus test to a new 'rant, like trying gulab jamun at an Indian joint is the best way to tell if they're for real.  Hey, it ain't easy making something perfectly fried on the outside and gooey soft on the inside, and then have it withstand the rigors of sticky syrup.  The gulab jamun test separates the wheat from the chaff.  Anyway, the duck was A+ and I can't wait to lay waste to the rest of the fkn menu.  El Founderino is for real.  Go there.. . (Update: Four days later I went back to grab a drink and some music, just keeping it low-key.  I broke down and ordered that halibut dish, sharing it with the GF.  Not really sitting down and eating, more like snacking the bar.  Late at night, just about closing, and the risotto was not fully done.  I like a nice crunch in my pasta as much as the next guy, but...  No star dock, cuz I don't roll that way.  Besides, first one's free.)
