ReviewID: nExrxvHC4EbebsjUtVky3Q
ReviewerID: 6QhyegEro97YDR_qw2ki9A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
1 order of famous chicken Garlic chicken $10.99, 1 order of Rib Eye Lomo Salteado $12.99, 1 glass of sangria $3.99, 1 Dos Equis Beer $4.99 having a nice quiet bombmeriffic dinner with the lady on a Thursday night at 7:30pm...... ain't happenin.. . After getting a lotta recommendations to try this place out, I took the leap of hunger and got my grub on.  Though parking the quarters were really tight I managed to get a parking spot right on the street.  Once in the restaurant it looked busy...  like busy busy.... like... diner busy... but we got seated shortly since the massive wave of people showed up right after us.  Can I get a high-five for being the start of the rush?!  Thanks!. . First off we ordered the famous garlic chicken, how can we not?  It was on every table!  And any chicken dish that has "famous" in it is a must have right?!  Mind you I'm a sucker for sayings like... "the best in town, number 1 in the city," and I have been bamboozled many times.  Gah!!!  Dam you NYC for advertising the best cheesecake at every corner store!  . . The chicken was served with fried plantains which would have been good if their sweetness wasn't soaking in the lemony garlic sauce from the chicken, a side of black beans, and white rice.  I mean... the chicken wasn't bad...  It was on the side of OK/good, it had a crispy tasty skin and all, but it just didn't taste like anything special.  The black beans were black beans.... I definitely had better Cuban style black beans elsewhere.. . As for the Rib Eye Lomo Salteado in a tomato sauce...  same thang... it was aiight....  not bad.... just not up to the level of bombness I was expecting.  This dish was also served with the a side of rice and black beans, but the meat was kinda tough, and like the chicken the plantains picked up a lot of the tomato sauce from the beef.  One thing I did like from this dish is that there were french fries soaking in the sauce, and you can never go wrong with meat and potatoes!. . The glass of sangria was definitely watered down and lacked a lot of flavor but! that Dos Equis was just right...  Granted it came nice and cold out the bottle, but how can "the most interesting man in the world" steer you wrong?  Did you know he once visited a psychic, just to warn her?  pshhhh....  what a G.. . I know there's a lotta Versailles lovers out there, and I probably should try more dishes to make my mark since it's so beloved.  The staff was fast to serve, but it was so busy whenever I wanted anything else I had to holler one down.  It was a madhouse in there!  As for now 2.5 stars is where I stand cuz there's better Cuban in LA.. . Until I eat again!. Keep on, eatin on!
