ReviewID: nfdsgQ_kAGE5LIv6OkzBlA
ReviewerID: xkn1QMEbTIyacj_DSfJ_sA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
We arrive and sign in.. -"Wow. This place smells good!!!". -15 minutes in, "Mmm, yeah I can't wait!". -30 minutes in, "Should we get something to drink while we wait? Coo.". -"Umm, excuse me, you guys can't drink outside.". -"Okay". -35 minutes in, "Uh, should we just wait inside?". tic...toc...lose track of time. -"It's hot. How bout we go outisde?. -"Hey, those dudes are drinking out here...Why don't they tell them anything?". -"Weren't those people here after us? And they have more people in their party! The hell!". -"Ask how much longer again...". . Zzz zzz zzz. . About an hour and a half + later...we were seated. We were beginning to think they didn't like us.... . Took us a while to get the LB'age right...4lbs of this, 2lbs of that, 5lbs of this should be good, dungeness crabs, 2 dozen oysters, so many fries, beers, water, and the whole sha-bang seasoning. The staff was really helpful and incredibly nice.. . Oysters were large, tasted fresh, and were a great way to kick it all off. The fries (mild &amp; medium) were tasty. I think the majority thought medium was already a little too spicy. I enjoyed em. But then again I ain't no wimp. Na'mean?. . Out come the crustaceans!!. . Alright, here's the run down:. . Crawfish - Way too much work for too little a reward. I grew tired of this but kept coming back just to make sure I would never order these creatures again. I do believe this is the only thing we didn't finish.. . Dungeness Crab - Use your hands to tear this guy apart and dig out the meat. Good stuff. Unamazing.. . Shrimp - Peel off the shell, rip off the head, legs, and pinch the tail to get as much shrimp flesh as possible and pop into mouth. Repeat a guhgillion times. They were alright. Again, unamazing.. . King Crab Legs - This was my personal favorite. Then again I LoOoOoOoOoOoVe me some king crab legs! I wonder if it was my affinity for them in general or the Boiling Crab's touch on em. Either way, I have to say they didn't mess it up. I thoroughly enjoyed the same seasoning that was on everything else more on these legs. Tools provided came in really handy.. . All in all it was a great experience. It's not my new favorite restaurant but it was good. I had a great time and didn't feel pressured to rush. That's probably why we waited so long and not that they had a personal vendetta against us. The cajun seasoning is serious business. That stuff is strong, oily, and yes - good. I permanently have an oil stain on my sweater that will forever remind me of my visit. Very messy. Roll up your sleeves, make good use of the roll of paper towels, and on this occasion it's not only acceptable but recommended you suck your fingers clean. Great service and not cheap. $40+ including drinks. But it's seafood. And mass quantities of it.. . Would I come here again? Sure. But this time I'll know exactly what to get. Oysters and king crab legs.
