ReviewID: nGA_a6CAfr7xEpvT41kWyQ
ReviewerID: 2dhIrsz2u9Q_4k7qBbNROA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Those that follow my reviews can tell you that I may or may not develop prostate cancer in the near future, assuming of course that I already don't have it. Reference:. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) . Thus, I'm making some efforts to eat salads. . . Straight up, I don't know how I feel about paying $16ish for a salad and lemonade with tip (I dare you to give back the receipt with the tip space left empty. That's just asking for bad karma). A salad that I had to stand in a second line to pay for after I already ordered it in line one.  I know this is beneficial to the throughput process of such a small crowded space as well as for the 'Wow look at them make my food" factor, which by the way I don't care for.  1) I hate standing and 2) If i wanted to see food made, I'd do it myself or watch it on FN while sitting on my lounger and not standing next to other oogling patrons. . . Was my steak salad good? Yes, I was happy with the perfectly prepared medium rare protein and the proportionate dressing on my fresh leafy greens. Was I full? No. I had to additionally eat half of my friend's order to be satisfied. I'm a healthy 6'0 foot 184 pound male damnit. I need fuel. . . I wanted to give this place 3 stars. It's as good as the others reviewers say it is, but to me it's a bit pricey for salad that left me still hungry. And then I remembered the last time I made salad at home. I had bought a Costco tub of greens, ate about 1/3 of it and tossed the rest into the crisp keeper in my fridge. It was left there undisturbed for weeks. It rotted into a primordial ooze. Then mini organisms swam around in it. The organisms grew legs and made land fall by the 3rd week. Soon little nomadic salad peoples began hunting and gathering around different parts of the fridge. On week 7 I opened the fridge to see my Brita water filter full of wine and a mini Jesus Christ giving me the thumbs up. . . Tender Greens gets 4 stars because I will never make salad at home ever again. A mini-crucifixion is a horrible thing to witness in one's kitchen. *In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit Amen.*
