ReviewID: ngMzNE3x7oAi8GupP7JptQ
ReviewerID: _BcuXITrotGbNlHFY8fD8g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Kogi Does it stand for (Ko)rean (Gi)rls?. . Saturday Night:. Me: Lets go grab some Pizza!. Boyz: Yes!. Wife: How about Korean Tacos? Kogi's in town!  We're in luck!. Me: Well, I really wanted pizza.. Boyz: Kogi? I've heard of them!  Lets try it.. Me: fine.... . So we get there at 6:30pm (When the website said they'd be there). And sure enough, the taco truck was pulling in.  We parked and got out of our car just in time to see... The longest line for tacos ever.. . As I walked past the college age crowd, I kept feeling like I was going to a rock concert or a club.. . 2 hours later, we finally got to the front and ordered.... 1 chicken taco. 2 spicy pork tacos. 2 short rib tacos. 2 spicy pork burritos. 1 short rib burrito. 1 Tofu Burrito. 1 black jack Quesadilla. . I don't know if it's because I was expecting to eat at 6:30pm and the black jack was the first thing I tasted or if the blackjack was really that good, but when I took a bite of the quesadilla, It sent chills up and down my spine.  It was THAT good.  So So So good.  I wish we had ordered 5 of these things because it was the best thing I had tasted in a long time. The spicy pork Tacos were the best tasting tacos there.  My wife agrees that she liked the spicy pork tacos.. . Restrooms: I didn't see any restrooms around.  So I wasn't able to put that into this review.  Perhaps someone can give a tip later as to where you can use the restrooms.. . Atmosphere: The atmosphere was really driven by the patrons.  It seemed to me like I said earlier, a college / club atmosphere.  There was no outdoor seating or any setup at the truck.  I wanted to be able to sit down there and eat, but you'd have to stand if you wanted to do that.. . Service: Service was kinda slow, since we were standing there from 6:30pm until we finally got our food at 8:30pm.  I can't fault Kogi for this... I don't think you can make reservations either.. . Tip: When you order, order a lot.  You might as well, if you're going to stand in line for so long.  Either that or get there earlier and stand in line.. . Overall: Great food, long wait, buy lots, arrive early.
