ReviewID: NGN3y2ZNqe0ScOLVpVe9Dg
ReviewerID: yYEIePWZlDWuHWxUlir_oQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
THE BLURB: Finally! I have reached the holy grail! Or so I thought when I finally visited Langer's for the first time - and most likely the last.. . THE SETTING: I got there at 3:30pm on a Saturday, 30 minutes before they close - and it was PACKED! Had to wait for 5~10 minutes, but it wasn't that bad. Something that surprised me was how clean and organized the place seemed, although there was some funky cleaning agent smell that I kept breathing in - ughck.. . SERVICE: The lady sat us down quickly, and you could tell she wanted to serve us quickly, take our order quickly, and get us the heck out quickly.. . THE HIT LIST: My lovely company, aka my mother, and I split the #19 Pastrami (aka the reason I went to Langer's) and the #88 Reuben with Corned Beef.. . #19: The combination of the bread and the slaw was near heavenly. There was a subtle sweetness about the bread that seemed to accentuate the flavors and greatness in the slaw - then comes the pastrami. Ohh, how fatty you were, but how even more jammed-packed with taste you were. The textures worked well together, although the overall substance was a bit overwhelming.. . #88: Dare I say this? I liked the Reuben better than the #19. Yes.. zOMG! Andrew! What are you thinking?! Yes.. the grilled rye on the Reuben trounces the #19 rye. The mound of corned beef that laid foundation for the mountain of sauerkraut in #88 proved to be more appetizing and lovely than the #19. The textures, the juiciness, the flavor, EVERYTHING about the #88 seemed better than the #19. Yes, #19 had it's sweetness and variety of textures and flavors, but both my company and I agreed - #88 stood the victor.. . THE DAMAGE: 2 sandwiches, a coke, tax and tip = $40.00 (aka - the reason it will be my last time at Langer's). . THE VERDICT: Sure - this place is great. A bit over-hyped, but the sandwiches were huge. But I highly doubt I will be back. It's very pricey for my taste and being in the part of town that it is makes for good reason to lessen my chances of returning to Langer's. . . Okay okay, please don't stone me - but strangely enough, I think I might still like pastrami from the likes of The Hat or Lucky Boy over thick sliced pastrami - it's just something I'm raised on. Yes yes - what am I thinking?! I know.. but hey, it's my opinion and you have yours.. . Also, Langer's is farther than I'd like to drive - I have Pasadena Sandwich Company closer to home that serves sandwiches about the same size, 80% of the quality, and is half the price. Yes, again, please don't stone me for my opinions. . . Overall, it was a fun experience. I came, I saw, I ate, and I cried. Cried because it was so tasty. Cried because it was $40 for two sandwiches.. . BONUS: There's a Mexican lady 1/2 a block down from Langer's selling Dirty Dogs. Somehow, my company and I mustered the stomach space to chow down a bacon wrapped dog with grilled onions, green peppers, and a chili pepper. YUM!
