ReviewID: NgvzJCRDNNh9CApipznVEQ
ReviewerID: g8BJtXIRlYEVOjzgB8V69g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
OK so this past Sunday, after seeing Guy Fieri visit The Oinkster on Food Network, the misses and I were compelled to check it out. We packed up our 2 huskies and figured we would take the pooches on a walk up and down Coloroado BLVD. while we waited for our food. When we got there it looked as if many others had the same idea. I would estimate at least 40 people in line before us. The misses waited patiently for an hour before she were able to order while i took the pooches on a walk. It is definitely worth the wait.. . We ordered the:. Oinkster Pastrami. Pulled Pork BBQ sandwich - without red slaw *misses doesnt like slaw*. Belgium Fries. Oinksterade. Chocolate Shake. . Both Sandwiches were very succulent and soft, juices were flowing with every bite. Pastrami was very delicious and non salty. The cuts of pastrami were so thick it filled me up rather quickly. The slaw and cheese on this sandwich give it just the right balance of tastes. Guy was correct in recommending this place.. Pulled BBQ pork sandwich was great! The pork was very soft and again, non salty and full of flavor. The BBQ sauce is home made and is not like the molasses sugar based sauces that generally come to mind when you think of BBQ. It was delicious and the misses and I soon found ourselves pouring it on what was left of our sandwiches and fries. Yumm factor = 10!. The butter garlic sauce that gets served with the fries is delicious too but very suttle in flavor compared to teh BBQ sauce.. . Before coming here, I always regarded "The Hat" as "THE" place for great fastfood pastrami. Not anymore! We live about 20 miles from here and it was worth making the trek out to visit.. . There were 2 birthdays in progress when we finally sat down with our food. It is great to see a strong family vibe at this place. They serve beer and wine so if you're in the mood for that, drink up! Staff was very friendly too.. . In total we spent 26 dollars. This place is not for cheap eats and is well worth the money spent.. . I will be visiting the Oinkster again! Enjoy!
