ReviewID: nHUz2DKef_0yKBXkGTUnQQ
ReviewerID: AADT758x5G2bhwFBRDqLfA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bob San Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
I might give this restaurant five stars if it changed its' name to "Daniel San" because that would be an awesome Karate Kid reference. . . Bob San is pretty rockin' though. I'm come to accept that if you want decent sushi in this city you have to be willing go into deficit. Let's be honest though, I could say this about most of my eating habits. See, I'm the kinda broad who drinks Gentleman Jack when I ought to be drinking Red Dog.. . But sushi cravings cannot be ignored for long, especially in a neighborhood where uppity sushi joints are as common as those dratted indie bake shops. Aki Sushi, Bob San, Blu Coral, Blue Fin, Coast, Mirai, Papajin, Usagi Ya (if I'm being alphabetical and OCD) are all within walking distance of my house. My regular dining companion and I decided upon Bob San because it seemed like it had a reassuring amount of customers (Aki Sushi doesn't) but at the same time wasn't flooded with rich wankers (MIRAI!!!). . . We were able to get a last minute reservation on a Friday night but I don't know that we needed one as the weather was so crappy. The host staff was very welcoming, but they welcome you in Japanese (and those girls were blatantly not from Asia) so I felt a little sorry for them.. . I instantly started to like this place when they presented me with a hot towel when I sat down. It was freezing out that day so I put it on my (face) cheeks to warm up. Awesome. We took a long time figuring out how much to order but we ended up with just the right amount of food. I should've written down what I ate because as lame as it sounds I really can't remember (they all had a Japanese title, ok?). All the rolls were great and I especially enjoyed the salmon sashimi appetizer. I do however remember dessert - they have awesome red bean ice cream and mochi (the latter is the perfect size for those who don't want to commit to a huge dessert). You also get orange segments too at the end of your meal which is a nice touch.. . Expect to spend some money here but in the world of sushi I think Bob San is what I'd call mid-range. I'll be all over this place again when they open up their covered patio on Division.
