ReviewID: niaVUMySXryDJ_nqvRu1NA
ReviewerID: T2-nZ41zcT02fdbFHFYhzw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
After going here I realized how long it's been since I've gone to a restaurant where the food comes out looking so pretty. I regrettably forgot to charge my camera before going (Ugh!) so I unfortunately don't have photographic evidence of said pretty food. Trust me though, it's quite aesthetically pleasing. Ah, but the prices make my eyes water just a tad, lol.. . Let's get started. I must inform you that this place is NOT on Lincoln Ave. It's like a door and 1/2 west of Lincoln Ave which had me befuddled for a few minutes when I was 100% sure I was reading the addresses correctly. Go to 3900 N. Lincoln Ave and look West. As you will see right away, it has an open and fresh decor of wood, metal, glass, and white. A contemporary environment with a hint of casual. I immediately felt it to be the restaurant equivalent of Jake clothing store. Yep, if you've been to Jake you know what I mean.. . The hostess was very friendly when I entered and didn't question my intentions when I walked toward the table where my dinner companion was waiting for me. It requires repeating that it has sadly been a while since I've dined at a place like this so I was bit taken aback by the relatively small menu. There wasn't much to choose from. And from the selection that existed, there was a lot of fusion going on. I like new and innovative dishes, but some flavors I just can do without being fused together. Wasabi ketchup? Ginger kumquat jam? Apple togarashi compote along w/port and red curry jus in a dish? Now you guys are just "doing the most.". . What did I have? I won't lie. I played it safe with the least Jackson Pollock-like dish on there. I got the 1/2 chicken with shallots and some chopped spinach, on top of Chinese black rice dressed with minted yogurt ($21). It was damn tasty. The chicken was pan fried with that type of golden light crisp to the skin that you can only get in restaurants such as these. The meat was juicy and flavorful with there being a leg and a breast. The minted yogurt was a fantastic complement. I only wish there would have been more on the plate. I liked the rice. It had a hearty flavor with a bit of sweetness much like you get with chianti. Now it said spinach on the menu, but it didn't taste like spinach. It taste more like chard and it overpowered the other flavors when I ate it. Most of that stayed on the plate.. . I also got a side of mac and cheese ($6) which was really a side. It was a generous portion of creamy 4 cheese deliciousness. It had the lovely baked golden top to it and paired with the entree, filling but not too much.. . Dessert. Once again I was confronted by strange fusions of flavors that just weren't sounding like dessert, let alone appetizing. Black vinegar sorbet? Wasabi vanilla bean syrup? Mmmmmmn, I can't do it. I was going to opt for the mai'a hot fudge sundae which was banana ice cream, hot fudge, macadamia nuts, and bruleed banana ($8). I thought banana ice cream AND bruleed banana was just too much b-a-n-a-n-a-s for me, but the waiter was going to have vanilla ice cream substituted. I knew I couldn't eat it alone and my dinner companion wasn't up for it, so I missed out. Boooooo. Just means I'll have to go back!. . So even though I wasn't feeling all of the fusiony trendy options, I would definitely go back. The prices are a little higher than I've gotten used to paying, but it's not in the Tavern on Rush price territory. Sola has an extensive wine list and some great sounding cocktails. I'd could see myself dropping back in for appetizers, cocktails and dessert while sitting at the bar. Ooooh, sounds like a great date idea!
