ReviewID: nIZXMzjwaAMSlPOlsFJnLA
ReviewerID: 5i7W4zdZdX-nFHX7jAgC9g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
friend:  "Hey, there are already ppl standing in line"  . me:  Lol, wtf, stop messing w/ me.  . friend:  " No, really, there are ppl there". me:  WTF, why are we still in the hotel room!. . So, I hurried my ass down, threw my shit in the whip, and hustled across the street so I wouldn't have to wait for an hour to eat.. . 20min. past and my friends finally came and being that I am "samart" I told the chick that we have 6 ppl but we will split up and sit separately.  Zing, she smile and said ok.. . Just like a sushi bar, I like to sit at the bar and watch them expertly prepare the meals ppl order.. . 2 chefs , 1 was on ramen duty and his hand was the measuring unit.  I love it, 1 handful of ramen in th strainer, 1 handful of sprouts, 1 handful of Scallions (my fav.)  what can be better?. the other chef was strictly on other dish duty.. . This place is tiny and the booths match the size.  Booths should only sit 4 ppl tops and even w/ 4 ppl, the guy between the wall and the other person doesn't have enough arm room.. . Food:. . Menu - didn't really notice - I didn't look past the ramen section I got the Koterri Flavor ( back fat flavor)  Wth, why not, ya only live once.. It came in a good size bowl, the Ramen was perfectly cooked (al dente) the broth was heaven and the slices of the pork belly was Orgasmic!  I threw in the extra ginger and pureed garlic and some spice.  Heaven! Oh, the egg that came w/ the ramen was expertly cooked, the yoke in the center was not fully cooked .... they are on top of their game.. . I wish I had more of the pork but ... I would've never finish everything because I also ordered the Gyoza.. . Gyoza was fantastic, prob. the best I've ever had!  They cooked it and flattened it, threw a handful of scallions on top and it came w/ a killer ponzu sauce.  to friggin die for.. . I use to think Santa Ramen in San Mateo was the best, but I believe this place has edge it out.  I don't feel bloated and sleepy after I left Daikokuya but I do feel that way after leaving santa ramen ...and Santa Ramen leaves a weird after taste.
