ReviewID: NK8uKSTmFU-agTEhijFUgQ
ReviewerID: Ymh9K9vfsV-9Dl2TGPtGiQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: La Pasadita
Category: Mexican
La Pasidita, located on Ashland, just south of Division, has by far, the best mid-day, two person snack ever invented. This little dish called "chachos". Basically its nachos with meat. To be more specific, it's nacho chips, with beans, melted cheese, avocado, sour cream and topped with grilled carne asada. Nothing beats it. NOTHING. And the best part is that it's only like $6.95. The carne asada is excellent and they use a flat top grill that completely sets off their meat marinade. Sooo gooood.. . Now if you go here, know that this could get confusing. There are two La Pasaditas right next to each other, and one across the street, and a De Pasada a little south from there on Ashland. I know that the two LP's next to each other and the one across the street are all owned by the same guy. I guess the story goes that people have tried to open up restaurants to compete with the original LP, but the LP owner always ends up buying out the competitors to hold down his part of the neighborhood. Smart man in my book, because he's serving the best product. The De Pasada, south on Ashland, has no affiliation (I don't think) but don't quote me.. . If you are going to drop by LP, we also advise trying the burritos($5.00) or tacos ($1.85/each). Real, and authentic. Only meat cilantro and onions. But we'll discuss those at a later time.. . Not too much is known on my part about DP but to quote @offtheeatenpath Twitter follower @elaineinspired, "There's a little yellow place just south of there called De Pasada. Best Chicken Burritos Ever!!!!!!!!!" As much as I would hate to side step LP and try DP, I will. Just to see what all this talk is about. Thanks @elaineinspired. . If you are going down to La Pasadita, you have three to choose from, all with dining rooms varying in size, and take out counters, but the menus differs at all three. We usually stick with the yellow building with the black sign. They have never let us down. Oh, and it's BYOB, which makes any place better. Enjoy
