ReviewID: Nlq3YXFky4ZBweoCbV3yaw
ReviewerID: E7CQw7i7fE7L4EBuwUDmkg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Abattoir
Category: American (New)
So we went last night for a birthday dinner, and it was all around one of the best meal experiences I've had in a long time.  The decor was great, and we all noted that despite being seated mid-room, the noise levels were very good and the lighting and positioning allowed a sense of your own space, if not privacy.. . The service was friendly, knowledgeable and very well-timed.  It was requested that we order appetizers, salads and entrees at once, which made me raise my eyebrow a little, but only a little.  Beyond that, they came out in perfect sequence and timing.  The wine and cocktail recommendations were all spot-on, and for the few things he didn't know by memory, he found out immediately.  He even waited patiently as I explained a cocktail to him (a Blood &amp; Sand) and it came out perfectly.. . The food!. In summary:  Delicious.. We had:. -Fried ceci peas:  had varied levels of fried-ness, which made for a variety of textures, lightly spiced with cumin - this should replace popcorn in all movie theaters, forever.. -Fried chicken livers:  perhaps the least interesting bit of the night, but a nice rendition of getting just that.. -Pickled Gulf shrimps:  light tasting, but a great combination of flavor and texture. -Charcuterie:  some duck mortadella, blood sausage, trout, agh, I forget all that went with this - some really and surprising flavors here.  I might not order it again simply because I don't go out of my way for such things, but all were really top quality.. -Steak tartare:  one of the best I've ever had...not that I eat this often, but the quality and care made this top notch. -Various salads:  a nice range here, I can't remember them all, but they served their purpose in being refreshing, cleansing, interesting but not overbearing or too filling. . Between the five of us, 2 of us had the pork tasting (included local ham, pork belly, pork shoulder over 'red beans' and rice) - all wonderful in both flavor and texture, each individual item perfectly cooked and presented.  The red beans were more like crowder peas, but I love those, so that worked well.  It was a lot of fat by design, which became pretty heavy for me towards the end, but that's not a complaint.  2 people had chicken schnitzel, which was everything I want from fried chicken of any sort - I didn't miss the chicken skin, and it was flavorful meat, a good moderately spiced crust and awesome crunch.  My woman had the pot au feu, which had an unearthly broth, some incredible quality beef and a near perfect setting of vegetables seated with it.  . . We all opted for dessert - a root beer float of the gods, a sweet cream goat cheesecake (made me think of a very high quality cheesecake-yogurt, with cherries), chocolate pot du cremes - like what mousse always wishes it was, and some amazing AMAZING maple bacon beignets.  These were a great blend of flavor and texture, not overly sweet, maybe just a touch more on the side of doughnut hole from beignets, but wow.  . . I tend to take peoples' other reviews in good faith, no matter how much they vary from my experience, and given the criticisms from other reviews here, it made me think someone was reading them and decided to really emphasize improving those marks.  I hope so, because damn...this was just great all the way around.
