ReviewID: nm9P1cqfGvBgbIDECbxedA
ReviewerID: PPEisXw1rYsknEz4WfNaGw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chego
Category: Korean
Hubby and I are Kogi fans. When we lived in Glendale we would head over to Eagle Rock to meet the truck at it's regular stop on Eagle Rock Boulevard. . . Culver City isn't too far from our WeHo home, so we headed over to Chego to check out some of the yummy-sounding bowls.. . Woo Hoo! A parking spot was available  for us in the tiny mini-mall lot! This bode very well for the culinary treat that was to follow.. . Hubby had the Prime Rib, and I tried the Chubby Pork Belly. We also tried the cup o' pickles. . . Based on the reviews we had read, we had some concerns about the prime rib, which had been described as "dry", and the rice, which some yelpers described as "mushy". We figured that a new restaurant needs a little time to get the bugs worked out, and they had probably gotten a handle on these issues by now. Our faith in Chef Roy and his staff was well-founded, and rewarded.. . The place is small, but cute and clean. We placed our to-go order at the counter and went to the To-Go station near the kitchen to wait for our order. All the bags,foil, napkins and utensils (I opted for chopsticks) are layed-out on a table, similar to the Kogi truck but much more user-friendly. . . The place was busy, but the kitchen didn't take long. We wrapped our food, and after a twenty-minute car ride home the bowls were still hot and delicious. The Chego bowls definitely travel better than the Kogi truck fare.. . Chego crafts rice bowls that are beautiful to look at, bursting with bold, fresh flavors. The portions appear smallish, but, on the contrary, they are very filling. I wish I could explain what makes them taste so good, but trust me, these bowls are great.. . Hubby was very happy with his prime rib, although the horseradish sauce was so mild he didn't even notice it was there.  The rice was perfectly-cooked, and sushi-grade. My One Chubby Pork Belly was delicious. I took one reviewers advice and mixed my egg up with everything else, and was delighted at the marvelous melange of flavor and texture in every bite.. . The cup o'pickles is brilliant. I had to restrain myself from eating the whole thing. Highly recommended.. . I am looking forward to returning to Chego to try some of their other tempting bowls. Chef Roy has a real knack for knowing what works.
