ReviewID: NmaS2zvsj9sBw6eZYzwhKQ
ReviewerID: wM-lbC6lsus0w1V8QZaKmA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bacchanalia
Category: American (New)
Best Valentine's Day ever!  . . This was the biggest and best restaurant splurge we've made in awhile, and it was completely worth it.  It was our first time dining there, and I wasn't really sure what to expect.  Thought it might be a bit stuffy since it was such a high end place, but was nicely surprised by the ambiance.  It was dimly lit and fairly quiet, which made for a very romantic meal.  Luckily we were seated in a stand-alone table for 2, as opposed to the booth/chair 2 seaters along the wall.  We had a view of the city and into the glass-walled kitchen, which was perfect.  It is a small and cozy space that is a perfect date spot.    . . Our waiter (and the multitude of people pouring water, bringing bread, folding our napkins, etc.) were top notch and not too invasive.  Our main waiter, whose name I wish I had caught, was very informed about the menu and wines.  Not once was I looking around for a waiter, but at the same time I felt we had plenty of privacy throughout the meal.  Nothing I hate worse than hovering waiters.  They book reservations there about 2 hours apart, so you are free to enjoy your meal with no pressure to give up your table.  . . Now, the food... wow.    We started with two glasses of the Piper Heidsieck champagne, which was wonderful.  The chef immediately sends out his first "gift" which was two gruyere cheese puffs, fried to perfection - could have eaten about 10 of those things.  For the appetizers we had the poached lobster (with paired sauvignon blanc) and kumamoto oysters with caviar.  Both were amazing and we knew we were in for an incredible meal. . . The next gift from the chef was a small shot of borscht, which we thought was funny because my husband is Ukrainian so we eat borscht often.  It definitely wasn't his mama's borscht, but it was delicious nonetheless.  For our entrees we had the duck and the NY strip, which I thought was a bit of a boring choice on my part, but I was really craving it.  The duck was incredible, had never tasted duck so juicy.  The steak, which I had med-rare, was cooked to perfection and practically melted in my mouth.  As much as I want to be adventurous, I'd probably order it again in the future.  Had a Tuscan, Brancaia Tre, with the entrees, which although wasn't the most expensive glass we ordered that night, was my favorite.  The next gift was a lemon smoothie, which was good but probably the least spectacular dish of the evening.  . . The cheese and contrast was my favorite course.  Had the Stracchino and figs (nice mild cheese to go with the sweet figs), and the Vermont Butter &amp; Cheese fresh goat cheese with roasted beets and beet sorbet.  I don't even like beets, but I cannot resist goat cheese.  This dish made me reconsider beets.  The roasted beets were excellent, but it was really the beet sorbet wich blew me away.  My husband, who being Ukrainian is a de facto authority on beets, agreed that this was the best beet dish he had ever tried.  Can't recommend it enough.  . . For dessert we had trio of sorbets and the bread pudding.  The sorbets were excellent, but after trying some of the bread pudding I'll admit I was a little jealous.  We paired these with a glass of port and a glass of sherry.  The chef sent out a small plate of heart-themed cookies, macaroons, chocolates, which was as beautiful as it was tasty.  Just when I thought we couldn't eat any more, the chef sends out two amazing madeleine cookies to end the evening.  . . This is definitely a special occassion type place, unless spending over $300 on one meal is commonplace for you.  Sure, we could have spent less if we had passed on the wine, but we wanted to go all out.  I can honestly say though that the experience was worth every penny, and I see why Bacchanalia is considered one of the best in the city.  Attention is paid to every detail.  On the way out, they even gave us flowers, a bag of croissants, and box of cupcakes from the Star Provisions bakery.  A truly 5 star dining experience.
