ReviewID: NMB2Bg4YV0WPCG9wJt9LrQ
ReviewerID: bjRCXVX2J7BlekuyN_Hrrw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Holeman &amp; Finch Public House
Category: American (New)
H&amp;F is a true gem, but it pays to have the 411 on this place ahead of time since there's a few tricks. I had my 'birthday party' here though and it was a smashing success!. . It's a bit tricky to find since the storefront just has a simple h&amp;m sign to identify it. It's a few doors down from Imperial Fez. We valeted and I didn't see any evident self-parking.. . They start serving food at 5:00pm, and we arrived at 6:00pm on Tuesday with 7 people. At this hour, the place was still empty and we were able to get half of the huge public house style table. H&amp;F is all self-seating, first-come first-serve, and the dining area is super tiny. Mostly tables for two, and a few booths.. . The cocktail list is indeed unique, and created by a master mixologist. That either impresses you or it doesn't. If you don't do cocktails, they have a nice wine list with some surprises.. . The menu is basically all small plates, and our group elected an official to just order about 10 things to share. So, I've tried most of the menu, but instead of listing them out I'll just say that I loved everything and the steak tartare was my top fav. Before I went, I was worried that my friends would not all be able to find something to eat on this appearingly challenging menu. It turns out to be much more friendly that I guessed to both the foodie and the 'fraidie. Everyone was pleased.. . Since we ate at 6pm, we did not get to try the burgers. Those famous little devils are only available at 10pm. (You're either there, or you're not!). . We opted to get dessert elsewhere, since by 7:30 the restaurant is in full swing packed with people and bustle. The crowd can get pretty trendy, but the servers never made us feel out of place.. . So, I love this place. Which is quite a shock considering how comfortably nestled in Buckhead it is, but what can i say!
