ReviewID: NmlHGBHcymNWp7Zz8pH_tw
ReviewerID: 8T9_QN3z4uXa6B9vTvwxwA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
The Griddle is the setting of many, many fond memories for me.  Like the time I ate an incredibly large omelet while sitting next to that guy from that show.  Or the time I OD'd on bacon (not possible) while sitting next to that girl from that show.  Or the one time I didn't have to wait an hour to get a table and the waiter looked like that person from that show. . . Food:. Pretty much everything on the menu is big, cheap, and tasty.  My advice: get a side order of bacon, one pancake (not one full order, just one, because you (by which I mean anyone) cannot eat a full order), and your choice of a dozen different types of omelets or pancakes (the pumpkin pie flavored one - 'Tis The Season -  is my favorite) or french toast or an assortment of chili or a sandwich (the shrimp one is the only thing on the menu I don't like).  You'll have enough food for a month and spend less than $20.  3.5 stars.. . Service:. Alex is a great guy and a great host.  The rest of the wait staff used to be in a very attractive, punk/pop co-ed boy band (I wish them all fame and success).  Service is fine, if disinterested.  The downside is the wait on Saturday and Sunday.  One thing is certain: you will wait.  And wait.  And wait.  Expect 45 minutes if you aren't a regular.  An hour or longer is possible.  2 stars.. . Decor:. Typical diner, with tables, booths, and counter space inside and a few tables outside.  There are also two private'ish rooms in the back for larger parties.  Since you'll be spending about an hour out front waiting, I guess you can consider the sidewalk near Sunset and Fairfax part of the decor.  It is often warm, sunny, and crowded with people waiting for cheap pancakes.  2 stars.. . Summary:. Food (60% weight for Overall): 3.5 stars.. Service (20% weight for Overall): 2 stars.. Decor (20% weight for Overall): 2 stars.. . Overall: 2.9 stars  (which I am rounding all the way to 4 since I am a long-time fan and this is a must-try LA scene).. . Come for the cheap eats, stay for the... wait.
