ReviewID: NmPSyv_mn-k4R_czknxe-Q
ReviewerID: SSND0Kb6qB-xmezVedCE_g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
dare i say it? . . bottega louie is now my favorite restaurant in LA. i cant shut up about it! . . man what a face lift downtown has gotten over the course of the past 2 years! and what a great addition bottega louie is to that facelift! . . aesthetically - it sits there right on the corner of grand and 7th- with a PRESENCE. very chiq, subtle, and powerful. . . the beautiful bakery with ready made food is available for those on the go, but the restaurant is what im here to talk about so here i go.... . the wait. yes. there is one. a quite substantial one. your place mark inside the hostess' great big book has never been so important.. . my gfs and i got there at 8 pm and they couldnt tell us how long the wait would be. so we headed over to the standard rooftop to grab a couple of drinks and kill some time. we headed back at 930 and checked back - and another 15 min wait -  we were seated. the host and hostess were so nice that it was hard to even realize how long the wait really was.. . the food . . the bread is just a regular piece of bread- wrapped in parchment paper. i think warm bread would probably be a better option.. . penne gamber- showed me how light and delicious a pasta can be. so simple / and the freshness of the shrimp and broccilini were paired so well together adn all the flavors of the dish just seeped into every bite! no additional seasoning was necessary!. . chicken parmesan- very thin filet with mild batter,fresh basil and mozzarella - not quite on the top of my list, but the non-heaviness, and the fresh tomato sauce with whole basil leaves was quite impressive. . sausage pizza- was also very good. how can something so plain be reinvented to be so good?!!!. . PORTOBELLO FRIES - alone !!!!!!!!! were good enough to compensate for our 2 hour wait! . . wine - the waitress proposed a bottle of a nice syrah - one we have never heard of before - and wow paired so nicely with everything. . its hard to capture the experience of this place with words. the beautiful restaurant with high ceilings and marble floors (although they are what contribute to the loudness of the restaurant) the beautiful people, the wine, the service, . . i am definitely a new fan!
