ReviewID: nN4mxoFApP2hgorCdAqipA
ReviewerID: qKVLocEUZUvceYXkiFX9BQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fox Bros Bar-B-Q
Category: Barbeque
[While moving DBA to the very bottom of my BBQ Quest list, I noticed that my review for my #1 was a little out of date and needed some freshening up.  So here's an update.]  . . Wow, this place has gotten really popular - much to my relief (it's successful and still serving great bbq) and my chagrin (it's busy and hard to park now - a small price to pay though).  I guess those billboard advertisements they had up on Ponce and at N. Decatur &amp; Clairmont worked.  Billboards for a bbq joint?  Crazy!. . Anyway, I've been here many times now.  I've tried a few more things too.  First off, the fries aren't "ordinary bag fries" as some dismissive jerk wrote - at least they aren't anymore.  Maybe they never were and I was just on the rock when I had them... Anyway, I've had them a few times and they are pretty good though a bit inconsistent - sometimes cooked a little too long, sometimes cooked a little too short, sometimes nicely seasoned and very delicious, sometimes not well seasoned and kinda bland.  So yeah - they are good though.  What's also good is the brisket chili - it is some of the better chili I've had and probably my favorite side on the menu.  Check it out - it is pretty awesome.  The Brunswick stew is also very good here though I've only had it a couple times.  The cornbread with jalapenos and (cream cheese?) is tasty as well.  Also, they seem to put sauce on their wings now but I'm not really a fan - it's easy to asked for them without sauce though.. . All the pulled pork and brisket I've had from here since the first few visits has been on point, but the ribs are still a little inconsistent - sometimes they are fantastic, but sometimes they are a little too dry.  I'd like them to be more consistently moist and tender, but I happen to love them even when they are a little too dry.  I'd suggest giving the ribs a couple tries before dismissing them as consistency is an issue here, but I can understand why people might not care for them much period though.  It's just a preference thing - just like I'm not wild about huge, fatty spare ribs or mustard-based bbq sauce.  . . Although I'm very interested in trying them, I still haven't had any of their much-lauded appetizers like the bbq rolls or the Tominator because getting those would just fill me up way too much to have enough room for all the ensuing deliciousness.  I have never had any of the specials here either but I guess I'd be up for trying them at some point - it just seems impossible to go here and not get the bbq.  The brisket burger sound pretty awesome too except that I hate pimento cheese.  Maybe get the brisket burger with the brisket chili instead of the pimento cheese?!  Sounds awesome.. . Despite some continuing inconsistencies, I always love going here and am totally satisfied everytime.  So Fox Brothers is still numero uno in my book.   . . Word is bond.. . 5
