ReviewID: nnx_Z1GdfUbUekzfa0xsmA
ReviewerID: yOi3du7-JJQHAcYCC7ClbA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bocado
Category: American (New)
Eating out for the ninth night in a row, I was getting tired of going to all our usual places. So I talked Nova into trying someplace new. And for once, it wasn't just new to us, but a totally new spot.. . Rolling into Bocado at 7 something on a Tuesday, it felt like a new spot, too. There might have been two other tables seated in the whole place, which made the restaurant seem kind of cavernous. Looking around though, the place seemed pretty nice. Style-wise, it's very Atlanta restaurant mod, something you'll know if you've been to places like Flip.. . Despite the rather large size of the place, the menu was quite small. Entrée-wise, there were only six dishes. But four of them looked really appetizing to me. Deciding what I wanted was surprisingly harder than it should have been. Having heard so many good things about their burger though, Nova and I ultimately decided to give it a try. . . When the plates came out, it struck us as a gourmet riff on Five Guys. And I don't mean that to be an insult. The Stack, as it's called, consisted of two thin patties topped with cheese and homemade pickles, served between a fluffy, sesame seed bun. Sure, it looked like a Five Guys burger, but Bocado's burger was super juicy and flavorful--though the kitchen did get a little salt happy with mine. The fries were also good. They tasted like they'd been double fried in peanut oil, crispy on the outside and soft on the inside.. . We didn't get dessert, but we did take a look at the dessert menu. All were reasonably priced, but none of the options were terribly interesting to us. The most intriguing was a warm chocolate tart with almonds and a root beer ganache. . . Some other notes about Bocado: the service was friendly, but not the hovering kind you generally get on a slow night. There's also a good-sized patio out back, plus some lounge seating out front, which will be great when the warm weather returns. And I have to say I dug the music that was playing while we were there, much of it would've fit nicely on my iPod.. . Wrapping things up, for our two entrees and my Highland Gaelic Ale, we dropped about $30 before tip. Considering the affable service, nice vibe and good food, I consider it money well spent. And with three more entrees I want to try, I don't think it'll be too long before we return. . . P.S. I have to add that this is yet another place in Atlanta that offers valet, even though there's a sizable lot. Bocado, however, does get points for having the most unintentionally amusing valet service. The company's was name was Valet Life and their slogan was 'The Future Of Parking.'
