ReviewID: nNY_b0AYAcq7lMmQLsuqlA
ReviewerID: OeSZCXeqVW2nE5N8Wl8j1A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
Yes yes, Thai Elvis.  Love to go there in a group to see The King. . . Here are some thought about getting great tasting food for your Thai Elvis viewing/listening pleasure. . . Palms is  is a very good thai place but don't stick to the usual faves that most people order in Thai restaurants for the best meal.  Leave behind all your old tried and true curry dishes and satay and pad thai and try something  new here because that's where the menu gets really good. . . The BBQ pork (I've seen it listed as Sa Dat in other places) here is done to perfection with tart spicy sweet garlicky goodness.  And I mean the pork, the beef is tough.  I got addicted to theirs and have found no match elsewhere. . . The fish cakes are awesome, although they may come pre-packaged, there is something about theirs that are better than others in the area. . . The Green Papaya Salad is amazing, although the seafood additions may be too salty for some, it's a great balance to the lime and chili.  I didn't love the Larb, but my friend did. . . Chinese Broccoli and Fried Pork or Salty Fish is delicious  (and the salty is REALLY salty) . . Pad See Ew here is very very good.   Ditch.The.Pad.Thai. for Pad See Ew or Rad Nar if you're hankering for noodles. . . The Whole Fried Fish is perfection, truly delicious.  I haven't gotten elsewhere into the seafood menu because I loved it so much.  Try it out if you haven't yet! . . Crispy Cashew Nut all the way!   . . My friend swears by the crispy fish in mango sauce but since I've moved north, I haven't been back and didn't get the chance to try it. . . Three Stars from me here is solid, would actually return for these dishes not just the Elvis, but I wouldn't sit in rush hour traffic from Venice Beach or Pasadena in order to have it.  Loudness,  Elvis singing  (when you're not there for it), seating and mediocre Thai Iced tea keep it from being 4 star.
