ReviewID: nOc1vsj1QRInhlLUjlawHA
ReviewerID: VWcrSZIu8_osE63dOJbEYg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
man why are the reviews so low for this place???. . maybe you all should go on a sunday night like we did or maybe you should all try to get gay men to hit on you later at a gay bar like we do.. . anyhow -- i had a great virgin experience here. . . i loved the interior. it definitely caught my eye. it had that italiano feeling going on with the lighting and the RED all around but then you get to the dining area and it takes on a whole different decor.. . i especially like the reflective mirrored wall tiles on each booth allowing for me to spy on couples at other tables without being obvious. twice i wondered, 'hey whose that cute couple and when did they get in here?' only to realize that it was US!!!. . so anyhow -- the RAW GARLIC they serve is just like POW IN FACE. its got a real sharp bite to it. my friend got dared to eat a spoonful of it for a whole whopping dollar and well lets just say you would of thought he got dared to peel a whole onion cuz he was in tears afterwards.. . the garlic rolls that they served -- SOFT, MOIST, and WARM -- what more could you ask for from free bread.. . i had the prime rib slab and man did that thing shock me when it first came out. it looked like they cut off the side of the tree and served it to me on a platter. until i actually SAWED my way through and realize there was meat inside. it was so HUGE and DARK i had to name it TYRONNE and i did my best to defeat Tyronne but ultimately i fell short of my goal and lost to a worthy opponent but i did fight the good fight and damn did i ever enjoy it. im still in a meat coma as we speak.. . finally, we ended the night with some garlic ice cream which was a pleasant treat. i wouldn't eat a heaping bowl of it but as a novelty experience to end the night in accordance to the theme -- definitely a nice way to seal the deal.. . overall -- i liked the environment. the timeliness of the food. the quality . the portions. it was a good experience. . . now the gay bar on the other hand... that was a different meat experience altogether.
