ReviewID: NOGkP0ucjUd5GxZU6TOY7Q
ReviewerID: 4ZfcCa4m5RWvO4EFzfYm1A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Burger #..... wait, I didn't get a burger.. . That's right, I went to the new Father's Office for the first time and did not order myself a burger. But Eli you're that burger guy! Well eff you in the A! I like other things than just burgers! I swear I do! Well to be kind of honest, the driving force behind my lack of burger ordering was the fact that I ate a giant burger for lunch that same day, . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . I met up with the crew just after 6pm on a Wednesday and the place was... NOT PACKED! Sweet! No lines, lots of open tables inside and out. I wish it was always like that. By 7pm though it had transformed into F.O. haters worst nightmare. Long line to get in, people hovering near tables or worse yet, sharing tables with strangers! But we had our own table and the nearest lurker was at least a meter away. . . Since I was all burgered out and I had been meaning to try the rest of the menu, we did just that. I was able to sample the cheese plate, the mushrooms and the smoked eel. Boy did it all suck!. . * Cheese Plate - Never had I had such a terrible cheese plate. Every cheese was just no good. There were at least 6 cheeses and not one did it for me. The bread they served with it wasn't toasted and was just stupid. Yep, stupid bread. . . * Mushrooms - A bowl with pizza topping quality mushrooms. Little flavor and uninspired. . . * Smoked Eel - Tasted like the herring in sour cream us Jews like to eat. Hardly any eel flavor. . . . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . I did steal a few bites of the burger and it was still damn good. I also brought my own supply of ketchup and mayo packets that really jazzed up the plain and sweet potato fries. They really need to start serving other condiments here, just no good reason not to. . . 4.7 stars for the burger, 0 stars for all the other food and 3 stars for the atmosphere at 6pm on a Wednesday = 2.4 stars. Come early and just get the burger and fries. You'll leave full and stress free.
