ReviewID: nozr_ckxrST73n1Y90k1UA
ReviewerID: qW2e3x21BMWlOr72WUoFug
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Here, suck on this piece of cardboard that I spilled my soup on. That's about how it tasted at what is supposed to be a replica of the famous dumpling restaurant from Taiwan.. . I've dined at the Taipei, Shanghai, and Singapore locations, and, yes, their dumplings are freaktastically good. I'm talking your first great kiss good, where the girl (or guy) leaves a little drool on your lips for you to savor.. . My best friend and I were soooo in the mood to sample these morsels of goodness from our days working in Asia. We ordered the pork, crab + pork, and vegetable dumplings.. . First, the vegetable dumplings tasted like chopped up bits of newspaper that was used to carry chopped garlic from the store to your kitchen. . . Second, the crab + pork dumplings, which are normally my personal favorite, tasted like week-old essence of dried shrimp boiled in soup, and was just off.. . Third, and probably the only positive comment here, is the original pork dumplings. It wasn't great, but was enough to do the job. We were among the first 20 people to dine there when the doors opened at 5pm today, so I know it wasn't a freshness issue. . . Everything just seemed to taste...... sterile. There was no greasy after-taste, which honestly make the experience that much more "juicy" in Asia, and while it may have been healthier, just felt like the dumpling skins were made of fresh linen instead of dough. . . So I pulled the manager on duty, and inquired about it. I was happy to see that she was completely honest, and said that in truth, due to differences in ingredients here, and the lack of certain things in this country that can't be used, that the dumplings here are only about 80% of what they are in Asia. Since I expect her to talk up the restaurant, I think the more accurate difference is 65% of what it really COULD be like.. . I was very disappointed, but only because it was a complete mismatch of relative comparison. I think that for those that have no base of comparison, you'll most likely find this an excellent dumpling house.. . Service is excellent though, and the place is immaculate. For those that have been to the ones in greater China, it isn't as dive-like as the one in Taiwan, but more modern like the one in Shanghai.
