ReviewID: np8BJFLY77RbhnuUw31jKw
ReviewerID: j14WgRoU_-2ZE1aw1dXrJg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi House Hayakawa
Category: Japanese
Simply put, this place is DA BOMB.  I'd heard a lot about this place and been wanting to try it out as I love Japanese food (not just sushi).  This is one of a handful of restaurants in metro Atlanta that is authentic Japanese - the chefs, servers, food, and even patrons.  As soon as I walked in, I felt like I was back in Japan.  The sushi bar was busy, there were Japanese businessmen at several of the tables, all I could hear was Japanese being spoken throughout.. . The restaurant is located in a strip mall just north of 285 on Buford Highway.  If you're traveling north on Buford, the restaurant will be on your right.  It's in the corner right next to Karaoke Melody.  The inside is nicely decorated and very Japanese traditional from the tables/chairs, wooden walls, lighting, etc.  Although, I did notice a few items from IKEA (haha) such as the coat hooks in the bathroom, the floor lamps and some of the dishes.. . The menu is extensive and this is probably the widest selection of authentic Japanese food I've seen in Atlanta.  Also interesting is the menu tells you where certain ingredients are from, whether it was flown in from California or Japan or wherever.  I like that.  This place has a reputation of being pricey, but it's really not.  Check out my Local Photos of this place to see the "Today's Specials" menu when I went.  The majority of the dishes were anywhere from $4 to $8.  Very reasonable especially for such high quality Japanese food.. . The best part about this restaurant is the quality.  The ingredients are so fresh and each dish is skillfully prepared by Art Hayakawa (master sushi chef) and the other chefs.  We ordered several dishes, which included Jellyfish with Shiso plum (very interesting flavor), Baby freshwater Sijimi clam Miso soup, the Haya-san box (special boxed-type of sushi - not rolled - with tuna, salmon, crispy tempura flakes, avocado, tobiko, masago and more), Enoki mushroom wrapped in bacon on a skewer, Green tea flavored cold buckwheat noodles, Raw wasabi marinated octopus, Ikura don (tobiko mixed with minced sea weed and rice), and a homemade Calpico sherbet dessert.. . Every single bite was delectable.  I loved the cold buckwheat noodles and haven't had anything like them in the States.  I always ate them on the airplane when I flew and connected in Japan.  These were great and were served with a small plate of wasabi, radish, finely chopped spring onion, and soy sauce that you could dip the noodles into.  The jellyfish and octopus were flown in from Japan.  The octopus was marinated and served with RAW chopped wasabi, not the concentrated processed paste that you normally see.  Awesome.  The Ikura don could be eaten alone without having to add any wasabi or soy sauce.  Very nice dish.  Be sure to check out my Local Photos for pics of all the dishes.. . Finally, the Calpico sherbet dessert is one of a kind.  You can only get it here where it's homemade and a Hayakawa specialty.  It's made out of the Japanese drink Calpico (or Calpis) and it's pretty much the shaved ice version of it with a sweet bean paste (or something) on top.. . Our server Takashi was awesome as was the rest of the staff and Art Hayakawa led everyone in the restaurant to sing Happy Birthday to me (I came on my birthday).  He likes taking pictures with his customers and posting them on the bulletin board in the back so he did the same with us.  We came on a Thursday night around 9pm without a reservation and while the restaurant was busy, we were seated and served immediately.. . Finally, the restaurant does a raffle on the first of each month for a $100 gift certificate.  If they call the number you leave and you don't answer, they "leave you a very sad voicemail."  Photos of all the winners are also posted in the back on the bulletin board.  Be sure to check out their web site (. http://www.atlantasush.... ) for a more detailed menu and photos of all their offerings.. . In summary, everything is top notch, from the service to the food.  This place rocks and is my new favorite Japanese restaurant in Atlanta
