ReviewID: NPcXnSm7CZkOyYAdnMf94Q
ReviewerID: 2opOrR6olV2YM3MiGgC2JA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
Wow!  My first review:  I had a good experience over all.  The decor was trendy and enjoyable.  Every item on the menu is ordered al a cart with great portion sizes (Not too big, not too small).  The wait staff was attentive to their tables, but a smile here and there would do them some good.  I think it's due to their pace of the restaurant, but  it would definitely improve the experience.  This is not to say they're not friendly.. . I had two cocktails during my experience:  The Cream Soda and Apple Cinnamon Martini.  The Cream Soda didn't taste like a cream soda, but it was good (carried a consistency of a White Russian).  Little before the meal ended I ordered the Apple Cinnamon Martini.  It was a delicious drink that was smooth going down.  The drink was light on the palate and its aroma strongly reminded me of warm apple cider.  I would recommend this drink before the meal, as it is light and would be buried by the heavy food items on the menu. . . I ordered the Onion Rings as an appetizer which were tasty and perfectly fried.  My burger was the rBQ which was very delicious.  The meat was tender, and its natural flavors were not buried by seasoning or that common burger grease.  The bun was buttery and lightly toasted.  Unlike most burger buns that look like they were sat on at some point, these buns were nice and spongy.  The combination of meat and bun gives an enjoyable experience to each bite!  Along with the burger I ordered the tempura fried okra.  It was a perfect combination!. . The other person in my party ordered a Krispy Kreme milk shake.  Surprisingly not sweet, this milk shake tasted very much like a Krispy Kreme!  Very Tasty!!!. . Pricing is very reasonable.  What people have to keep in mind, this restaurant is a boutique, not your local burger joint.  Culinary genius with a unique twist in execution, this restaurant is a perfect place for going out with friends to share laughs, drinks and food or a location to take part in on a date night.
