ReviewID: nq0BWE8RU-NrQZLxinshXA
ReviewerID: cGa4vDjLuXMZSUaWvnmlqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
GF and I went back for a return engagement at Umami Burger yesterday along with fellow Yelper Ciara G.  After touting the wonders of this place Ciara had to see what all the hubbub was about.  GF and I were all too happy to find another excuse to go back.  . . We showed up and the line was out the door, however, since there were three of us we got seated right away at a nook near the front entrance.  Score!. . We opted to get five burgers and cut them into quarters so we could all sample.  Yelping at its finest!. . I rank them in order as follows:. . 1) Port and Stilton Burger ($9) - Still the culinary King of House Umami.  Port and Stilton Cheese plus carmelized onions.  A juicy explosion o' flavor.  This one makes me think of English pubs.  For some reason this one wasn't as good this time around as it was the first time.  . . 2) The Umami Burger ($10) - A very close 2nd to the Port and Stilton.  Mushrooms plus a Parmesan crisp and a tomatoey sauce.  All I can say is...Umami?  Ooo, Mommy!  . . 3) The SoCal Burger ($9) - This was again GF's fave.  A gooey mess of oven roasted tomatoes and cheese.  . . 4) The Hatch Burger ($9) - Suggested by our apparently very stoned waiter in lieu of the Truffle Burger, which he said they were out of.  We figured that stoners know the best munchy foods so we gave it a go.    This one came with chopped cooked Jalapeno peppers and cheese.. . 5) Triple Pork Burger ($11) - Chorizo, pork and green onion diced in.  Not as good as it sounds.  Pork is more well done and drier, and doesn't go all that well with the bun and the other fixings as the beef burgers do.. . The girls also got two sides, the fries and the beer battered onion rings, which were decent but not great.  I'm not a big fried food guy so maybe it's just me, dunno.    . . This time around some of the magic wore off for me.  I'll explain.. . The service this time around was mediocre.  While they brought us our food quickly, we had to flag people down twice for refills on our water glasses before we got any and our waiter never brought the sauces we asked for.  Also, no Truffle burger this time around--what, was there a truffle shortage or something?  We went specifically for this burger so that was a major disappointment.  . . Parking at this location is always a pain unless you want to pay for the Valet service.  GF and I had to park two blocks away in a two hour limit residential parking area on a sidestreet and hoof it back and forth.  . . Portion sizes are also on the small side.  The Umami Burger is in between a slider and a typical Whopper-sized burger.  For an average of $10 per burger I expect more.  . . Hopefully the so-so service and the truffle shortage was an anomaly.  I also think Umami Burger while good is on the expensive side ($60+ for five smallish burgers plus two sides is quite pricey) so I'm inclined to hold them to a higher standard, thus the loss of a star.
