ReviewID: nqqmIl2iSY4xMffGvyukcQ
ReviewerID: SiiNrrQBvp0BLC4F2HxrMg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
After a difficult week at work, the Friday dinner was a welcomed distraction from finally executing the current corporate mandate of cost savings, job displacements and realignment.  I was finally able to feast on more than stress but more importantly to celebrate my good friend's birthday.  . . When we arrived at the restaurant; I thought it was at an awkward location because the restaurant is nested among three buildings.  However, I quickly realized the genius of the location since its power broker central and this probably is a power lunch/dinner place - it's a neighbor of the CAA building.  . . Before we were seated, we enjoyed a cocktail at the outdoor patio.  The central courtyard is surprisingly nice and peaceful.  Also, the buildings provide a beautiful view and the office lights provide a soft illumination to the surrounding areas.  No matter how screwed up the rat race can sometimes get; I must admit I wouldn't mind running around to get my cheese in these buildings since its a nicer maze than my own boring building.  . . We ordered the tasting menu, which correlates to approximately 14 dishes and just over 2.5 hours of fantastic dining.  This is a rarity for us since we usually save our really good meals (that are not on the corporate card) on dates, not on other guys.  For a bunch of guys, we were surprisingly satisfied after the meal which is a worry when ordering the tasting menu at a fine restaurant.  Every dish was complex with many nuances but always came down to three solid basics in every bite - the sweet, the savory, and the salt.. . The meal took longer than expected and kept us from our final destination at Chloe's.  However, it was well worth it because we were able to talk/vent.  I've known one of them since 2nd grade and the other since freshman year in University so it's nice to hear about each other's lives &amp; stresses (misery loves company).  I guess meeting up at a bar isn't really conducive to catching up when drinks, chasing, and sloppiness are involved.  . . Just like the dishes at Craft, no matter the complexity, stresses, and people in your life; it comes down to the basics that make it great.  I wonder which one of my friends and I are the sweet, the savory, or the salt?
