ReviewID: NqyDWYsBxgxfOb7DUhwodw
ReviewerID: 9GOk4F9pcO6Q8E2OTD5zrw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
I HEART (less than 3) MILK.  Since moving to SF, I've missed Milk immensely.  So much that sometimes I cry knowing that I can't have blue velvet cake whenever I want.  Okay, so that was a bit of an exaggeration but that should illustrate to you my love for Milk.. . I've been to Milk many times while living in L.A. and they have always given me great service AND heavenly desserts.  Granted, I've never tried their real food but who needs real food when you have a variety of desserts to choose from?. . I always love to get the Blue Velvet Cake from Milk and I love telling everyone about that cake.  The response I usually get is "What?!" to which I reply with "It's like a really soft and moist Red Velvet Cake except it's blue with blueberries and amazing frosting."  And for the people who are not from L.A., I usually get them a slice to try and warn them about the surprise they may get the next morning.  **SPOILER:  Please skip this if you don't want to know what the surprise is................... You poop blue/green poo.  Don't worry, you're not dying.**. . My co-workers knew that I love this cake so much that for my going away party, they special ordered a whole entire Blue Velvet Cake which everyone could not get enough of.  That's how good it is.. . They also have really good ice cream sandwiches although they've been getting smaller in size since I first had one last year.  My favorite from the normal sandwiches is the Coffee Toffee.  BUT when Valentines Day is approaching, look out for their special menu which includes a Pomegranate Lychee Ice Cream Sandwich made for special order.  And we now go into one of my favorite stories:  This past Valentines Day, I decided to order 4 of these Pomegranate Lychee Ice Cream Sandwiches (Lychee Ice Cream wedged between two Pomegrante Macaron cookies).  I also ordered one Passion Fruit Macaron.  They told me my order was going to be ready in 48 hours.  Great!  Then they called me the next day sending me some bad news - they ran out of the pomegranate concoction needed for the macarons!  Oh NOOO!!!  At first I was stumped but I had another idea so I requested to have the whole entire sandwich be lychee (Lychee Ice Cream wedged between two Lychee Macaron cookies).  I thought the chef would not accommodate that (you know how some chefs could be so prideful in their menu that they're not willing to change it) but he did!  And for the "trouble", they gave me some free cookies when I picked up the order without any delay.  I was soo happy especially when I was eating everything.. . Today, I decided to visit Milk again and ordered (To Go because there are hardly any available tables there) of course, the Blue Velvet Cake, a Molasses cookie, an Ooey Gooey Double Chocolate Cookie, an Agua Fresca, and a 2-scoop Mango Chile Sorbet.  The Molasses cookie was good but didn't hold my attention for very long.  The Ooey Gooey Cookie was really good - it was really soft and very chocolatey.  The Agua Fresca is a melon drink that's not very strong in flavor but is really refreshing.  (They sometimes have the Hibiscus Tea which is better!)  . . Finally, the Mango Chile Sorbet...  who'd have thought to make sorbet with mango chile?!  Does this remind anyone of Lucas Chile powder and chile mango lollipops or am I too ghetto?  I loved, loved LOVED this sorbet!  If I wasn't driving back to SF, I would've bought a pint of it.   Hm... maybe I should anyways so I can eat it on the way... The mix of the semi-sweet, semi-sour mango with a little bit of spiciness was just perfect.  I believe I have a new favorite ice cream flavor (my original was Dreyer's discontinued Almond Praline)!. . Sigh...  Milk, you complete me.  :)
