ReviewID: NRCCPd5VlAUHJaKoUje8tg
ReviewerID: y6cy0wfDyqb7CNUVlMUwWw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Let us just start by recognizing that Wurstküche has been one of the longest standing items on the Grub List. It was there with us from the beginning. Let's be honest... it was one of the earlier inspirations for the, "Dude you need to check out..." mentality that has spawned The Good Grub. And with Wurstkuche, it's kind of like finding out that Santa does exist. The über modern (German pun intended), but somehow classic sausage / beer garden/ "our version of Happy Gilmore's happy place" Grub spot dishes out thick-cut Belgian fries, steins of German brew, and of course, mouth-watering sausage sandwiches. Be prepared my Good Grub compatriots, this is not your wimpy, "maybe-they-have-a-spicy-one" sausage place. Yeah, they have your standard Brat, Bock, and Italian Hot varieties... but Mr. Wurstküche has a little something sneaky up his sleeve... we're talking alligator &amp; pork, duck &amp; bacon, and our personal selection, rattlesnake &amp; rabbit. It's like some sort of beautiful circle of life... Snake eats rabbit... Man eats snake &amp; rabbit on crunchy roll with grilled onions and spicy peppers... Alligator eats pig... Duck eats pig?... Now we're just confused... but hungry. Because honestly people, you're going to bite into these deliciously grilled up sausage concoctions, throw on one or two of their three different mustard options, and start to consider switching to a rattlesnake-only diet. We at the Good Grub feel there are four solid rules when it comes to this place... Rule #1)... Get a stein. Rule #2)... Seriously... man up. Get a stein. Rule #3)... Throw down some extra change for the white truffle oil glaze on the fries (now you're starting to get a feel for how amazing this place is). Rule # 4)... if this your first time at Wurstküche... you have to fight... okay, that might not be true, but dude, get the white truffle oil. And there's probably more like sixty rules... Rule #37) no crying when you bite into the juicy-deliciousness that is a Wurstküche sausage. But this place has more than just Good Grub that makes it unique... it kind of on stands by itself in a semi run-down, 100% badass part of downtown, right next to the ... and I kid you not... we couldn't make this up if we wanted to... Crazy Gideon's flea market / bizarre / are-we-in-an-episode-of-the-twilight-zone / electronic emporium. Seriously, who ever knew this place still existed? Or ever existed for that mater? We thought those awesome Crazy Gideon TV commercials that kept us company after school in the third grade were washed away... or banned... or something... along with ads for the Chia Pet and Larry H. Parker. But have no fear, the location just makes Wurstküche that much more awesome and original. When you enter the place, you first step into a tiny room with the sausages piled up high in a display case and a dozen or so taps behind the register. You start to size up the other guests... because, if it's crowded enough, you're going to be willing to start a riot to get your hands on that Wurstküche goodness. But rest assured, as you leave the crowded front room and walk down the long dark hallway with your order number in hand, you'll turn the corner and set your eyes on the "where-the-hell-have-I-just-gone-and-will-I-ever-h ave-to-leave?" new age beer hall. With that first look, you'll kind of feel like you've walked into your own surprise birthday party... but way better... because friends, family, and co-workers are always trumped by beers, fries, and sausages. So head on down for some afternoon Grub... or hit it up at night when it turns into a full on Grub bar... or go twice in one day... there's no shame in that. Because when the Grub is Good, society's norms need not apply... and trust us... Wurstküche might as well be German for seriously Good Grub.
