ReviewID: NrJ07_egvx2L9Jvw_I55hA
ReviewerID: Oi26QGnPAEWdTUtilyOkwg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
This was my second visit to Mastro's and while not infinitely superior to the first time around, it was a significantly more pleasurable experience. My first visit found my date and I parked in the what is perhaps the worst table in the entire restaurant. A two-person booth, downstairs, immediately adjacent to the VERY busy kitchen. . . This time we requested a table upstairs and were granted our request. The downstairs might actually be the better place for more intimate, romantic dinner as it was MUCH quieter than the rather raucus scene upstairs. Contending with the live music and jumping bar scene on top of the usual hard-surfaced restaurant cacaphony was interesting but it didn't bother any of our party.. . Speaking of the bar scene... We arrived at 10pm on a Friday night and the place was PACKED. Cougar Central to be sure but as an avid people watcher I was duly impressed with the endless parade of just-a-bit-past-their-prime arm candies and high-end used car salesmen.. . On to the food. Remember the gargantuan portions that Mastro's provides, we skipped salads and appetizers and went right to the entrees and sides. As much as I love a ribeye, 22 oz. is just too much for me at one sitting so my cousin and I shared the bone-in rib eye which was cooked to perfection. Not as tender in texture as I would have liked (especially at their prices) but still delicious. My date ordered the petite filet and THAT was the cut of the night. Rarely have I  tasted a filet as perfectly cooked and mouth-wateringly flavorful and tender as that one.. . For sides we went with the Steamed Asparagus,  Sauteed Mushrooms, Creamed Corn, Gorgonzola Mac &amp; Cheese and Potatoes Au Gratin. All were excellent (especially the creamed corn which is easy to foul up) and you have the added pleasure of each side being served up expertly by the waitstaff, where it continues to cook on the scorchingly hot, straight from the broiler, grease spattered plate.. . I have uploaded some pictures for your enjoyment and would heartily recommend Mastro's to anyone with the means to cover the bill. The food is fantastic, the room is gorgeous and the service is on point. . . Well played.
