ReviewID: nsWXSwgqFIZIWyUZeuKWqQ
ReviewerID: _T0V8A1LGtLOpebrLqUOOQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Every time I go to Fogo De Chao I want to cry tears of joy. This place is my happy place.. . The phrase all-you-can-eat have been synonymous with Las Vegas, long lines, and fat people holding two plates full of food wearing a tie-dye t-shirts and open-toe sandals. Not anymore muchachos. Fogo De Chao (fo-go-gee-shoun) has arrived and all I can say is bless their precious little Brazilian hearts.. . Fogo De Chao is a Brazilian steakhouse or Churrascaria as it is known in the motherland, and it is the sexiest all-you-can-eat restaurant in the world. The typical all-you-can-eat restaurant has rows of counters, heat trays, and food which has been sitting under heat lamps for hours. However, at Fogo De Chao you and your guest have no lines or heat trays to eat out of.. . At Fogo De Chao you and your guest sit at your table and are handed a magical disk. This magical disk has two sides, a red side and a green side. When the red side is shown everything is seemingly ordinary. You can go and serve yourself some exotic cold cuts, tasty cheeses, or crispy vegetables. You can also sit at your table and enjoy some wine from the restaurants amazing wine list. But then you turn the card over to its green side and the clouds part and God himself comes to sit next to you. Because once the card flips, the staff, known as Gaucho chefs, surround you and serve you 15, yes I said 15, different cuts of quality meat. The meat which has been cooking from a visible fire grill is brought directly to your plate and served from the skewer. And this isn't just any kind of meat. We are talking about filet mignon, leg of lamb, rib-eye, top sirloin, beef ribs, chicken breast wrapped in bacon, and garlic steak just to name a few. The quality of the meat and its tenderness is breathtaking. If your mouth isn't watering by now you should punch yourself in the face. The staff treats you as if you were the Prince of Dubai. They are attentive to your every need.. . In addition to the meat, the staff provides endless amounts of warm cheese bread (or as I like to call it, "Holy God that is a piece of amazingness in my mouth"), mashed potatoes, fried bananas, and fried polenta to the table.. . With over 14 locations throughout the United States, you can rest assured that your "all you can eat" cravings will be thoroughly satisfied.. . So take it from me, if you're looking for the closest thing to eating in heaven, Fogo De Chao is it.. . Saboroso!!!!
