ReviewID: NTPdd3-k83yuKmG1kCHJJA
ReviewerID: ZYZNcugF3xUEGyLOVGiZ0Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zed451
Category: Steakhouses
So I have had the opportunity to visit the newest incarnation of this space both during it's opening pre party as well as for a "regular" visit.  Zed 451 is a Churrascaria (Brazilian steakhouse) which for me- feels a bit like a "vertical buffet" and not my favorite way to have a meal- but if you like that sort of thing- then Zed is for you.. . This location is beautiful.  If only the space could talk as it could tell the tale of what it has been in past lives.  I know it has been apartments where a fire took off the top floor (look for the original window located in the bar), other restaurants and now Zed 451.  This reincarnation surely has to be its best.  . . The bar area has several fireplaces, areas to mingle with friends or to escape with that "special someone".  You can climb the stars to the roof top bar- feels like it could be my new favorite place (note:  as of this writing- they are still waiting for their liquor license to be able to serve up there)  There are pine seating areas and they've even planted an area with grass to relax and take in the views of the city.  The large skylight looks down on the main bar below.. . I like their specialty drinks.  My two favorites are the cucumber sage martini, or the margarita with the chipotle salt on the rim.  If you order a drink on the rocks- they actually will chisel the ice from these giant blocks into your glass.  Unnecessary but theatrical all the same!. . This is a one price- all you can eat- buffet, done in an interesting way.  The "harvest table" is where all the salad, soups, breads and cheeses are that change seasonally.  There is also a wide array of desserts that you can choose from if you have room after consuming more meat than you would ever imagine!. . With meat as their specialty- you can bet that the Parmesan crusted pork, the lamb chops, and all the various forms of steak (sirloin, tenderloin, with garlic, etc) are delicious and all were really rare which was appreciated by this carnivore although the person I was with really wanted everything more done.  The only thing that should have been more done was the salmon on the night we were there.  It was uncooked in the center.. . The service is quite good- in all aspects from the valet who quickly grabs your car (there have to be at least 8 of them standing out front) to the women who open the doors and welcome you back to the servers- all were accommodating and appeared to want my business.  I also like that a few of the people that I met at the opening party- actually remembered me as I sat at the bar and had a couple of those great margaritas.. . This place gets my vote for the bar alone.  Those cushy leather chairs at the bar will be seeing me frequently and once that roof top area opens- look out!  As for the restaurant- it unfortunately is not going to be a place where I come back to on a regular basis.  It's just not my favorite kind of dining experience.  But don't let that stop you from trying it.
