ReviewID: nu5b3UemoKsUYC8O4LBy_A
ReviewerID: oGydDIKM81Qqx1dm9PQfvg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Serpas
Category: American (New)
We were on our way going to a local neighborhood joint for dinner when I saw that Serpas finally opened.  I mean I should know this, since my office is located at Studioplex!  I turned the car around and decided that since it didn't look too busy we should try it out.  Plus, I am that kind of yelper that likes to try the new places out before anyone else gets there!  :). . They did an amazing job on the space!  Keeping the original look of the bricks and utilizing large stretched out canvas portraits to cover the walls were a nice touch.  The shiny stained concrete floors and the industrial look that was kept with the lights and even the metal chairs had everything flowing quite nicely.  Only thing that may be an issue, once this place gets busy is the noise...with all the open space and lack of items to absorb sound, its going to get loud.. . The staff were really nice and friendly and I love a good place that everyone from host, waiter, bartender, asst. manager, manager, etc... comes by to talk to you.  . . GREAT TIP -  All night, every night...all bottles of wine is only $25.00!. . On the food...I looked at the menu and wondered why everything seemed so familiar.  Then I realized that Scott Serpas also opened up Two Urban Licks and finally saw many similarities.  We started with a basket of fries and the crab toast.  The fries were awesome...hand cut and seasoned just right.  The crab toast was good as well and thank goodness they only had 4 on the plate since I could have eaten 20!  David ordered the double patty burger and I got the BBQ salmon.  The salmon was really good and the root vegetables served with it were amazing.  David said his burger was good, but not the best he had in town.  I also ordered a side of grits...c'mon i'm a Southern boy...it was sooooo good, I think I could have just ordered that as my meal.  .   . Overall a fantastic experience and I highly recommend.  If you like Two Urban Licks, you will LOVE Serpas!
