ReviewID: nuLp3YmfCEEvEB1GsWezwQ
ReviewerID: m2S6mZ1drfGJfOzKP0Cl6A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
So a week after my friends and I tried Shisen Ramen in Torrance, we decided to continue on our quest, which lead us to no 4 on Rameniacs list of Top 10 Ramen shop in LA - a small restaurant in the San Gabriel Valley called Hakata Ramen Shin-Sei-Gumi.. . . http://www.rameniac.co.... . . Its in a small, neon lit shopping plaza, on Valley Blvd. past San Gabriel Blvd. Its next to a Vietnamese video shop and a few doors down from a northern Chinese restaurant and a pho restaurant.  Its pretty small, with a counter a few tables, its would be ideal for small groups. We got there at 8pm and after Noel put our name on the sign in sheet, found ourselves waiting outside with about 4 other gropus of people on a cool night watching the LCD tv showing a promotional video of  the various Shin-Sei-Gumi branches, like the yakitori one in nearby Monterey Park and worker talking about what makes it a unique dining experience with special promotional offers along with community events they participate in (subtitled in English).. . After a 20 minute wait, we were glad to be let in, only to be told to be told we had to wait an extra few minutes, so they could give us a table,  as they originally were going to have us sit at the counter. So we finally get in and all of a sudden, it felt like all the workers in the restaurant dropped whatever they were doing and belted out a deafening "Irrashaimase" to us (and every other person who entered that night) and then get a table right by the LCD tv and window, giving people a chance to stare in at us. A few minutes later, we get our waiter and he took our order. . . Pablo, Aimee and I ordered the Hakata Ramen, while Noel ordered the yaki ramen, which is pan fried soft ramen noodles on a plate with vegetables, pork, pickled ginger and a dollop of mayo. I also ordered a large plate of fried rice to share with the group and came with a bowl of miso soup. Tasted pretty good, but not something I would personally order.. . For my ramen, I chose to add on spicy miso ($1.25) and chashu (pork slice) ($2.00), while Aimee and Pablo added shredded seaweed ($0.75). Along with Aimee and Pablo, I also opted for the normal noodle texture, level of saltiness and oil when Takehiro took my order. I was kind of surprised when the miso came out as a dark ball on a small serving dish alongside the seaweed that Aimee requested for her bowl a few minutes later, as I assumed that the miso would have been already mixed in before arriving on my table. But I should have kept in mind that its all about customizing the taste here, as each ramen ordered is followed up by a question regarding levels of noodle softness, saltiness and amount of oil to suit the ramen to your taste before it hits the kitchen.. . Now for my gripe about this place: I'm a big fan of fried rice at a ramen shop, but at this place, I was pretty disappointed. At most of the ramen shops I've been that served fried rice, even if there was a slight difference in taste, they all had the same basic kind of good flavor (and made better with pickled ginger and shichimi togarashi). The first thing I noticed is that it was a brownish color that looked different from the more yellowish looking fried rice. When I tried it, it was hard for me to eat, not only because I was getting full quickly, but the weird dry fried fish taste really bothered me. It wasn't oily and it had an almost dry burnt taste, with small chunks of dried out meat (I assume pork). Even with the pickled ginger and seasoning it just left a bad taste. I don't know, maybe the guy cooking the rice was off that night, but I hope if I try the fried rice at the other branch, it won't taste as weird as that one.. . I would say the ramen is actually better than Shisen Ramen, which is currently no. 3 on Rameniac's list. They all seemed to have green onion, pickled ginger, chashu and then noodles in a milky looking broth., but the customizing makes it unique for each person. The Chashu seemed to take in the flavor of the broth. The spicy miso took some time to blend in, but it did eventually reach that point of being spicy, (with the help of the shichimi togarashi of course) unlike the supposedly spicy ramen at Shisen Ramen. The noodles were thin and straight, like spaghetti, and very similar to Asa Ramen's noodles. Its only $0.95 to get an extra set of noodles and Pablo took advantage of it,ordering 3 extra sets of noodles to finish his bowl.. . I haven't tried the other branch in Gardena, but from what I've read, it seems to be the better location. But, overall, this is a good place to have some ramen in the SGV. Its definitely not Santouka, but its still worth having (if you don't mind the wait, weird tasting fried rice and loud yells from the staff as you enter and leave). Personally I think it should have been no. 3 on the list but it still deserves a spot on Rameniac's list and worth a visit whenever you're in the SGV and want some ramen
