ReviewID: NwU8QazaY3eSm3Mjh-ZS_g
ReviewerID: 84Ee_5DeoubAMxpAcAmD7Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Reasons Why I like Tender Greens:. . - A healthy place that tastes anything but.. - It's the only place where I would actually order the veggie plate AND enjoy it.. - Watermelon aqua fresca!! With refills!!. - Mashed potatoes that taste guilt-ridden.. - they have meat (chicken and skirt steak), and it's yummy.. - Two hours of free parking in the structure around the corner, on Watseka. - You can eat a Honey's Kettle fried chicken drumstick for dessert!. . Yeah, who knew I'd like an organic-type eatery? I always thought that these type of places were for granola-nibbling, hippy types who scramble their chakras (chanclas?) Rubik's cube-style and choose to eat here after yoga or pilates so they could feel superior to the burger-gobbling masses. Boy, was I wrong! . . Yes, there may be a few yoga students in the line of people that frequently goes out the front door, and for good reason: this is good stuff Maynard! Mikey will eat here and throw the boxes of Life cereal into the trash. . . This isn't exactly a sit down place. One waits in line, peruses the menu options on the board mounted just inside the front door, and hopefully, one knows what they want by the time it's their turn to order at a counter where the hostess would normally be stationed.. . Then, the line continues, paralleling the workers who are putting your order together assembly-line style. It reminded me of the how your follow your car when it's in the car wash, the nozzles, soap, brushes and blowers being replaced by a salad station, plates of roasted veggies, and a carving station torturing your senses as your wait. Finally, the line ends with giving your drink order to the cashier, forking over your cash, and finding a table.. . Good luck! Outdoor seating is wherever you can find it. This place is popular. . . Another thing I like (or you may hate) about this place are the portions. You're not getting the porterhouse for two when you order the skirt steak; it's four or five thick slices and that's it. If you get a plate, it comes with your entree item, a salad of your choice, and a dollop of mashed potatoes. if you get it as a sandwich, you just get the salad. . . It's actually just enough food for normal human beings, but others may disagree. In all honesty, I could probably eat two of these plates, since I end up picking off my friends' orders. It IS healthy, right? Fresh, organic ingredients or whatever catch phrase they're using these days.. . Another thing is that they don't have 'normal' soda like Coke and Pepsi products, but the kind of bottled stuff you'd see at Galco's. Beer and wine is served, though.. . Tender Greens is the type of place where I can eat relatively guilt-free and truly enjoy it.  And  the nice thing is, you don't need to be be on the fast track to satori to dine here.
