ReviewID: Nwv5U17_Th_yTJY7R7ykZg
ReviewerID: j6_Pn0Qk7SjrmBoKuXqOyQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I never thought I'd be the reviewing type, as I'm quite happy to be a lurker on the great wide internet. The first time I ended up at Pizzeria Mozza was an accident. A cheap peruvian place my friend and I tried to go to was closed. Somehow, we were seated at the bar within 10-15 minutes of our arrival at Mozza, and the experience was pleasant enough. The pizzas were good (I think we had the leek and goat cheese and bacon one, which was tasty and the rapini with anchovies which was lackluster), the appetizers were good, and the butterscotch budino (which I had been yearning to try after Orangette's mention of it) was stellar. So, when an east coast friend came to town I thought it would be a good outing. We reserved a table for 9:30, arrived at 9:25, and proceeded to wait. And wait. And wait. My lovely east coast friend, who is a self-proclaimed phlegmatic [see the four humors if baffled], gave our hostess a fabulously steely glare. Over and over again. Fifty minutes after waiting, we were seated, promised by the waitress a free appetizer. As nice as that was for her to recognize the irritation, I have decided that my time is worth more than $9/50 minutes, which I believe is what the brussel sprouts cost. . . Our meal was good, the pizza dough is airy and tasty (and I am fairly carbohydrate indifferent). We had a very lovely white bean bruschetta, the salad of celery, green apples and olives (over dressed, in my opinion), the potato and gorgonzola pizza, and of course...I insisted, the budino. . . Other grumpy curmudgeonly evaluations: why is it so loud? The restaurant, even when packed, is not huge. Clearly the high ceilings were either strategically chosen to make you feel like you were in a bustling dining establishment, or else they are completely thoughtless. The music was bizarre -- by the end of the evening it was some 60s r-n-b, but earlier it was some lousy contemporary pop crap. . . If this were a local establishment that I could wander into every now and then, I'd probably go back. But, I think there are better and more enjoyable dining venues in this great wide city of LA. Go if you simply must experience the hype first hand. Check out the inevitable celebrity or two (we stood behind one, who got seated before us, but admittedly  he and his companion sat the bar...). But steel yourself for a disappointment.. . I recommend going only for dessert and after 9:30pm...if you're willing to sit at the bar.
