ReviewID: NWz519FH0EnP0kscXUDCow
ReviewerID: V1-FqZROBj4jvK_-0-Lu6g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
I went here with 8 friends for a Friday night birthday dinner.  Overall it was a good experience, just not a great one. . . The positives. Great service. Our server handled our large group quite well, although he was a bit overzealous as he pushed appetizers :)  Regardless, he was a nice guy, attentive, and there was good bus'ing from the bus staff.. . Fun atmosphere. Bright colors and spacious. Although not sure I understand why there is a zombie mural.. . Delicious sweet potato fries. Although def salty like Demetrio P mentioned.. . VERY accomodating for the reservation. Another restaurant killed our reservation bcs we had 9 vs 8, so we had to change locale the day or so before Friday.  My friend making the res had negative experiences deaing w/Carnivale and Publican, but Red Light was really nice. She did have to sign a 2 pg confirmation complete w/credit card to make the res that big. She would have been charged $50/head for no shows. OUCH (so maybe this part is a bit extreme).. . On to the negatives.. -1: Weak Mango Martini: It was like drinking a mango slushi... Tasty, but I highly doubt there was actually any citrus vodka inside. It was however very pretty :). . -1: Poor to mediocre Pad Thai.  The $7 order of Pad Thai from Thai Classic delivery is 3 times better than the $20 Pad Thai at Red Light.  The flavor was just off - maybe too much lime and cilantro?  I've had a lot of thai delivery in the US and a fair amount of it in Thailand and this is hands down the worst pad thai I've ever had. I prefer the shelf stable $3.75 Annie Chung Pad Thai from the grocery to this.  I did however really enjoy the sliced cucumbers around the plate :) They were yummy for snacking.. . Other than the dessert, I didn't hear anyone rave about their food so I'm assuming it means the others had OK dinners, thus my logic for A-OK.. . PS. Mac Daddy - Sorry to disappoint you w/this review- that there isn't anything outrageous to write about :)
