ReviewID: nY4PznvxOo99cuEIUceMNw
ReviewerID: rWAO6Gla5-YvTfGcsq3O_g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Great pizza, long lines and, of course, high prices - after all, we're on Melrose in hipsterville! Not that there's anything wrong with that. It's the pizza we're after. Can 1000+ reviews be wrong? Nope.. . I decided to take my boyfriend here for our 1.5yr anniversary, hearing loads of good things - I mean, after all, Mario Bitali created the place (and the food's Italian), so it had to be good. It was good. Not amazing or anything, but very tasty.. . I made a reservation two (2) weeks in advance, so as to not be stuck at the pizza bar. The exterior is very  cute+charming+Italian looking, counting the ingredient shop 'round the corner, assuming you'd like to buy ingredients you've just tasted and fail miserably trying to create your own Italian culinary masterpiece. In between the two sits Osteria Mozza, the upscale dining establishment attached to the pizzaria. It's three establishments in one building. Confused yet? Don't be.. . After figuring out which door to enter, you're greeted with a cramped 20-something tabled room, absolutely bustling with diners, waitstaff and culinary artisans (read: pizza chefs) scrambling to fill orders and get everyone fed. We sat down and a carafe of water was automatically placed at our table. It was free, thank god - a coke will cost you $5. Each. Seriously.. . After perusing the menu (and Italian comic book placemats, funny pero no comprendi), I ordered the fennel sausage pizza (thanks Yelpers!), and my mate ordered the prosciutto. The order took about 25 minutes, and upon arrival we weren't disappointed! Both pizzas were hot and freshly oven-baked (coal oven methinks?). I usually don't care for fennel seed sausage, but this meat was perfectly seasoned and just oily enough to make you want to use the stuff as lipgloss - light. No napkin-dabbing here.. . We skipped dessert, but the only thing I would say really disappointed me was the fried squash blossom appetizer. It was yummy, don't get me wrong, but very overpriced (especially considering we were only given four blossoms). The fried cheese completely overpowered the blossom. It tasted like fried cheese. Which is good, but I wouldn't have ordered the blossoms had I known. . . All in all, a very yummy lunch destination. The gal next to me had some sort of all-mushroom pizza, and although I'm no fan of fungus, it looked delish.
