ReviewID: NYEx4ZP0iPlK5zPnY4o2wQ
ReviewerID: Ngjqky6LxNk6XdX3pyzYYw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pasta Da Pulcinella
Category: Italian
This cozy Italian restaurant is slightly off the beaten path in a converted bungalow in Midtown, but worth seeking out.  Home made ravioli, filled with a variety of fillings, is the house specialty.  They are famous for their Tortelli di Mele, ravioli filled with browned Granny Smith apples, sausage and parmigiano and topped with a brown butter, sage and apple cider drizzle.  A menu of house favorites is complemented with an equal number of rotating daily specials.  I had one such special, ravioli stuffed with bits of roasted chicken, black beans and corn and topped with a spicy tomato sauce.  It was unique and tasty and the ravioli were large and plump.  My dining companion had the chicken cannelloni which consisted of 3 Italian crepes stuffed with chicken, spinach and ricotta.  One half of each crepe was covered with a tomato basil sauce, the other end by a creamy gorgonzola mushroom sauce that was heavenly.  It was excellent comfort food.    The caesar salad was very average with an uninspired dressing, although it had nice large pieces of shaved parmegiano on it.  And the bread was downright blase with hardly any taste.  Neither one match the quality of the pastas being served.  . . Servers are knowledgeable about the menu and offer excellent guidance when trying to decide between entrees.  All servers wear a black fedora as part of their uniform, which I found a little cheesy and not in keeping with the feel and atmosphere of the restaurant.. . The main room was completely occupied by a corporate group of 30+ on the night we dined and it made for a noisy room, although the atmosphere usually tends to be quieter and more romantic.  More intimate seating is located just past the bar or outside on the porch.  The large group seemed to throw service a little out of sync.  . . Entrees are reasonably priced at $15-18, with appetizers running from $4-8.  Two entrees, two caesar salads, 4 glasses of wine and tip came to $88 for two people.  Add another $3-5 for parking across the street.
