ReviewID: nyPCrAT5H-PmTFXAZBrnfA
ReviewerID: n2UsVjISE1nOow63cm3auQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Urban Belly
Category: Asian Fusion
I spent at least an hour agonizing over where to eat last night. Date had an i-Go car, date was paying, date was an adventurous eater: These factors, listed in order of importance, opened Chicago's entire culinary universe to me, and I was overwhelmed. But suddenly, a sign appeared before me -- five stars from one of my favorite reviewers -- and everything became clear.. Now, if you'll excuse me for a moment, I need to prostrate myself at the altar of the strip-mall food gods. I was a doubter, a naysayer. A high-rent-standalone-restaurant snob. No more. Urban Belly has made me a believer. . . The owners made a smart choice installing a vinyl cover at the front of the restaurant, which blocks the parking lot and scenic California Ave. from view while inside. The restaurant space is austere, with long communal tables and strips of driftwood adorning the deep brown walls. And those horrifyingly uncomfortable wood blocks they call seats? (MUCH heavier than they look?) No matter: The plainness heightened my other senses, allowing for a greater appreciation for the rest of the experience. Maybe that's why church pews are so uncomfortable.... . We perused laminated menus in the back of the restaurant then ordered at the counter. Udon noodles with an Asian bolognese (ground pork, black beans, mushrooms, sriracha, magic, etc.) sounded nothing short of incredible. The side of wrinkle beans intrigued me, even though I couldn't keep a straight face as I asked for them. Date was secretly mortified at my childish giggles. And. Limiting myself to two kinds of dumplings was even harder than figuring out where to eat in the first place, but I settled on the steamed squash and bacon dumplings, served with daikon and sweet orange wedges, and traditional pork and cilantro pan-fried dumplings. . I wiggled and danced my way to the table, helped myself to a glass of water and snapped my chopsticks in anticipation. Date was secretly horrified at my dumpling lust, which would sadly far outweigh any other desires for the evening.. Our food arrived, and it was all I could do not to sweep our tiny bowls aside and dive straight into the serving dish of that Asian bolognese. With my face. The dumplings were delicious, especially the squash and bacon, but I would do morally questionable things for a constant supply of those noodles. Short of handcuffing me, there was nothing that could have stopped me from plowing through the entire bowl, so I had it wrapped up as leftovers and somehow conned mortified, horrified date for one more serving of dumplings, this time a deep-fried duck variety.. I. Was. In. Heaven.. . I'm pretty sure one of my goals in choosing Urban Belly was to eat less thanks to the small plates. Failed objective, obviously. But I'm not sorry. I ran a 5K yesterday, dammit, and I deserved to eat myself into a stupor.. My only regret is not having visited Urban Belly with two more people, which would have meant we could sample twice the food I did last night. Dining in the company of friends is always nice for, you know, conversation and socialization, too. . But idle chatter is blasphemy during a time of worship.
