ReviewID: NyTEJrdNbjd6p7YgC50dSA
ReviewerID: 6YEnpx-qloIfFX-L9uyfbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
MILK is one of those "that is so LA" places that everyone knows is overpriced... yet they still go anyways because the sugary offerings are just way too yummy to pass up on! ... Or at least, that's my theory of how I've found myself spontaneously making the drive over here to spend $6-$7 on a towering, rich homemade ice cream shake about 4-5 times now over the past couple years, haha!. . So MILK offers food (simple fare like sandwiches, soup, salads, etc) plus drinks like coffees + teas, but the real deal is their desserts! If you can't tell already, I'm a big fan of their milkshakes + malts. My favorites are the Milkie Way Malt . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  + the Citrus Vanilla Float . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . Depending on whether I feel like indulging in a chocolately caramel blend of uber sweetness w/ chocolate chips + a malt ball on top or the more tangy mix of blood orange + lime w/ a large scoop of vanilla ice cream... I often have trouble deciding which option sounds better. In the case that none of their concoctions on the menu suit your palate, MILK will also let you create your own shake out of their selection of ice creams. I've tried the Triple Chocolate Shake . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  + a few others before, but I still stand by my favorites. Some of the others are just too sweet to the point that I can't finish them because I get sick of it. Sugar overloaaad! Also on the topic of ice cream, you can also try their sundaes, ice cream sandwiches, order an ice cream cake, or get a scoop. Personally, I feel like I get more bang for the buck getting shakes, though, especially considering the portability factor. . . Of their baked goods, there's a pretty decent selection of cupcakes, cookies, brownies, cakes + other baked yummies . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . I actually haven't tried their blue velvet cake that I've heard so much about... but I wasn't overly impressed by their red velvet cupcakes. They're kind of on the dry side + you can find better elsewhere. . . Note to all newbies that MILK is really, really small! There's probably only about 15 small tables total including the ones outside so I wouldn't recommend bringing a big group here unless you're ordering to-go. It gets crowded during warmer days + in the evenings + weekends. I've seen the line go pretty much out the door before! They only have 2 cash registers + it seems like they have about 3-4 employees running the shop even when it's busy. Upon ordering, they give you a number card so that they bring your order to you when it's done being made. No comments really on the service. They're nice, but I can't really remember it being anything special + I just went last week. Also, beware that there's no parking! You might be able to find street parking on one of the streets adjacent or try the small lot of the strip mall across the street. I usually can find something on Poinsettia St, but note they have fairly strict no parking hours since it's a residential area. If you're just stopping in + out though, it shouldn't be too much of an issue.
