ReviewID: NYZw35anEH7K2nu1gjpfTw
ReviewerID: Fs_ydYjONpVrsUCKGMqjaQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
spago by way of dineLA's restaurant week.  dinner.. . perhaps not entirely worthy of 2 michelin stars, but i had a great night here.  service was attentive and efficient.  the decor at spago is ludicrous, though by meal's end i found it to be quite appropriate in its ostentatiousness.  the food, while not the most refined--heaping portions, lacking presentation, simple flavors verging on simpleton--is undeniably and forcefully delicious.  what it lacks in sophistication it more than makes up for in unmitigated tastiness.  . . apps:. - maine crab raviolini w/ meyer lemon and pea tendrils: the only sign of a delicate hand all night.  mild but lingering, really tasty. . - celery root and apple soup w/ bacon confit, onions, caramelized apples: beautiful texture, both balanced and bold in flavor.  bacon confit was out of control. (this is a good thing.). . mains:. - braised short rib: the beef trend of yesteryear, elevated by horseradish pomme puree (i think?) and some sort of sauce containing mustard seeds. - rack of kurobuta pork: perfectly cooked, gloriously fatty.. - salmon: well-cooked piece of fish inundated with mushrooms.  a "that's interesting" dish.. . dessert:. - lemon cubed: only got a bite of this.  sabayon had the appearance of bubbling porridge.  too tart, but maybe that's the point.. - chocolate bread pudding: ungodly rich, so good.  salted pecan praline (?) gelato was excellent.. - medjool date cake: the cake was moist and warm, drenched and bathing in the celestial jizzum that is sherry yard's coffee toffee sauce.  because of this, the date flavor is a little lost, but who gives a sh*t. (to be fair, there were some date-y molasses notes throughout but it's hard not to attribute it to that sauce.  no matter, the cake made for a worthy vessel.) served with creme fraiche, a (candied?) blood orange disc, and passion fruit ice cream.  with their powers combined, this dessert offered the best bite of the evening.. . the dining experience offered at spago is indicative of that sordid los angeles decadence.  try not to have a good time here.  if you don't, blame whoever it is you're with.
