ReviewID: o0DxfzBGlEtJFO4Kd9e21w
ReviewerID: gEO11MjHUlxqM3z5UFO5uw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
Okay, So I have never heard of this place but a friend wanted to take me here after being to the one in SF, so around 7:30pm I found myself pulling up to the valet. When we walked in, I felt really under dressed. It gave me that feeling like, ugh, if only I would have known! I was actually wearing a baseball hat &amp; the hostess, who was smiling the whole time, told my friend I had to take it off! lol (I'm a college student, give me a break!)..okay, so hat is off, ran back to the valet guy who hadn't moved the car yet &amp; threw it in. With all the people standing around, at least the car is a Range Rover so I felt a little less ghetto..haha . . We were early for our reservation which was at 8:15 so we ended up at the bar having a couple drinks. After my first grey goose martini which was a decent price, 14 bucks, I started relaxing. The atmosphere seemed pretty diverse to me. So about ten minutes after our reservation time, a girl came and got us and took us to our table. She was very friendly. We sat upstairs and the table had a nice little view of the downstairs dining room. . . Then this guy comes and is holding something in his hand. I stare at him for a couple seconds (definitely feeling the two drinks by now) and realize he wants me to take something. Well what he wanted me to take were chopsticks! haha..I think that since he was holding 50 of them and half of the chopsticks were covered by a napkin, I was thrown off..and no I'm not dumb! lol . . The waitress came over and was soo nice! Usually at a place like this, I would expect the staff to act like A-holes, but she was awesome. She even put my napkin on my lap. Okay, I'm giving too much detail here. So anywho, the wild salmon was very moist &amp; cooked perfectly. The Garlic noodles were also good. Although the way I kept hearing people talk about them I expected them to be heavenly. lol..Just Good... . . Now to show u how good I thought the service was, I had asked the waitress what this doorway lead to. She actually took me to this private back room to show me. It is used for private parties &amp; I guess celebrities frequent this room. Very beautiful. . . So overall, besides the hat, I had a good experience. Everyone was friendly, from the waitress to the guy pouring me water. I didn't pay, so that helped, but even if I had to, I would come back.
