ReviewID: o0lIm7oQJhwe3IfwRgvuxQ
ReviewerID: ML0rNXpMFZhz4EuEAw5NwA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
I have an erratic work schedule that occasionally permits me to have a weekday afternoon off. I decided to brave LA traffic since my friend had been wanting to try Spago for some time. I was highly skeptical. Californian cuisine isn't exciting to me. I love flavor and Californian tends to be less thrilling in this department, but Wolfgang is legendary and Spago can't ALL be hype. I thus allowed myself to be lunched.. . The menu is fusion and with Italian and Japanese influences. To me this says: flavor potential. We selected four dishes to sample a variety of offerings including a vegetarian pasta appetizer, fish entree, meat entree and chocolate cherry dessert.. . Appetizer of seasonal agnolotti with English peas and marscapone- vibrantly fresh with the right amount of creamy marscapone to add a touch of smoothness. Whoever makes their pasta is amazing. It's firm but wonderfully soft in that al dente way. The dish looks very simple but clearly lots of love and skill went into it.. . Entree #1: Swordfish with tomato, artichoke, olive tapenade and drizzled with some sort of herbed oil. Our server proudly informed us that WP himself selected this swordfish. In my head I'm recalling disastrous fish dinners: dry swordfish and olives/Mediterranean flavors overwhelming delicate fishes. My skepticism dissipated immediately with the first bite. It was very light, flaky and moist unlike any of my other swordfish experiences. An appropriately small portion of olive tapanade is made of very finely diced olives and doesn't overwhelm the fish at all. A hugely successful dish and I savored EVERY bite! I even scooped up the bits of tomato/artichoke/herbs and made my own bruschetta with the complimentary bread.. . Entree #2: Grilled medium-rare prime hamburger with smoked onion marmalade, garlic aioli and Vermont cheddar on house made bun. Another well balanced, lovingly created dish executed with flair. The juices of the meat were oozing a bit into the soft bun. The onion marmalade was delicious! It's really intensely sweet but there's only small spread so as not to overpower the meat. And oh so gooey cheese is always a welcome addition. This was an INSANELY GOOD burger. It's served with a heap of herbed and salted fries and little pots of ketchup, dijon and mayo.. . Desset: Forest cake layered with marinated cherries, fresh whipped cream, gooey semisweet chocolate ganache, Kirsch gelato and meringue. I swear there was booze in the cake and cherry marinade and it was delicious. Weird fact: I never liked chocolate as a kid. Neither did my brother so it's not me, it's my genes. But man are these dessert artists are turning me into a chocolate lover! Or maybe it's the booze. Either way, this was a wonderful moist and tasty cake. I like that it's not too sweet. It's no wimpy portion either-- there were generous layers of cherries, chocolate ganache and fresh cream.. . Also, the service was lovely. Our server was so congenial and gave us fantastic recommendations and happily answered all my nerdy food questions. For example, the complimentary bread is from La Brea Bakery but the bun for the burger is house made. And Wolfgang himself came out and greeted his clients! I got to shake hands with the master himself and he exudes a warm approachable grace.. . Okay, Wolfgang, you've won me over. Cut, anyone?
