ReviewID: O0xupmkWE9RM2hgNpWHZAA
ReviewerID: dJnqnQ4MgQX0NmjHEysvoQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
* Fogo De Chao Churrascaria *. . YUM! This is detailed, but since it's one of the first, I wanted to be as accurate and as descriptive as possible. :o). . Had the pleasure of lunching here recently for my best friend's wedding reception. Needless to say, they get 5 stars for great food and service. It was my first time at a Brazillian Steakhouse (I think the lunch buffet price was about $32/person), but I had heard about what to expect through the grapevine. Here are some of the highlights: . . ~ Meat, Meat, and More Meat ~. As you can imagine, there were LOTS of choices here (they have about 15 total) and they include the usual suspects: beef, pork, chicken, and lamb. Some of my favorites included: the Picanha (Sirloin seasoned with Salt and Garlic), the Filet Mignon (with and without bacon), Alcatara (top sirloin), the Fraldinha (bottom sirloin), and the chicken breast wrapped in bacon. My boyfriend tried many of the other meats - he noted that the lamb chops and the pork ribs were equally tasty. . . ~ Side Dishes Galore ~. Did I mention the price includes really yummy side dishes? Oh vey! Dishes included very yummy mashed potatoes, crispy hot polenta, warm cheese bread (like popovers), and plantains. There's also an entire salad bar with a mutltitude of choices. . . We were all super-stuffed so we didn't try any dessert that day, but they did have a few choices (including creme brulee and chocolate lava cake I think) along with coffee and tea options. Dessert and coffee were not included in the buffet price though. . . The servers were very friendly and mindful. We didn't go thirsty at all. The restaurant also uses red (No, thanks) and green (give me more!)disks (that look like coasters) to signal the servers regarding whether or not they should come up to you and give you more meat. . . Square chocolates were available on the way out. . . Parking is valet only and I think it was about $5. . . Hope you enjoyed this review...this is definitely worth trying (at least for lunch).
