ReviewID: O16Zbxds5bVNeSndFm3DIQ
ReviewerID: rF_xWS_zDqeI3Js9tYSHdA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Culver City. It's like Main Street USA in Disneyland with HG Wellesian Eloi and other bland unimaginative people out and about dining in sidewalk cafes and restaurants.  Unlike the great sidewalk cafes of Europe where the thoroughfares and arteries are fed by tourists to be sure but also a vital stream of human traffic going from one end of town to another, pursuing private and public pursuits, the whole of which makes the city what it is - Here, one man may have just left lunch with his mistress and is en route to see his child play tennis. There, that old woman is going to the fishmonger to get some scraps for her spoiled cat, etc. etc. - downtown Culver City is two contained blocks leading to nothing going from nothing, connected to nothing, full of a-holes like you that drive to eat in one of 10 or 15 restaurants and then, when you're done, you leave that shithole and think no more of it. I mean, where are the madmen, the  starving hysterical naked looking for an angry fix... the angel headed hipsters? Not in Culver City. I can assure you of that. Here, are the accountants and the dentists.. . Culver City sucks. That's what I've always maintained and always will maintain. There is no inspiration to be had there and no one worth meeting in those suburban gin joints. No one will write a song about Culver City nor will it give birth to any movements nor incite violent affections. Tender Greens though is pretty tasty. My tuna nicoise salad was wonderfully dressed and the undulating leaves of salad greens were fresh and packed with moisture. The pale pink tuna was ever so slightly salty but firm, succulent and had just the right hint of char. Fingerling potatoes were cooked perfectly. My lemon chicken soup tasted organic and I could suck down a huge bowl of its wholesome homemade goodness. So, in summary, Tender Greens good, Culver City  not so much.
