ReviewID: O1fmnN4KrqT3mCy_JGA4Bw
ReviewerID: iRfjtjSp3Bfo-KFSbiupmw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hide Sushi Japanese Restaurant
Category: Japanese
I have mixed emotions about this review, I really do. . . First, is anything really worth a 30 minute wait ( or longer ) in cramp quarters stressing if they have skipped your name or not? Well, I can think of one thing, but that is not offered at this establishment :)  There is good news and bad news about the wait, the good news is - must be good right?  The bad news is, the wait.  The stress of so many people waiting I believe puts undue pressure on the service staff as well and they are not quite as welcoming as you would hope.. . Why do I personally go to a Sushi restaurant?  For the entire experience from miso soup to orange slices.  I enjoy watching the Sushi Chef's making their treats; the chit chat and the occasional "special" something that was made just for you.  I enjoy the upbeat waitress with her smile delivering more hot tea just in time to quench that urge.  Oh, and we can not forget the fresh/really good sushi is why you come to begin with.. . So what do you get at Hide?. . First, parking is a hassle, but as one other Yelper suggested, there is a potential parking spot up on the curb right next to the restaurant, but I did not want to chance it.. . Second, you get to wait.  We arrived at 5pm on a Saturday and waited nearly 30 minutes and the wait just got longer as the evening went on.  We were really happy we were not seated at one of the tables near the wait area because that would have sucked. Suggestion?  When you arrive, place your name on the chalk board on the wall near the cash register and note S/T so you essentially get first available (Sushi bar or Table).  Oh, and I hope you have cash in your pocket because that is all they accept.. . Third, you get to experience the "Hide Process".  I have been struggling on how to explain my experience at Hide and I could only come up with a high quality production line experience.  Since we placed S/T by our name, when we were called for the Sushi bar, the waitress quickly said - Sushi mostly ok?  Not so welcoming, but I understand why she would say this, but gosh, give me a bit of a break I just waited a long time for this.. . Welcome to the beginning of the process.  From the moment you sit down, to the moment you leave, you get to experience placing orders, getting really good sushi and paying the check.  No frills, no happy happy, joy joy, just the basics mam.  Where is that hot towel anyway?. . Hence my struggle with how to rate Hide.  For instance, I love cold Sake.  At Hide, you have one choice.  I love watching the chef make the treats.  At Hide each Sushi Chef is so busy, you are not sure which  Albacore is really yours.  The waitresses are so worried about seating  the patrons and delivering the orders, you hardly get a smile.  And what you do not get, hot tea and orange slices when you are done.. . What you do get?  Really good sushi at a good price and this place seemingly caters to the "American Sushi Lover" - meaning no real exotic offering on the menu.. . Suggestions:. . Miso Soup ( better then most places). Albacore (Decent). Scallop Special (Yummy). Yellow tail ( melts in your mouth). Spicy Tuna Roll ( Yummy). Special CA Roll ( Decent - not Great). Monk Fish Liver (I had two). . In summary, if you are looking for a low stress; warm;  friendly / fun / upbeat Sushi bar experience then Hide is not your spot.  If you are looking for heads down good sushi eating experience, then this is your place in spades and the check won't bust you either.. . My rating:  5 Stars for the Sushi, 1 Star for the Experience = 3 Stars Overall
