ReviewID: o39jcIVYXIizmyGG3PX_Fw
ReviewerID: rzF0Bq4F736sHlMKrEy21A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Bluebird
Category: Wine Bars
Trend setting the Chicago Gastropub is The Bluebird.. . For those of you who see the word Gastropub and say Gastro-What, let's take a look at Wiki for a second.. . *wiki***A gastropub is a British term for a public house ("pub") which specialises in high-quality food a step above the more basic "pub grub." The name is a portmanteau of pub and gastronomy and was coined in 1991 when David Eyre and Mike Belben opened a pub called The Eagle in Clerkenwell, London. They placed an emphasis on the quality of food served, though The Eagle was not the first pub to offer good food.. . Gastropubs usually have an atmosphere which is relaxed and a focus on offering a particular cuisine prepared as well as it is in the best restaurants. Staying true to the format requires a menu that complements the assortment of beers and wines the gastropub offers.*end wiki***. . Now that that is clear, you should know that although the name Gastropub may not be that old these types of food, bars, pubs, whatever, have been around fO-eVA.. . The Meets are severed by the ounce are spectacular, it's like having a tasting at a great butcher, or deli.. . The Flat Breads are amazing and extremely creative in flavor combinations.. . The wines are vast, fairly priced and the servers know what they are talking about.. . Now my favorite part.  The beer.. Now I'd like to see some taps in this place but hey that's okay, I understand.  Beers from all around the world, but for me it's the Belgium all the way.  I bet the beer menu in Heaven looks a lot like this one even though, some bottles are a bit on the pricey side.  Fear not you will find one tailor made for your palate without killing your wallet.. . Next is the atmosphere, The Bluebird has a minimalist approach to decor which right away lets people know that "WE ARE NOT PRETENTIOUS" which is good because most "Americans" would look at the common menu at a Gastropub and make that mistake.  . . The bar stools and table chairs right away took me back to science lab, i was wondering where the Bunsen burners were. The front windows open up to giving the feel of alfresco. The music is perfect not to loud just right to enjoy and still have a conversation.  . . Which brings me to the best part of The Bluebird.. . You know how some places are great but the clientle sucks, thus far, this place is great and the clientle is AWESOME, full, of great people who get the idea of the Gastropub, it's all about Good Food, Good Wine, Good Beer, and GREAT CONVERSATION.  The night me and my Extra Special Lady Friend (ESLF) were there we met everyone it seemed and talked about such cool things all night long, even shared food and drinks with others in the place, good friends were made that night at The Bluebird. . . So yes, go to The Bluebird, enjoy yourself, meet people, and DON'T BE AFRAID TO ASK QUESTION ABOUT ANYTHING ON THE MENUS!  These guys know their stuff and just want to make you as happy as possible.
