ReviewID: o3iJI5b2KOc7QnCr09Kmtg
ReviewerID: pFBeUN4O6mgChLfYI9oIPQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: La Crêperie
Category: French
I tried to like La Creperie. Really, I did! . . I once spent 12 hours there with Maggie R. No joke! We met for mimosas and brunch and ended up staying through dinner. That was an expensive day!! I had the eggs (or maybe it was an omelet) and they weren't great. The mimosas were good, but not great (and I drank enough of them to know!) Things got a little fuzzy around lunch time and I remember ordering some type of nutella crepe, which was good. Then dinner time hit us and we switched to bottles of wine. What goes best with bottles of wine? French fries. No, not really, but the fries were good! They came with a little cup of beef gravy that was delicious! After this experience I felt I couldn't give an accurate review since the whole day was a blur. Also, I was a little miffed. We spent all day there and I ended up spending $150...they couldn't throw something in gratis? Nope. . . My second experience was a fabulous french day planned by Matthew S. and I was lucky enough to tag along. Again, there were things that bothered me. The appetizers came out with the entrees. I hate that. Krsna and I shared the trio of pate and it was good. I enjoyed the pate, but my crepe...ugh! This place is called "La Creperie" so crepes should be the specialty. I ordered the ham crepe and asked for cheddar cheese to be added. I'm not sure what I received, but it wasn't a crepe. It was more like a ham and cheese tortilla wrap that had been left in a panini grill too long. It was overdone and almost burnt. My fingers were starting to hurt from trying to cut it with the butter knife that they gave me. It was definitely not a crepe. A crepe shouldn't be that hard and my companions crepes were falling apart with a fork. . . Here's a tip for ya' La Creperie:  I know that a lot of people love the goat cheese but try having a few things without it. I'm not a fan of it and found it hard to ordering anything off of your menu because I was avoiding the goat.  Kthxbai!
