ReviewID: o6FBbzeP1V1SmBasYClKaw
ReviewerID: ps_wRXZyhwO-tOygI5hl_g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Usually I'm going to nice steakhouses once maybe twice a year, but I just went to Mastro's twice within 9 days of each other.  Not my choice, but it just reminded me that I haven't reviewed it yet!  You typically want to be seated upstairs where the scene is.  The bar and the piano man are there for people watching and lively music.  It's your typical steakhouse in the sense that you order your meat separately from the sides, the sides are big enough to share and they have many different appetizers to start your meal off.  You almost always leave very full and satisfied.  The steaks come to you on incredibly hot plates - seriously, when they tell you not to touch the plate - DON'T TOUCH THE PLATE!  Last night mine was still sizzling that little steak juices splattered up onto my chest!  Good thing I had already had a martini at Nic's Martini Lounge (great martini place 2 blocks north) and a glass of champagne or it would've hurt a lot more!  In my opinion, a sign of a good steakhouse is if they can cook the steak the way I like it (medium-well-plus, don't judge) and do it perfectly so it's still juicy... as well as the cut you get, sometimes you can just tell the difference between a "good" petite filet mignon and an "excellent" one.  The mastro's mashed potatoes have bacon in it, so in case you don't like bacon (like me!) go with the garlic or another potato dish.  Last night was the first time I had the au gratin and they were better than I thought they'd be - they were cheesy, but not TOO cheesy which au gratin often can be and the potatoes are cut in wedges and roasted rather than how you normally get them in slices and they're cooked, but still white.  The sauteed mushrooms, broccoli and asparagus are always cooked perfectly and it's nice that the waitstaff serves your first helping.  I did make a crazy choice the first visit in the 9 days and only had an appetizer (crab stuffed mushrooms) and the warm spinach salad.  The salad is very big, so know that if you choose to "start" with that - it is perfect to share.  I of course got it with their house balsamic and no bacon, but I can imagine if I enjoyed it altered, the original is just as good.  I don't like oysters, but one of my friends who was at both of these dinners ordered them both times and felt that they were just not worth it.  He thought so the first time, but to make sure, ordered them the second time to see if it was just that night or if in general they weren't that good.  They take reservations and are always so nice and courteous to try to accommodate, but be prepared to not be seated on time and to be there longer than a typical dinner.  Not a place to go if you have to be somewhere afterwards, but a great spot to splurge, spend time with great people and have a delicious meal.  It's always fun to dress up too! . . http://notomatoespleas.... 
