ReviewID: o8zvih3QU9DUaXKpZ2w97A
ReviewerID: aaeg9SYA-ey7Ovv1zr_Ncg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Highlander
Category: Dive Bars
To be honest I don't recall my first trip to the Highlander almost 8 years ago.. . I was carded at the door by a large, balding gentleman that had the look of a Hell's Angel. . I had a pitcher of Guiness. . I ordered the Kari Kari.. I butt dialed at least twice. . . Eight years later I still find myself narrowing down the entirety of my "let's go out and have a relaxing evening" food options in northern Georgia to The Highlander and MAYBE 2 other places.. . This is a dive where I feel comfortable without knowing a soul. . This is a bar where I can get a good, cheap drink.. This is a restaurant where I can get something tasty, quickly.. . Like to smoke? Bully for you. I don't indulge but I appreciate the atmosphere (/cough - lack of children).  . . The drunken stripper from two booths down SWEARS that this is the last time she wants a tater-tot (and can she have yet another one for her friend?), the non-Jagermeister decor features old PIN-UPS skateboards and a varied mix of work from local artists, and the bartenders drink more in an hour than I do in a night.. . I don't think I've ever eaten here and not gotten the Kari Kari. Crab Angles, Crab Rangoon, Crab Angels, whatever. This sumptuous 7-piece offering is 'tasty-cakes' in my book.. . I've enjoyed their veggie burger before. I've even raved about it. On separate occasions I've also despaired the next day over the fact that I couldn't stop thinking about how bad it sucked the night before. So it goes.. . Ordering something Fried? These guys are great. Once, and only once, I had some stuffed Jalapeno's that were overcooked. They came out at the same time as several other fried Apps and the rest of them were absolutely perfect. When I look back over the years at their consistency it adds up to a great track record. Frying, while simple, is essential in meeting the needs of 'the Wife.'. . Speaking of 'the Wife,'  she has often enjoyed several 'Specials of the Day' in the fish department and has yet to say anything negative save in regards to the leftovers on the way home - "Don't you dare throw my fish at that car!" Did I mention she doesn't like fish?. . Raised in Miami, I'm a big fan of a traditional Cuban. The Highlander does not make a traditional Cuban Sandwich (at least not like I've ever eaten in Miami or Tampa). That said, I've found it to vary in the spice factor from 'Pretty Tasty' to 'Almost Obnoxious, but Still Enjoyable to the Last Bite.'  Ever since Kool Korner shut down this is where I satisfy my urges for pork on a bun with swiss et al. Oh sure, other people will preach the virtues of other places around town, but this is how my palate gets down.. . Live music events seem to abound and there are weekly highlights like the AUCE Crab Legs under $20 on Tuesday, Trivia on Sundays and Drunk Bingo on Monday's around 8ish. . . I confess I've not thoroughly explored all the menu options, but just the same I recommend The Highlander to everyone. I'm never disappointed, and I've never had a bad evening of it.  Dress up. Dress down. Keep to yourself. Make new friends. The Highlander accepts all comers so long as your money is good.
