ReviewID: O9_u2yNIIYqM_RYdMlYp8Q
ReviewerID: ajMm_rBqbKYALu-I8-__Kg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
There's so much better for AYCE Korean BBQ out there... there's really no point to go here.. . All outdoors is actually pretty nice, but then it's smoky as all hell, especially on birthday celebrations when they spray champange all over the birthday table and it hits the flaming hot grill and POOF, the grill goes out and you end up with smoke everywhere. Hell it's FUN, but again, there's reeking of Korean BBQ, and there's a serious stink. This is the latter when that happens.. . Ban chan is okay. It doesn't let me down, which honestly is all I expect from a $16.99 AYCE place.. . The meat? Though. Seriously. There's so much better available out there in AYCE places in Los Angeles/Orange County. This place might hold up well in 99% of other places, but LA/OC isn't one of them. The chicken is generally decent but we had quite a few pieces that we very tendon-y, the chicken I get from 99 Ranch is better than this. The beef brisket? Kinda fatty. They don't offer beef tongue in AYCE. =( The galbi? That was actually decent, but it was still decidedly average. Pork belly? It cooked down nicely, but was pretty lacking in taste after it was cooked. And marinade? This place hasn't heard of it... not for the meat they serve for AYCE, at least. Some other places do. Manna isn't one of them.. . It's fun for groups of up to 20 or so-- we had 26 and the other 4 had to sit at a different table (which is ok, we knew we had a huge group)... and oh yeah, the other complaint: service was SLOW. Not even asking for anything fancy... but basics like more water? More ban chan? Heck our grilles sat empty long enough for us to get irritated about it more than once. It was a birthday so we had a cake-- they knew in advance-- but when it came time for dishes and plasticware for the cake? Yeah. They gave us a bunch of place settings that turned out to barely be enough for half the table. Getting the rest took more asking and more waiting. Considering that this place caters to large groups, I was disappointed.. . To credit things, at least, service was actually worse earlier in the night, and it got better later, presumably as more waitstaff came on duty. Or it could be 'cause they figured out we had a Korean with us. *shrugs*. . But the real kicker? We started at 6pm, and 8:30pm as we were finishing up they asked us to leave 'cause they had another party that was waiting. Again, I understand this... but our side table of 4 people? They let them stay. Just gave a very weird vibe.... not a good one.
