ReviewID: O9b2be4yuQbzh8PGNomIfg
ReviewerID: ylH3EKzQr0c1_zCGdSJhsw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
I went here last night for an anniversary dinner and wasn't so impressed. First of all - Green Zebra is not vegetarian. It might be mostly vegetarian but they serve seafood. . Atmosphere: Minimalist, modern, earthy, nice lighting. Warning - if you don't like the possibility of being seated six inches away from other diners - avoid this restaurant. If you're not seated in one of the comfy booths that line the wall, you're pretty much going to be on someone else's date unless your group is big enough to warrant your own section. . Service: Extremely good. From the guy that kept refilling our water to the waiter that was extremely attentive. The only negative is that after we got home we realized we ordered an additional dish, were charged for it and never got it - annoying to say that least - especially at $12 a pop. . Food. This is where I was most disappointed. First of all, the vegan-friendly dishes (labeled with a "v" next to them on the menu) weren't as plentiful as I would have liked - this especially goes for the entree-like section and the desserts. . We started out with a trio of onion soup (included ramps!). It was basically like the broth of french onion soup. It had a nice grilled piece of bread in it. It was just ok for me. . Next we had the shittake springrolls. These were pretty good but not really something I would crave. . I was really excited for our next plate - the black eyed peas dumpling but the inside of the dumpling didn't impress - it reminded me of simple red bean paste. The BBQ was more like terriyaki sauce and was pretty bland. . Next was the fried chickpea plate which was basically just falafel squares. They were very dry and very run-of-the-mill for me. . The final plate was the crowning achievement of the night - the Udon noodles. I enjoyed trying fiddlesticks for the first time (they reminded me of broccoli stems in flavor and texture) but the real highlight was the broth - a very delicious ponzu/citrus style broth that I couldn't stop eating. . The dessert menu didn't offer anything that was vegan that was exciting to us so we decided to pass. . All in all, I think the restaurant is fairly overpriced and I was annoyed that they call themselves vegetarian and also that a dish was skipped. With so many other cheaper and more vegan-friendly options in the city - I doubt I'll be back.
