ReviewID: o_MA9yfL9nBx0wfaJqxdFQ
ReviewerID: 5T5At0Q1cXCPV66Cq23oEQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Perennial
Category: American (New)
Perennial for the Restaurant Week Win!  I had been for brunch a few times and loved it, but this was my first foray into Perennial dinner. . Perennial was a total 180 from our crap experience at Boka the evening before.  Our server was engaging, helpful and most importantly, kept our drinks full!  . . We started with the daily crudo, which was a plate of hamachi cured with oil, lemon and salt and garnished with a pickled jalapeno-shallot relish.  Yum.  I had another great drink which featured gin and creme de violette liquer...I need to find me some of that.. . But I digress.  Back to the food.  I had the Lyonnaise salad, which is traditionally one of my favorites.  This was the only misstep of the evening.  My salad didn't come with the advertised bacon lardons.  I am not a big bacon eater (I will go as far to say that I actually dislike bacon) but the salad was lacking a certain saltiness to it.. . Mike was the big appetizer winner with the black truffle gnocchi.  So good. . . For entrees, he had the braised short rib with parsnip puree and roasted carrots.  Very simple, but very well prepared.  I had the roasted duck breast with braised savoy cabage and a mild dried cherry sauce.  It came with a little puff pastry filled with duck confit.  The duck dish was amazing.  I would go back for that alone.. . Desserts were also excellent.  I had a crispy hazelnut bar (the texture of which resembled something in between the inside of a butterfinger and a rice crispy treat) that came with chocolate mousse and some ice cream.  Delish.  Mike had the "raspberry cheesecake," which was actually raspberry custard with cream cheese whipped cream and graham cracker crumble.  Also delish.. . We had a really great meal in a really relaxed atmophere, and we will definitely go back!  Props to Perennial for really embracing what RW is all about - a quality experience at an "introductory" price point.
