ReviewID: o_n41UkqOaHlIeQzps9mgA
ReviewerID: aD-rsDe2S0e7jTkYD6ULaQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Visit here for the history and experience--come away with a chili cheese dog. ;-) . . Overall experience:  3.5 stars. Food: 3 stars. Cost to worth it ratio: 4 stars. Wait to worth it ratio: 2 stars. . Highlights:. - History: starting from a stand in 1940 to a solid building in 1946, this place has been around for a while. I'm not a history buff, but it's cool to think of all the people who have waited in the same line you did, ordered from the same bustling window in front of the open kitchen, and ate the same type of hot dog... There haven't been too many restorations so the sign looks original further revealing its history. I've seen it covered in many food shows, I just had to try it. . - Variety: so many different types of hot dogs displayed on the pink paper menu, wall in the back of the kitchen, or the pages posted up front. Fun names too like the view, today show, martha stewart, and lord of the rings.. - Chili cheese dog: The big winner of our order. I liked it, but I'm a sucker for chili cheese dogs. Not sure exactly how much better it is than a regular hot dog, but I did thoroughly enjoy it.. - Marble cake: random companion to a hot dog but pretty soft and tasty. - Fries: puffy and seasoned. - Clientele: mix of locals, travelers, and international tourists from all walks of life. . Lowlights (my flip side to highlights):. - The wait: I'm all for anticipation and expected a long wait, but after the hour or so of waiting I wasn't even hungry for a hot dog anymore. :-O The line starts behind the building, passes an antique shop with an odd display window, curves around the side, and snakes up front. Kinda like a Disneyland line but with food instead of a ride at the end of it. . - Brooklyn: pastrami sounded good, but with a hot dog was kind of strange. Pastrami was a bit tough and was crazy to eat with it bustin out and hard to keep in the bun.. - LA traffic: we made the pilgrimage from the OC and there was stopped traffic on the freeway both ways, causing for it to take way longer than it should. People say Bay Area traffic is bad--at least we have hours it's limited to like mornings and evenings during the work week. :-O. . Think it might be more of a one time you can say you've been there thing and I now have.
