ReviewID: O_oPGLuZNSfselgzdYd0aQ
ReviewerID: fj_GmJkMe1YV9nojmScKvA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
A THOUGHT:. I feel like people HAVE to write good reviews of this place. It's required. I mean, you spend so much money, dang it, you'd BETTER LOVE IT! And even if you didn't love it for real, you'll MAKE yourself love it b/c you don't want to look stupid for blowing your rent money on dinner.. . That being said, this place is pretty amazing. I don't know if it's b/c I'm SUPPPOSED to love it, but it was a great experience, one that I'll remember for years to come.. . FOOD:. The food was not only interesting and complex but aromatically and visually engaging as well. It really is an event. It takes hours. And I found joy in the way I was challenged by the food. It was actually pretty inspirational in some ways.. . I liked that even after 15 or 20 courses (can't remember how many there were, it's been a few months), I didn't feel over-stuffed. . . STAFF/SERVICE. The staff wasn't mad that we didn't drink wine. In fact, they had a great alternative they suggested, something they had picked out (for the Alcoholics?), some sparkling juice that didn't interfere with the food.. . WHY ONLY 4 STARS?. My rating is more of an in between 4 and 5. The reason it flirts with 4 is because of inaccessibility for the financially challenged. I mean, I like good food and will pay the price, but this is flirting with ridiculous. It's kind of like how I wouldn't pay $2000 for shoes. Even though I can appreciate its design and aesthetics and fawn over it and say things like, "Yes, it IS genius, it is the perfect shoe," I still can't bring myself to buy it. So even though I might pay $500 for a pair of shoes (which I think is still a lot), in the end, it doesn't make me feel great. . . This is couture food.  And I appreciate couture. And I can champion their existence with the rest of them. But the inaccessibility, though it may be celebrated by many, is not a celebrated quality for me personally. And I don't mean to say conversely that cheap production for the masses is a quality I necessarily prize, either (though I can appreciate its contributions as well). . . But like I say in my profile, no one should really read my reviews anyway. So don't get mad.
