ReviewID: oaEtFqTMdNrCIxGrgcqyqA
ReviewerID: 2FtdCVp8sEFlcjEdOVDLLA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Service for prudes. Food for Kings and Foodie Peasants.. . We had a Mozzarella sampler:. Nothing like it in my lifetime. There was a couple from Italy and other homemade locally and in restaurant - let me tell you - I had NO idea it can stretch and melt like that. Apparently they make/have something like 16 different mozzarella's - daily - awesome!. . So... my wife leaves the table for the restroom. Right before that, she carelessly let one of her mussels get out of control and jump off her plate - resulting in a stain on the "what we are lead to believe as million dollar cotton blend" white table clothe. So... right before she returned with precise action, there was this "white swan" placed on the table in her placement waiting for her. Now... this think looks something a hotel turn-down team would produce in their evening rituals for guests - ha! BUT now its gets better. As she sits down, another staffer runs over and spreads this new "what we are lead to believe as million dollar cotton blend" large white clothe napkin and covers her culinary mistake - "the mussel contamination" so that it apparently isn't offensive to us or any other people that may walk by our table and be embarrassed for us - being the sloppy table of the bunch - our cheeks should have been red.. . Ever get your wine glass seasoned? Well here you can - I have to NO F##king idea what that is - please someone educate me. There was four of us and all four of our glasses where "seasoned" - thanks to them. None of us said anything and juts looked at out glasses with what looked like backwash on all ourt glasses... later we all broke out at the same time to ask each other - what the hell "that" was all about and ALL of the sudden - and staffer falls out of the ceiling and kinda spoke down to us to tell us that's they "season" all their glasses to make the wine is of extreme expectation of their demanding guests.. . I give it 3 stars because of being talked down to by the staff - really disappointing on that front. Thought this was about eating and not wearing your Harvard degree bib around your neck - framed and all - WTF??? I am so worked up again about the above I wanna go lower on the stars but I can't.. . The food is incredible - there isn't a single thing we could nip-pick about - amazing.. . Couple Tips for Mozza:. Get a new staff and attitude and your golden! Walk over to Mozza Pizza and learn something about people - people.. One more tip - DO NOT season my glass - I rather taste and approve my own glass and NOT the bar tender who wasted off his ass seasoning glasses all night - thanks!
