ReviewID: OAFhVJW-l8skQjn0j5B5ag
ReviewerID: 5HJvYcAM6FLat695V_JF1A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
After my first and only visit to this cute little cafe I am left with mixed emotions! It was good, but not great :( which was a little disappointing considering how packed it seems to be on any given day. The boy and I went here for brunch a few weeks back. We both adore dining on patios, so this place was one of many on our list of "must try" places. . . To our surprise this isn't a sit down and be served place. It is a order at the counter, get a number and find a table kind of place. No biggy. The line to order was long, but it went fast. Those kids behind the counter were speedy and efficient. Not only that, but while waiting to order they have a case of sugar filled goodies to gawk at and ponder upon. . . I ordered the Turkey Pesto Panini (sliced turkey breast, swiss, tomato and pesto) with a salad for the side and a cappucino. I was very pleased in my entire meal, including the cappucino  which came out quickly.. . The reason we were disappointed was because the boyfriend didn't have quite the experience I had when it came to the food. Not only did his Classic Grilled Chicken Sandwich come out wrong (with tomatoes and he is allergic) but they didn't give him the side of fries he ordered... they just didn't give him a side at all. After waiting a few minutes to see if maybe his fries were just lagging he went inside to voice his frustration and to reorder the sandwich. We sat for another 20 minutes while those around us recieved their meals and still... no new sandwich and no fries. At this point I was almost done eating and the boy was a bit frustrated. You just can't get between a hungry man and his expected meal. Talk about making him Mr. Grumpy Pants. . . We finally got the attention of one of the gentlemen who was delivering entrees to let him know we were still waiting on a entree which had been ordered for some time. He urgently went to the kitchen and returned a few minutes later with the meal in hand... finally. The boy liked the sandwich, but still curses the experience. He is in the service industry, so he can be hard to please. Really though... like any other dining patron he just enjoys getting good service, especially considering he gives good service to others 6 nights a week. . . Our first experience was decent, but really could have been great would the service have been more pleasing. I am totally down with trying this place again in hopes that we were an exception to their normally fantastic service.
