ReviewID: obp7amjVoOfqgUJv3gzQqw
ReviewerID: qYQNp0KxX2tG-p2Q6e7pxQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Murphy&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
If Yelp allowed separate ratings for food and service, I would be giving Murphy's four stars for the food.  My first visit here was almost one year ago during the Virginia Highland Summerfest. I ordered the chilaquiles. While I was there I joined their e-mail list.  2 days after my birthday last month, I receive an e-mail stating "Come in any time this month for lunch brunch or dinner to receive a $20 birthday credit compliments of Murphy's."   I decided to take my mom for Mother's Day since my birthday had passed.  We get there around 9:00 and the wait for a table was not long for parties of 2.  We were seated outside which was very crowded.  It was so crowded that the father seated next to us with his 3 daughters and wife knocked over a saucer and it broke.  The waiters had to continuously squeeze through the small space to pass each table. Our muffin basket combined with our entree plates and water glasses on the table had very little space for anything. Before ordering I informed our waiter that I had a birthday coupon and gave it to him at the end of the meal. I was very surprised when I got my receipt and only my mom's entree (trout) was removed. Called the waiter over who said only my entree (pancakes with sausage) was free, even though I stated that the coupon was for $20.00. He left to talk to the manager and came back &amp; restated it was only my entree which I did not understand because he did credit my entree; just my mom's which cost more. I went inside and spoke to the manager who did not understand what the complaint was.  I told him I thought the coupon did not have any stipulations about which day it was used or for what meal it only stated for dine in only. I read my coupons carefully and asked to see it.  He looked at the receipt and then a few minutes later said he would give us the credit.  Did my mom get a flower? No she did not. When I sign up for a restaurant e-mail list and they offer coupons or certificates, I like to use them. I can't comprehend why managers give patrons such a difficult time about honoring them?  Many restaurants don't offer discounts or coupon specials and I think less of them should if it is going to be a problem to use them.  Yes brunch at Murphy's is good, but it is not worth the wait, the small space, or the slow service.
