ReviewID: oBRsu53Symu0B2v-T_g2Nw
ReviewerID: Ix6QSAuTuLXVT-VLMggM1Q
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Roebling Tea Room
Category: Coffee & Tea
We live very close to Roebling Tea Room but I guess there is a reason why we never went there. Gut instincts just told me that it was no good. But in an effort to invalidate my instincts, my bf and I visited Roebling Tea Room one evening between Christmas and NYE. Though it looked OK, I didn't have an appetite for any of the dishes listed on the inconspicuously written menu. (When it was time to take our orders, our waiter asked us if we had any questions. This boggled me because there were no descriptions of any sort on the one-word menu items. For example, bowtie (pasta), chicken, etc.) I resorted to a mac-and-cheese topped with bacon (an additional $x) while the dinner date chose to try the pickles w/ soft pretzel as an app and the bowtie pasta with braised beef shank.. . The service took years. The tortoise-like slowness (no association to the Tortoise and the Hare where the former wins the slow and steady race) was further elucidated when a crowd of waiters were overbearingly tending to Bill Murray's gastronomical needs while lowly us had to struggle for mere eye contact. My feelings were hurt, to say the least.. . But hurt turned to fury when we tasted our food. The pickles and pretzel were almost indelible (I say almost because I have an iron stomach and taste). The gave us a handful of pickled hot jalapenos and we didn't know what to do with them. I mean, do we eat it and risk a third-degree burn? The pretzels were far from soft. . . To add some fairness to this scathing review, half of our entrees was actually decent. The bowtie pasta was light and the beef shank was a surprisingly passable "sauce" for it. My mac and cheese was another story, however. The taste and color reminded me of Velveeta cheese. After you break through the edible cheese crust of the dish, you are left with a inedible cheese soup underneath. I picked on the bacon bits. When the waiter came back to take our plates, I had only eaten about 1 tablespoon of the dish and had no intention of doggy-bagging it. . . Bottom line is that Roebling Tea Room sucks and I am never going back even if the guy from Lost in Translation, who supposedly is into hipster chicks, eats there.
