ReviewID: ocKpbaKeaVK4ZddcmE5_lA
ReviewerID: ZiwTj9U_n-e0AbwL16LHeg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
you can call it whatever you want. addiction. habit. need. it'll get you in the end, and you'll come off of that high soon or later... and you'll find yourself going back for more. . . every year i pick up an expensive habit.. . four years ago, to the chagrin of wallet, i picked up a love for fashion while playing in italy. . . two years ago, my palate expanded, and started refusing two buck chuck. though i am still far from wine connoisseur status, let's just say, i break the bank a bit more now when wine shopping. . . about over a year ago, i discovered Fraiche. and this innocent little restaurant in culver city, slammed with me with not one, but THREE expensive habits. . . fine dining. . oysters. . dessert. . . BLAST!!  (in stewie griffin voice). . my boyfriend took me here as a surprise for our seven year anniversary. who am i to say no to 'wining and dining'?  im lucky, after so long, the sparks are still there. (along with the dates!). . . Fraiche, for me, has the most spectacular oysters. Though on the pricey side (25 for a dozen of kumamoto), the pristine, cool taste of cracking into one of those babies is well worth it. so worth it, in fact, we ordered two dozen. accompanied with the tear inducing condiment, known better as horse radish, i would tilt my head backwards to relish the burn of it all. that's right. i like the burn! not as much as steve-o from jackass (snorting wasabi), but close enough!. . in the beginning, the service was spotty, and it was difficult to get the attention of the server. this would have easily been forgiven, if it was a crammed friday evening, but it was not... minus one star. and to clarify, this is only regarding our waitress, the busboys were super efficient, and were actually the ones trying to track her down! . . on to our next appetizers. i ordered the baby beet salad. he ordered the corn soup. ooooohhh yes. beet me baby, BEET ME. perfectly cooked, and beautifully arranged baby beets, sprinkled with salty, crunchy hazelnuts, all set delicately on a beaten, whipped, house made ricotta. the corn soup was just as sensational. so comforting, that it comes with a mandatory smile with every bite. there was a corn fritter hidden in there, and it was perfectly cooked, with the soup oozing into it. it was mixed with basil cream, but never felt heavy or overbearing. . . next up, he ordered the striped bass, (which i thought was ok), but my monkfish trumped his bass. the monkfish is fraiche's specialty. the texture of it, if i could describe it, is perfectly cooked lobster. it doesn't melt into your mouth, but if you push it a bit with your tongue, it will give, and when it gives, it is so generous. placed on top of a beautifully elongated line of potato puree and spinach, it's moments like this when i wished i had a personal chef. . . on to dessert! we ordered the chocolate bread pudding, and the torta della nonna (with fiji apples, as opposed to the plums that are stated on their online menu).  . . oh heavens. so after i hire a personal chef, maybe i should hire a personal pastry chef?! . . the chocolate bread pudding was spectacular. dense, but still expanded in your mouth. there were flecks of coffee bean in there for sure, with a sweet pear puree underneath it, accompanied by a vanilla bean ice cream. though i would never think these flavors went together, they complimented each other perfectly, without a hint of oversweetening! though i obviously loved this dessert very much, i must say my own dessert again, took the prize on this one. this may be, because i was in the mood for something lighter. my fiji apples were cooked so that the crunch was still there, with the buttery crust and custard in the domestique position, adding, encouraging the fiji apple to keep going....and it did. my eyes fluttered. my heart was full.. . and the bill was 218, not including tip.. . BAM!. . another habit gained.
