ReviewID: OcPEVN22GZypDLTl5yVQsA
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Tank Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
Tank Sushi = The Opulent Land of Infinite Options . . Whether you're in the mood for martinis, small plates, big plates, sashimi, maki, signature maki or more signature maki, Tank has no shortage in any of the above categories. Yep, prepare yourself for a slight case of sensory overload with the endless menu and subsequent dilemma of attempting not to select items too excessively. . . Once seated in one of Tank's stupendous-for-groups-of-four-or-more semi-secluded 'rooms' (reserve one if you can), my fearless foursome proceeded to divide and conquer the intimidating menu with a few rounds of cocktails, soups, salads, fresh fish cuts and a few of the monstrous maki. A cool, crisp bottle of Tu Tu Pinot Grigio was the perfect accompaniment to starters of piping hot miso soup and seaweed salad with a yummy and hefty dose of sesame toasty goodness. Mmmmm, so far, so good! Moving on to items with a bit more substance, however, was where things got a tad hairy... . . Sushi Sigh. The sushi showing just wasn't that astounding. Of the 5 signature maki, all went sadly unfinished and 1 was downright disliked (ahem, I'm looking at you mushy Lava Maki). My favor leaned toward the Gorilla roll with spicy tuna, crispy eel, pungent tobiko chili sauce and ikura as well as the Alaskan Night with fresh salmon, rock crab meat, avocado and a nice smattering of black tobiko. The rest? Eh, sort of forgettable to tell the truth and most certainly paled in comparison to my paramour, the ultimate in rock 'n rolling, Mr. White Dragon himself from Coast. Sorry ;-( With so many options it's possible Tank just can't wrap its everlong arms around doing everything well... the maki is a battlefield and the lava maki is just one of the lurking IED's. Take Cover!!. . Service was friendly and thankfully most accommodating in turning a deaf ear to our raunchy girl talk... just keep the martinis coming guy and nobody gets hurt! . . Now while I can't imagine running back to Tank, I wouldn't eschew them, either. On the 'totally tanked' scale, we're not sunk, just slightly bunk... three sushi stars personified.
