ReviewID: odgcpzJO1gMlp7wmO5sBHg
ReviewerID: fRIS3H-HltbktixjkFO2xQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Funniest part of my first time going to Friendship (and it won't be the last for sure!) was when one girl in our group said, "Everything I put in my mouth has been good! Even the water!!". . If that doesn't say enough for this place then of course read below.. Fair warning though.. When I find a place I really like or dislike, I tend to go on and on about it. Friendship Chinese falls under the category of places I really, really like.... . Chocolate fortune cookies where a friend had 2 waiting and then another 4 during dessert!! A really big 'sampler' of desserts for all of us to try during our tasting?!? Let me start by saying that we went here for a tasting because we are doing a party there.. Decided on this place for the party through Check Please and of course all of the reviews on Yelp.. Of course I'll update this review after the party too though I am sure it will just reaffirm how great everything is there! Anyways, Alan (owner) invited us to try his food with the tasting since none of us have been there before, but it was more like a gorging instead :). . We walked in on a Tuesday when it was really busy.. The hostess was really nice and we didn't wait long to be seated because we had the tasting.. Decor is really impressive.. Lots of Buddha heads and dark wood paneling. There is a gold wall in the rear.. The place is really nicely decorated and quite classy.. The outside of the place looks like the gate in Chinatown to me.. Also, apparently the washroom was really nice and had real orchids in it.. :). . Alan talked to us and explained his dishes.. You can tell that he puts in a lot of thought and care into his dishes.. I can't remember the names of everything we had as there was a lot and the whole experience felt like a blur, but I shall do my best.. We had Hong Kong style spring rolls for appetizers and I think the crab rangoon.. Both were really, really good! Also, we had a coconut shrimp dish as well.. The sauce it came with was really good.. Actually, all the sauces really worked well within the dishes! We were all stuffed from just that, but more was to come!. . The main courses were sesame beef, duck l'orange, honey walnut shrimp, and I think spicy scallop with shrimp.. OMG!! All these dishes were done really well.. I am not a fan too much of all sesame beef or the sweeter dishes like sweet and sour whatever you can find at whatever Chinese restaurant, but this one was really good!! The shrimp with the walnuts.. it was excellent! It was sweet, but done so well with the walnuts and shrimp that I wish we had more of that! The duck was also sooo good! Really nice and crispy for the skin and succulent on the inside.. We also finished all of the orange slices that came with it! Scallops and shrimp.. really good too! Nothing for these dishes disappointed.. It's not just your normal chinese food done better.. It's kicked up quite a few notches!!. . Dessert was a molten lava cake in the middle, a chocolate covered cake that was I think half vanilla/half chocolate, and a sorbet covered in white and dark chocolate.. All this was presented in a U-shaped plate and garnished with chocolate fortune cookies (which made one person in the group more giddy declaring Alan as her new BFF.. I can't really say much to the dessert as I don't go crazy for it like others, but it was really good! I especially liked the sorbet! . . Alan - You're just waaay too good to us especially for people that have never been to your place before! You said you like to bend over backwards for your customers, but you've really impressed the whole party! Best chinese food I've had! Some of the best service I've had!. . This man is quite serious about what he does (read his confession on his restaurants website) and it shows!
