ReviewID: oDRht382QQoFHBgoz5OtZA
ReviewerID: wNrhhCS4dqePLQuGefBFYg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
i amend that to 4.5 stars! you ask really? for a really good place like this? why? well, read the below. but, first, kudos to the good doctor for making great selections.. .      i'm not actually sure how much the meal cost in total, but cocktails, crab stuffed mushrooms, fried yams, fried cheese filled ravioli, mashed potatoes, creamed corn, sauteed asparagus, stringed beans, and about 3 reds, a dessert, and a dessert wine probably would be overly absurd. do you prefer sparkling water or still? . .       let's get into the ratings: cocktails + horseradish. big and good, though, as always, in a small amount. the dry ice is nice to look at. you're warned that the horse radish (white stuff, on the plate) is hot. it is hot. hotter than regular wasabi/horse radish combinations. just a dab hits you right at the back of the nose. the mushrooms? have it with some of the cocktail sauce. the other stuff? good. good. good. good. however, i was expecting much, much more in the mashed potatoes given raving reviews from other websites. failure to meet expectations? standards too high? it was good, but it felt ok. it.. just 'whelmed' me. ha. . .    anyhow, onto the meat. if you couldn't tell from my other reviews, i'm a carnivore. i order my meat on the rare side. i eat lots of it. and here, i get that.. .     the filet was fantastic. a 1.5-2" chunk cooked exactly how i like it. outside seasoning was just potent enough to last through a whole slice (which have to be very thin, since the volume you're cutting turns out to be fairly large). garnishes and other adornments like an overwhelming amount of melted butter or blood was mostly nonexistent - it's just your plate and all the meat. . .    the plate was as hot as noted (and warned). it didn't come sizzling nor did the heat last through the meal, but it did hold up well.. . so, -0.5 stars because of my personal bias. you hit up mastro's $7 valet. not bad. worthwhile since everyone else is out eating at the same time (so no street parking). you see the place. it's fancy, yet austere. a nice guy in a suit with an ear piece opens the door. nice. and you wander in. . . then...it hits you. is it culture shock? is it an age realization? something about the people in business suits and suggested "business casual" screams at my woefully under dressed cotton polo shirt and apparent youth - 'this is different from what you're used to.' old boy's club is right. sinatra in his middle-older years is right. . . i wasn't at ease small bar up front so i wandered around the other shops.. . the rest of the party arrived slowly while i was wandering around. an usher led us to the private room upstairs - which is a blessing because it cuts out a lot of the ambient noise. . . note: this place is crowded. between the numerous and omnipresent wait-staff and the mass of people munching away and talking, you get a multitalented pianist. he's on the piano. then he sings. then he's on the trumpet. you can make requests via slips of paper. his spot is great because there's 1 or 2 women just lounging on the piano with their drinks. this was on a tuesday night. it was crowded when i was there at 7. it was crowded when i left at 10. . . did i mention there are at least 3 drinking stations here?. . but, i digress. it was odd and i was uncomfortable until the ordering and digging in started. i went into my natural element and brushed all the random thoughts and worries aside to eat. with so much good food, you have to focus.
