ReviewID: OE__2orpQXDOmcmayckCNQ
ReviewerID: pAqJ2BZDAb9jWRUh6ISgxg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
Heads up rare meat lovers! DO NOT order this burger rare. It comes out incredible mushy and you won't get the wonderful char that is the best aspect of the burger. Luckily I got to snake a couple of bites from my brother who ordered his burger medium rare, and it was a world of difference. Now. that that's squared away -  my thoughts on the restaurant and the food.  . . First, the burger. It's definitely bold and creative, but supremely tasty it is not. The bun, too sweet and too mushy. I found the three accompaniments unnecessary except for the pickle, which was tasty.   These sides included some sad, tasteless, overfried onion rings. Despite this, the patty itself, when charred correctly at medium rare (if I were to return I would even order it medium) is fantastic. Nice beefy flavor and crunchy, sweet, delicious char... when ordered at the right temp. Sadly my rare burger was a mushy, cold mess. I wish the waiter had warned me of this when we told him how we wanted our burgers cooked! . . The 2 highlights of the night were the tater tots and the potato soup. Perfectly priced at $8 and $13. The potato soup was creamy and rich in flavor but light and silky in texture. Very sexy. Served with bits of bacon and a fried egg on top. The tots were piping hot and had the nicest fluffiest texture inside.  . . I also had the beef tenderloin w/chickpeas and parsley salad. In this dish the rare meat sings, finally! A great cut of beef. The chickpeas are perfectly cooked. But I found the parsley salad to be too sharply acidic. And with just those elements on the dish along with a small piece of charred onion, I found myself bored with the dish after I was halfway done. . . I like the atmosphere of the restaurant - the waiters and very friendly and it's easy to get your waiters/busboys attention for any needs. Nice outdoor seating with soft candlelight makes this place great for dates. Drinks were too sweet and not expertly blended, but priced well for the setting.
