ReviewID: oEgFiqMzPvV33oZSu_F-Gg
ReviewerID: Z0tl47BPph4BOJQTwa8Dkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: El Barco
Category: Mexican
El Barco how I love thee.  With it's head scratching 'fish on crack' sign and it's location smack dab on 'Assland' avenue, one might quickly dismiss this Mexican seafood stalwart.  To do so would be a crime punishable by a lifetime of eating at Hardees.  . . You walk into this place and it's lit up like grandma's bingo parlor.  Crazy marlins and sharks(?) hang from the ceiling and the decor is about as subtle as Elton John's sunglasses.  . . You sit down and get a menu bigger than the Bible and the Koran, combined.  What the heck do you order?  My friend, I beg of you.  Skip all of the nonsense and just order the special Dinner for 3 (or 4).  But Ben, I don't know what is on this?  Will I like it?  Will it be enough food?  Shut up.  Order.  It is savory and you will likey.  . . We usually go with 4 people (this place is the best with groups) and order dinner for 3...always bump it down one person.  If you have 5 or even 6 people, you can get away with dinner for 4.  If you only have 2 people?  Well you'll have lots of scraps to feed Snoopy.. . So the dinner comes out on a giant cast iron platter and it's like they took a big net with the catch of the day and dumped it on the grill.  Breaded fish, steak, calamari, grilled chicken, octopus, potatoes, peppers, onions...wow.  This isn't a meal, this is an experience.  I took my brother and some other out of towners here (this ain't Applebees chappy) and he proclaimed it gift from the seafood gods and second to none as far as as monumental meals go.. . Dinner for Four runs you about $68 bucks...not bad the copious amounts of food you get.  Margaritas are a steal at $6 apiece and they are as potent as they are tasty.  Their tequila selection borders on absurd and if you order enough food the owner may just buy you a round of free shots.. . Even the 'chips and salsa' are unique.  You get a big basket of fried round corn tortillas (full size) that come with two dips or salsas...I don't know what they were but they were spicy, tasty and good enough to make me play the air drums at one point.  Actually that may have been the tequila that made me do that, but I digress.  . . Come here with a group for a memorable experience that you won't soon forget.  A word to the wise, if you don't like seafood or your idea of good Mexican food rhymes with 'Farlos O'Jelly' please stay at home and make those Ortega Taco Kits and play with your cat.  . . Thank you.
