ReviewID: Of5WQ5uTspcNqcFhjOg2Fg
ReviewerID: 9HyAuq4Vfv7JRsQrGj2etA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
I don't even know why I bother writing reviews of these firmly entrenched LA establishments that already have hundreds of reviews.  Nonetheless, I feel like it's my duty as a native New Yorker to weigh in.  I guess this review is really for New Yorkers and people who use Russian dressing as a condiment.. . I should note from the get-go that Canter's is not a kosher deli -- it is a kosher-STYLE deli -- they serve distinctly non-kosher foods like cheeseburgers, for example, like the Carnegie Deli. . .   Speaking of, Canter's is not as good as the Carnegie Deli or even the 2nd Ave Deli.  It's more like a Stage Deli.  But it's totally legit in every possible way. The sandwiches are nowhere near as big as Carnegie's and their pastrami is not as good.  But the guys from Broadway Danny Rose would assuredly eat here when gigging out west. . . When I go to Canter's, I feel like I'm home.  I can't put my finger on it because the decor is so blah. Those old phone jacks at the tables, and that bizarre balcony thing...  it's anachronistic but it's lovable, like a jukebox or drive-in.. . I think it's the just the overwhelming aura of corned beef, matzah balls, fresh rugelach and Dr. Brown's.  There's a Junior's here in LA on Westwood.  As a Brooklynite, I had to go but it really doesn't measure up - in fact the Juniors in Brooklyn isn't so great to begin with.  And Izzy's was really disappointing.  So Canter's is really the one that stands out to me among all the kosher-style delis in LA. . . The last time I was  there, a prostitute (who had a striking resemblance to Jacke Harry) bolted through the door and grabbed a bag off the bakery counter and said, "I almost forgot my hamantashen!" So, take comfort in knowing it's the number 1 source for hooker hamantashen at 4AM. With an endorsement like that, how can you go wrong?. . One small criticism: one of the cashiers was extremely rude to a cousin of mine who was visiting from NY. She bought a Canters t-shirt as a souvenir for a friend (size small) and the cashier looked her up and down and had the nerve to say, "I think you'll need a larger size." So, that basically ruined her entire experience.  The girl just ate chicken soup, a Reuben and a knish and you're going to make her self-conscious about her weight?  Uncool dude. So, be careful of that one "bitchy" male cashier -- otherwise, the service is fine.
