ReviewID: OFba3zgDj94LVwQjm5eubg
ReviewerID: CKHRhKZobmNBfUvlzxNqgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
Papa Cristos is where grumpy hungry belly's go to get happy! I have been going here since I was kid living down the street. I live in Long Beach now but will use any excuse to make my way down to Pico and Normandie for some feta-ie goodness. . . There is a cafe, a small deli, an outside patio and a sit in eating area as well. They have done a great job at preserving their store over the years so don't let the neighborhood scare you away. Once you valet park your car for free in the back you'll never be able to tell where you actually are. . . Be wary of coming here hungry because they have a pretty big menu for such a small spot and most all of it is fantastic! Its frightfully easy to over order. Luckily most of it makes great leftovers. My favorites are the gyros (of course) and the rotisserie chickens, the spaghetti, this is actually the only place I would ever order spaghetti from, there's just something so fantastic about their sauce!! Especially the spaghetti with shrimp and feta, the roasted potatoes, the Greek salad, and the FASSOLAKIA!!! which is a green bean stew you can find on the deli side of the store, but if you ask for it in the restaurant they will serve it to you, with feta no less! . . The deli has great salami, and three kinds of feta; french, Bulgarian, and Greek. When i asked them what the difference was between the three, Chris let me sample them all and didn't even get mad when I said the french was better than the Greek! You can also pick up a bottle of their Greek salad dressing, something I think I need to do soon! They also have all kinds of Greek deserts, Ouzo, canned goods, jarred goods, racks of lamb, and good mortadella! . . The only thing I would be concerned about ordering here are the lamb chops. They are cooked on the same grill as the octopus and since lamb already has a tendency to get gamy the added fishy flavor can be a killer. But that said, the only time I ordered them my dining partner may have requested that they be well done in which case it was his fault and not papa Cristos. . . Thursday nights are BIG GREEK DINNER night! If you have concert tickets in LA or are going to movie this a great place to stop first. Assuming you don't overeat and go into a food coma........
