ReviewID: ofXwLTrh2ZzRrn8qE6oPIA
ReviewerID: b94kxJWA-9QqkduMHRbp9A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
Okay, I have only negative things to say about this place.  The first attempt to dine at this fine establishment was what ruined it for me forever.. After a day of shopping on Rodeo Drive with my husband, we stumbled across Crustaceans at around 6ish.  No reservations, no plans even of having dinner but we both had wanted to try this place because it's so well known so we decided to make an attempt.  . So my husband, dressed in jeans, and button down shirt, asks the host how long the wait would be, and the response he got was hilarious.  Reminiscent of the scene from Pretty Woman where the prostitute asks the saleswoman in the foofy boutique how much the dress costs? Well that's the attitude we got, " The wait would be much too long."  So my husband asks again, "well how long would that be?" Response:  "It's much too long." . Okay so, I'm just laughing cause this is too funny.  This is not really happening. We were totally dissed homey.  As we prepare to leave, I notice the little framed sign that suggests a dress code.  And yet, no this still does not explain the big reject, yes we were dressed casually but not like hobo chic or anything!  So we just leave cause were just disgusted.. About a few months later we decide to go back,  because we HAVE to go back at some point right, it's the principle. I'm in a black cocktail dress, heels, the whole deal, my husband in his black suit for crying out loud!  AND, we have reservations.  Well anyway I felt stupid cause as we're getting seated there's this total yokel couple dressed in like jeans, t-shirt with nascar stuff on it and flip flops sitting at the bar.  Whatever, right?  This restaurant didn't live up to the hype anyway. Oh yeah, the food... it's okay.  I honestly don't remember what we had, we just had the waitress suggest a bunch of stuff .  It was good food just not great.  But why would anyone put up with attitude when you're spending good money?
