ReviewID: Ogawj3vlHMBwfXVNvjsQAg
ReviewerID: etwWZaxtOpOYvHivWNIqOw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ann&#39;s Snack Bar
Category: Burgers
We have a guest from out of town and figured it was high time to try the legendary Ghetto Burger.  . . Our adventure started when we pulled up around 12:30.  We went onto the porch and sat down.  There were maybe seven people in front of us.  . . While we were waiting, at least a dozen people came up.  many of them bounded up the stairs and tried to go in, only to be rebuffed.  Eventually, we started shouting "DON'T DO IT!" at them.  One guy was told to wait his turn by Miss Ann and promptly left, cursing under his breath.  A suburbanite dad and his two teenaged sons sat for about ten minutes, then gave up.  As they left, one mumbled "this is retarded."  The attrition rate was probably about 75%, one brave survivor for every three washouts.. . Good riddance, suckers.. . About an hour and a half after we got there, we were in.  Miss Ann had a helper today, a nice older lady who mainly made sure everyone got their drinks and handed out the sheets of aluminum foil that serve as de-facto to-go boxes.  The inside is a study in contradictions - the place looks insanely unhealthy; it's old and worn and there are pots and pans everywhere, but then everything is kept fastidiously clean - hands are washed like clockwork, surfaces are consistently wiped down, and so forth.  . . Honestly, it's a lot like being at your grandma's house - as long as you mind your manners, stay polite, watch your language and stay off the phone, you'll be fine.  . . The burgers themselves are astonishing.  It's seriously a pound of meat, slathered in seasonings and lettuce and tomato and delicious delicious onion.  The fries are pretty good too, but let's face it, you came for the burgers.  Miss Ann is like clockwork - every single step of the Ghetto Burger process is down to a science.  Or an art, I guess.  The point is, holy crap, it's amazing to watch this little tiny woman just buzz around and fix these massive slabs of deliciousness.. . It's not insanity..... . THIS.. IS.. ATLANTA.
