ReviewID: ogb3ntFukMHVrt7uZxiqpw
ReviewerID: zMtZrY5bmHRo-2Iz9sJ-vA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Casa Bianca Pizza Pie
Category: Pizza
Dear Yelp,. . Ha, ha. Okay. You got me. Very funny. . . So yeah, I read all the reviews -- "Oooh, aaah! It's so wonderful, it's so magical, the pizza is like pooping rainbows, it's glorious!" you get the idea. Super "popular" place, sounded like a good idea, etc etc etc. So what did we have to lose?. . Firstly, everyone and their great-grandmother (no, seriously) seems to agree with you, because there were no less than 18 parties ahead of us on the wait list when we got there. "Must be good!" we presumed. Obviously we haven't learned our lesson from Pasadena's similarly lauded 21 Choices: people lining up for something does NOT necessarily denote said thing being worth the wait. But I digress; we waited... 40 minutes later, we had ourselves a table.. . The waitress was super nice. I mean, in her defense, she clearly had no idea just how disgusting the food at Bianca actually is because she was positively jubilant in recommending the Bianca Pizza to us ("and make sure not to miss the homemade sausage!"). We took her advice, threw in an order of Minestrone and Garlic Bread to start, and hoped for the best!. . First indication that there is a Yelp conspiracy to give me food poisoning: our "garlic bread" was literally -- I shit you not -- a sliced hot dog bun that had been covered in garlic powder/paste and thrown on a skillet to brown. It was also served in large enough quantities to make you wonder if somebody in back needed to get rid of some garlic bread, FAST. I can't say much about the soup -- if you've ever had soup from a red can, you know what to expect here. (P.S. throwing a couple pieces of shell pasta in a can of Campbell's does not justify a $5 price tag, assholes).. . But let's be honest -- nobody is sitting here crying like that Sanjaya fangirl over the soup, right? It's all about the PIZZA, you say. Weeeell, let's just cut to the chase then, shall we?. . Pale dog shit is a poor way to pass off "homemade sausage," is the first thing I'd like to bring to the table. Now that may sound a bit harsh, but I assure you, the aftertaste was far more "harsh" than anything I could possibly say in retrospect. The mushrooms looked like they were still soggy from the pickling jar they came out of; like somebody made the pizza and THEN double-checked the order, at which point they realized we were supposed to have mushrooms on there somewhere... You see where this is going. . . It was just one of those meals where you try, and you try and you try to stay positive, but after a few minutes you're left utterly broken by the food. You invariably take a look across the table to your dining companion, recognize the look of abject disappointment in their eyes, and the meal is over. Major league disappointment, this time.. . And then we got the bill. Are you KIDDING me with these prices? Well thanks a LOT, Yelp... best pizza in Eagle Rock, my ass. This place and Sika's have a lot in common.
