ReviewID: ohJJwetptcBgYwDRC-latg
ReviewerID: aDqr0wPVrpV7uokGpM5QeA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Canoe
Category: American (New)
Canoe was a great dining experience.  I took my girlfriend there for an early valentine's day dinner on the 13th, and had an 8pm reservation.  We were seated at right about 8pm in a 2 person table in the back corner of the restaurant.  . . Our service was impeccable, Dana was fantastic.  We started with a bottle of their featured white wine, the Eyrie Pinot Gris from Oregon.  Originally wanting to go with a red wine, we switched to white as soon as the additions to the menu were mentioned.  . . Their current menu, featuring plenty of variety (including beef, lamb, pork, deer, rabbit, quail, pheasant, and plenty of seafood) was attractive to say the least.  As mentioned, there were items not on the menu that were featured that night, one of which I ordered.. . We started with two starters, presented in half orders in 2 courses, which was very nice.  The first was the  Blue Hill Bay Mussels with a  ginger, sweet soya, and coconut-lemon grass broth.  They were fantastic and there were plenty on the plate.  The broth was both sweet and spicy, leaving a refreshing taste in the mouth.  Our server then brought over some sour-dough bread to dip in the broth, which was amazing.  . . The second starter was their House Smoked Salmon on a crispy Yukon potato cake, with Vermont goat's cheese.  Also very good, the contrast in texture from the potato cake to the smoked salmon provided a great experience.  . . The main courses were next.  I ordered the Striped Bass (from the Chesapeake Bay) with creamed potatoes, black trumpet mushrooms, green beans and truffle butter.  The bass was cooked perfectly, and had a nice salty crust on the outside to compliment the mild fish.  It was some of the best bass I have ever eaten.  The potatoes were indeed creamed, in a runny sort-of half-potato half-broth fashion.  Their texture combined with the fish and touch of truffle oil was excellent.  The green beans were done well, and the black trumpet mushrooms were interesting, though not my personal favorite.  The wine matched perfectly with the fish.. . For dessert I ordered the Gingerbread Guinness Cake which came with autumnal spiced pears, and a mulled cider sorbet.  I want to know how to make the mulled cider sorbet.  It was simply the best thing on the plate.  This, however, did not take away from the cake, which was moist and very well done.  In addition, the pairs were very tasty, with a bit of spice on them as well.. . Once all was said and done, the check came, and it accidentally had 2 bottles of wine on it instead of one.  Dana, of course, quickly took care of this and it did not detract at all from the experience.  . . The restaurant as a whole is beautiful, reminding you a little of a mountain lodge of sorts.  It was nighttime, but I could still see the flicks of light off of the Chattahoochee River.  . . All in all the experience was wonderful, and some of the best food I've had in Atlanta.  I'd rank it #1 as a restaurant that is high class, but not pretentious or stuck up.  I will be going back without question.
