ReviewID: oHMif5MqFOD8MOeNCltMPw
ReviewerID: qwONwL783a0hvPQl2TVWjg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
With great yelping, comes great responsibility.  Being a yelper means being educated on all things food.  Whether it be roach coach tacos or fresh sashimi.  So when I see 5 star blasts for this place it really "grinds my gears" because I so wanted to be a true believer.  I cook almost everyday, so when I see food like this where I know I can cook better at home.  Just makes me irritated for paying for it.  . . I've been here on two separate occasions.  One for Cinco De Mayo with yelp buddies Daniel L and Ching T aka "Chingaling", and the other with my friends who were visiting from Missouri.  I came back with hopes that Gloria would redeem herself.  I'm all about second chances, I think that's my problem.  . . Food Order to date:. . Loroco, Pork and cheese, Bean and cheese pupusas.. Cane Adobada. Fish Special w/ Garlic (I can make this better at home). Tamales (2nd visit). . The pupusas probably warrant about a 3 star.  They were okay, but I've had better a lot of other places.  One place that sticks out in my mind is a food stand at the farmers market.  They were accompanied by a pickled cabbage slaw which I found the worst part.  There was a metallic, almost antiseptic taste to the cabbage.  Like it was prepared in a metal bowl and then left to soak in a big vat and just scooped up and slapped into a bowl and sent out.  . (ps.  if that's how its done, I'm calling the health inspector). . The adobada was okay.  I didn't really have issues with this.  Although if anyone Vietnamese is reading this you'll know what I'm talking about.  It tastes almost like "Thit Kho", vietnamese version of adobo.  Someone at the table said it was a bit dry, I'd have to agree, but just a tad.  Try it, you might like it....I personally would never order it again.. . Pescado "fish" Special was nothing special.  As a matter of fact I was super annoyed because I could have cooked this a thousand times better at home.  I make a mean Ajo sauce that kills.  I should work here and show them how its done.  "Mi camerones de ajo es muy  ridiculoso!"  . . Tamales were ehh.  Don't laugh but you know those tamales they sell in the grocery store?  They are way more tasty then these.  Serious...I don't play.  Albertsons chicken and green chile tamales are the shit.  . . Maybe I just ordered the wrong things, maybe it just wasn't their nights, maybe they're known for other things.  I'm not a genie I don't know.  . . Would I come back?  Maybe if someone invited me...but not by choice...Burn me once shame on you, Burn me twice shame on me, Burn me three times and you're dead to me.  . . ps. *no burns meant for the people that like this place, to each their own and I'm glad you had good food, I just missed out I guess*
