ReviewID: OhNw4Z3aeT_opH-OqRg08Q
ReviewerID: 23J4vG9_xxxdnmi8CBX7Ng
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
Golly Molly, I missed the boat when I tried this place for late breakfast yesterday.  I am unfamiliar with the restaurants along this stretch of Culver, and in hindsight I shoulda chosen one of the crowded salad joints like Tender Greens.. Now I know why there were no crowds at Ugh, I mean Ugo.. . I got there at 11:30, they serve breakfast until noon, so I ordered scrambled eggs that came with Italian roast potatoes, sausage &amp; bacon, and toast (I got sourdough).  Eight bucks, not bad.. . They did not mess up the eggs, fortunately, or I would have had nothing to eat.  I didn't complain because I was hungry for my first meal of the day and I had an appointment in less than an hour in Westwood.  No time to deal with a replacement meal even if it had been offered, partly because the service was slow.. . See the photo of my meal.  Looks are deceiving.  It looked really good.  But the bacon was too hard to bite, the potatoes were salty, the sausage was chewy and also very salty, and the dang toast was hard as hell.  Haha, never order breakfast in an Italian restaurant, is what Ima thinkin'.  Get pasta you dummy, or a panini!  The lunch samples looked good as I walked in, as did the bakery offerings......but then again, so did my breakfast when it was served to me.. . Two other tables were occupied on the patio where I sat.  I heard the server tell a patron that there are no refills on iced tea, he would need to order another one.  Gimme a break.  It's tea, not fine champagne.. . So....for me, the only redeeming quality of this restaurant was the attractive decor and the location of the patio....across the intersection form the historic Culver Hotel.  What a view, I love that building.. . Maybe my food was lousy because it was at the tail end of breakfast-serving time.  Stuff sometimes gets salty &amp; hard when it's reheated too much.  I don't know but next time I'm going elsewhere for a salad.  There are a ton of places to eat in that cool area.
