ReviewID: oIdp_d1Dt85baBsQo8kxIQ
ReviewerID: TVBI1LYXTlWeHCtqBSt6QA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
It's great if you can get here early enough to snag a seat, and just really sucks if you don't. They definitely enforce their capacity limit here so prepare to wait in line if its a busy night. Also to wander round for quite a while or stalk people in order to find a seat. For me, I get here usually around 6 after work so it's no big problem for me. Perfect for a drink after work and some eating.. . This location is very long with a bar that runs the whole width of the restaurant almost. Lotsa beers on tap, with interesting handles for each beer they have. The bartenders are pretty helpful and can recommend drinks if you're uncertain. Or if you're not drinking, there's always bubble up or root beer. Dark wood covers most of this place in the form of chairs and tables and on the walls. They keep the lighting a bit low inside, bit brighter outside.. . There's a huge patio area where most people like to sit, but plenty of indoor seating also. One back room that also holds a few tables too. I've sat in different areas and outside is always the best. Near the heaters is if it starts to get cold at night. It's a first come first serve kinda place, which kinda sucks cause then you get people hanging round you a lot and you have to defend your area. Sometimes though, it just creates  very cramped space where as many people as possible eventually try to squash in. Good for guys, maybe not so for girls.  . . So they say the best burger in LA can be found right here...well it's pretty good, but I'm not sure if its the best. Really depends on what you like. Different people, different opinions. It's an amazingly juicy burger with arugula, carmelized onions, bleu cheese, all between toasted french bread. I've had it several times now, and sometimes I like it and sometimes I don't. First of all, its not always made well. Sometimes the bun is too toasted and everything falls out, and other times they don't put enough onions and so the burger gets a little blandish. Overall, its tasty, but not to my preference. I generally prefer more to my burgers. I still get it every now and then, but definitely not all the time.. . The fries here are always perfect. They serve both kinds with a garlic aoili sauce thats goes well. The regular fries are super thing and crispy, the sweet potato fries are crispy with that lovely textured crust. At 7 dollars a basket though....they better be perfect. They did used to come in the most adorable mini shopping carts...which were discontinued prolly because they all went missing. . . Other things I have tried that were good are the bone marrow, pork belly, and spanish mushrooms. Not very filling stuff...but good nonetheless.. . Worst things about FO is that you need to order everything from the bar, there is no happy hour, and it gets pricy. It gets pretty busy so sometimes it does take forever to order anything, and if you have a small group it gets harder to keep your seats. Drinks and food here are pretty darn pricy, and they have no happy hour at all which pretty much sucks. People still come anyways, and I guess they really don't need to get more crowded.. . Plan accordingly and get here earlier to grab seats and all will be well. And if you haven't tried the burger, you must and then decide for yourself how it is. Might as well if you come here.
