ReviewID: OiwGLF2GU61f9GpyYV_oXw
ReviewerID: et6sgeA6M5T8UT5PCJKFKg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Noodle
Category: Asian Fusion
I used to love Noodle...until they changed their menu. I don't agree that their food is tasteless or lacking in quality at all. In fact, I judge most chinese restaurants by the Hot and Sour soup because its one of my favorites and Noodle USED to win hands down in that department although they call it Hot and Spicy soup. It's not exactly the same as the traditional version but this isn't a traditional asian restuarant and I happened to prefer it over the original so much more. I don't know what you guys did to the recipe over there but I am not feeling it at all. It's like you tossed in corn starch to thicken it up and it was the perfect consistency before. And how are you going to serve it with a piece of "naan" which isn't even naan, just a piece of pita bread? What happened to the fried wontons? Surely pita is not cheaper than fried wontons? Am I supposed to WANT to dip the pita in the now corn starchy soup? While you might be an asian fusion restaurant this particular food pairing is not working and doesn't even make sense. . . The basil noodle bowl is still my favorite. No changes in the quality however the bowl appears to have shrank. My boyfriend always orders the crunch grouper which is delicious but now I see it no longer comes with cucumbers on the side? Not sure where those went. I rather enjoyed them with the tomatoes in the sweet sauce. . . Other great dishes are the lo-mein noodle bowl, crunchy beef and sichuan tofu salad although sometimes these can be covered in too much sauce, particularly the salad. Ask for the dressing on the side. . . I agree that Noodle is not an authentic asian restaurant but they're not trying to be. It's asian FUSION so if you're expecting something traditional, go somewhere else. If Noodle could get back on their game a little, this is great place with great, fresh food at an affordable price. I've yet to have a better noodle bowl in Atlanta that I've liked more than the ones served here. . . Please Noodle, get back on track! And fix my soup! Preferably with fried wontons because its the best!!
