ReviewID: oLYO8R5G9xkBX_7LtBUnnA
ReviewerID: 56ao_CDMVcVTTBOqVuF4Ng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Ahh,  Culver City.  How I miss my old neighborhood.  Since I left two years ago much has been added.  So many new reasons (&amp; restaurants &amp; wine bars!) for yelpers to visit.  . . Tender Greens was one of the first new additions in the revival of downtown CC.  I've eaten there multiple times and have been pleased with the food each of my visits. It's a bit more casual (compare to Ford's Filling Station or Fraiche), which suits me just fine. Tonight I went with my husband after yoga class, slightly sticky in my gym garb.  No one seemed to notice.. . We had the Chipotle Barbecue Chicken Salad and the Flat Iron Steak from the "Hot Stuff" menu. My salad was yummy; I just love crunchy tortilla strips to break up the monotony of a big plate of lettuce.  It was also HUGE; the average person/eater would easily have enough left over for lunch the next day.  The steak, which I have had before here, is darn darn darn tasty.  It's tender and pink inside and nicely done on the outside, with great flavor and awesome consistency.  This is exactly why I don't bother cooking steak at home... it just won't taste like this! . . We abstained from the gold mashed potatoes (we're watching our girlish figures, like everyone else in LA), but let me tell you that just looking at these spuds through the glass-rimmed counter will make your jaw drop and your mouth drool.  They look thick, creamy and buttery, just as mashed potatoes should be.  For goodness sake someone go and eat them for me!!!. . I have to take one star away for my husband's sake;  Tender Greens CAN be a bit stingy with their meat portions.  His Flat Iron Steak meal usually comes with, oh, say four strips of steak about 2 inches long. When he saw this he quickly asked to order extra, knowing this wouldn't appease him.  For a lighter eater the 4 pieces would probably be fine.  . . Overall the fare here is healthy, delicious, and not too overpriced.  It's worth a look-see if you're testing out the new digs of Culver City.
