ReviewID: ON1b7qLmZU1j9TeuqWWIRQ
ReviewerID: ZOPLjrmR1qjc0fk6hFPM5w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I've come back here a few times since my last update as it's become one of my fave 'go-to' places in the area. I've never (ever) been disappointed with the food quality at this place! In fact, I would whole heartedly give this place a 5 if the servers here just cleaned up their act. Shame on them for running a gorgeous space with management that clearly settles for mediocrity of service staff. . . I am in love with the brunch here. Over the weekend, we started off with Bellinis (which they make excellently here) and ordered the following: . . Eggs Arrabiata - (2) Poached Eggs over thick Italian bread, smothered with a spicy arrabiata sauce and Parmesan cheese. . . Mini Sandwich Sampler - Excellent! Came with the following Tea Sandwiches: . * Smoked Salmon, Cream Cheese and Cucumber on Pumpernickel . * Turkey, Avocado and Sprouts on Baguette . * Black Forest Ham and Swiss on Baguette . The sides were a beautiful fruit salad and red potato salad that was tossed with a grainy Dijon vinaigrette . . I also ordered the Potato Latkes which were pretty insane and was served with creme fraiche and applesauce. Carbohydrate overload at its finest. . . My BF ordered a side of the Arugula Salad which came tossed with slivered red onion, freshly grated Parmesan cheese and a light olive oil vinaigrette. A perfect and refreshing side to pair with the above heavy foods. . . On another occasion, I ordered the Portobello Fries and they really are worth the hype! The breading they use is nicely seasoned with oregano and basil. We also had the Bianco pizza which comes with three different cheeses, garlic and arugula on a delicious thin, crispy yet appropriately chewy crust. . . Picked up some cupcakes for my dad since it was Fathers day and brought them to the parental units. The Pistachio flavored was to die for! The frosting was super light and airy, not dense and pasty. The cake itself was rich, moist and super fresh, probably the best I've had in a very long time compared to many specialized cupcakeries...
