ReviewID: oNjY6oaTVZnFef3a80DzrA
ReviewerID: hGpyShURS3PXOAvR5lFL2w
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Why are people so crazy about Boiling Crab? Are we Southern Hicks or are we Southern Californians? To me, this is just fatty, greasy, non-nutritional Southwestern style seafood that is to be consumed in a way that's very barbaric. Much of their food is fried, too. Your hands get so dirty and gross, napkins become your best friend. The food is gross. Everything is garnished with hot sauce, you might as well just drink a bottle of hot sauce. Can you imagine all of that sauce and grease just laying in your stomach with chewed up bits of seafood? Eww. There's just too much finger licking and slurping of hot sauce it made me wanna barf. Moreover, there's little nutrition and the quality of the seafood is very average.  Be ready to do a lot of dipping too, they give you so much dipping sauces, like manaisse and other sauces with ridiculous amounts of fat. People eat the bags of shrimp like popcorn, while I am struggling to peel a single shrimp apart while hot sauce accumulates on my fingers like hand lotion. Eww.. . Moreover, the sweet potatoe fries are horrible!! Why do people say the sweet potatoe fries are so good? They taste like they have been in the freezer for 6 months (actually, they probably are) and when they bring them to you, they look like McDonalds fries that have been laying in the bin for 2 hours. Gross.. . The one thing I did want to eat, which was the crawfish (their signature item), they were completely out of on a Sunday at Noon! Totally inexcusable and incompetent. There's no excuse for being out of your signature item on a weekend.. . The service overall was fine and we did not wait the 1 hour 15 minute wait time they initially quoted us. Given how busy the place always is, the staff was generally responsive.. . Look, I'm a midwestern raised Korean boy, and generally we don't eat this kind of food. In fact, we associate this kind of food with uneducated hillbillies in the South. So why do so many Asians eat it? Don't get me wrong, I love seafood, but I'd rather eat food in a way that's more civil, hygenic, and healthful.. . If you like eating greasy, fatty, fried Southwestern style seafood that's just soaking with spicy hot sauce, having little nutritiional value, then this is the place for you!
