ReviewID: onzUNjJ794Gaj9E7qiYqKA
ReviewerID: lsKsK1xZXA8LBRY1z4apbw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Rathbun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
Being new to Atlanta, I haven't been to a ton of restaurants yet...but I went to Rathbun's twice last week and I would happily go two more times this week (anyone want to take me out??).  . . Dinner #1. On Tuesday, a friend from SF was in town so we headed over pretty early (around 6ish) as we were coming straight from the office.  We didn't have a reservation and I figured that if we couldn't get sat, we could always eat at the bar.  Being that the restaurant was pretty empty when we arrived, we were able to get a table in the main dining room.  We immediately ordered a bottle of wine (priorities people!) but then spent so much time talking and catching up that it was a good 15 minutes before we even opened our menus.  Our server was awesome - totally understanding that we wanted to have a mellow dinner to catch up and didn't make any effort to get us out of there.  Side note - I used to work in the industry and know how much it can suck to have people park it at your table preventing you from getting more than one seating in a night...But in our defense, most tables didn't even turn over so it apparently was a pretty slow night.  Once we finally ordered, we started out with the roasted bone marrow (pure goodness) and the ahi crudo.  Both kicked ass.. . 10 years later when we finally get around to ordering dinner, I had the short ribs special and my friend had the sea scallop benedict.  The portions were perfect and my meat was awesomely tender.  Sweet dreams of short ribs danced through my head.... . At this point we realize that we are out of wine and start ordering by the glass (gotta love dining on the company's dime!).  So we drink and we talk and we drink and we talk and then we order dessert.  We go for the 4 dessert combo and get the homemade donuts, the peanut butter pie, the Krog candy bar, and something off the specials menu which I am totally blanking on.  The donuts were a smidgen dry for me...or maybe just a little more dense than what I was expecting but everything else rocked.. . Not being quite ready to head home, we decide to have one more drink at the bar (at this point it's a good four hours since we walked in the door).  We each have a glass of champagne.  The back of the house starts to trickle into the bar area which was no big deal for us.  But then all of a sudden the bartender walks over to us and tells us that we are going to have to finish up since the back of the house is coming into the bar.  It was a little odd since he had just poured us our drinks 5 minutes before.  There were also still a couple of tables seated in the dining room.  One of the guys from the BOH heard what the bartender said and told him that the only 2 women in the place should be allowed to stay...and rightly so!  So we were allowed to stay and finish the champagne that we had paid for.. . Dinner #2 (I promise to make this one shorter). I had another friend come into town on Friday night so I had made reservations for 9.00pm.  We arrive right and 9.00 and get seated right away.  The dining room and the bar were packed so it was a different vibe than on Tuesday night.  I should mention that one of the reasons that I really like this place (aside from the food) is the decor.  I don't want to compare everything to SF but it's hard not to...and Rathbun's reminds me of some of my favorite restaurants back home.  Yea for Rathbun's!. . We start off with the escargot and the calamari.  I loved the sauce that was served with the calamari (sweet and with some heat) and it was a plus in my book that we didn't have to remove the escargot from the shells (I'm not a fan of working for my food).  My date orders a great bottle of red wine (Worthy, "Sophia's Cuvee") which goes down ever-so-smoothly.  I'll stop at this point and say again how great the service was.  Our server was on top of it and never missed a step.  Back to dinner...for our entrees, I had the veal chop and my date had the veal porterhouse off the specials menu.  I have to say that both were great but I liked mine better.  My veal was perfectly cooked (medium-rate) and the sweet corn and Gouda fondue was to die for.  . . For dessert we also did the favorite four and chose the donuts, sticky toffee cake, chocolate cube, and grapefruit sorbet.  The donuts were the same as Tuesday so I'm thinking that they are just a little too dense/bready for my liking.  . . All in all, another awesome meal at Rathbun's.. . My one request is that they put oysters on their menu.  I'm finding out that not a lot of Atlanta restaurants have fresh oysters.  Guess it's a California thing.
