ReviewID: oO43QGP4TMkKNdWa10b4pA
ReviewerID: U2PfWdwWq9f8Y8DmHc4kfg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Craft Atlanta
Category: American (New)
Fiance's birthday is this week, so I took him to Craft.  The atmosphere as a whole is lovely--lots of wood, warm lighting, and a vibe that is inviting in an accessible yet luxurious way. My only minor complaint is that the tables are a little close together, but we ended up sitting next to some great folks, so it was a minor offense.. . We arrived about 20 minutes early and decided to have a cocktail at the bar. A "Tom's Collins" (oh, that clever Colicchio), consisting of Hendricks gin, bitter lemon soda, and cucumber, was refreshing and tasty. Jason's "Sunshine Squeeze," which had vodka, citrus, and ginger, was sweet and tart and well-balanced. The bartendress was very friendly and knew her stuff.. . Our server greeted us fairly quickly and gave us the menu rundown. Bread arrived, and it was okay, but the butter was rich, flavorful, AND served at the proper temperature. I asked for a bottle of Sancerre, but that prompted the server to make a different recommendation in the same flavor and price range; we trusted him and were quite happy with the result, an Italian white that was dry and acidic while still maintaining a fruity quality. I wish I could remember what it was. I also wish that hadn't been the height of the server's usefulness.. . When he returned to take our appetizer orders, we opted for sweetbreads and Wagyu tongue torchon. I also asked for one each of the three oysters available that night. The oysters came out first, with a lovely mignonette, a few lemon slices, and an adorably teensy tiny bottle of Tabasco. The hot appetizers came next, and I recognized the Wagyu, but on the other plate were a few fried dumpling-esque bites and a gelatinous mass. Thinking that I had maybe misunderstood the preparation of the sweetbreads, I took a bite of the jelly. DEFINITELY not sweetbreads--somehow, the waiter heard me order "head cheese." Even though the mistake gave us a chuckle and enabled us to bond with our neighboring table, it really was an awful error. I mean, I am STILL talking about how nasty that one bite was. In terms of the other appetizers, the Wagyu was good but not terribly memorable. The sweetbreads, however, were quite possibly the best I've ever had. The outside was perfectly caramelized, and the inside was firm yet tender. And the flavor? Out of this world delicious.. . For entrees, Jason ordered the roasted swordfish. He expressed some concern about its preparation to the server, since he wanted to make sure the fish would keep its firm texture without drying out. The server said that they were actually poaching it in olive oil, which sounded like the perfect way to get the desired result. Unfortunately, the server must have misled us a bit, because the dish was quite dry and really didn't seem like it had been poached. It still tasted fine, but I could tell that Jason was a bit disappointed. I opted for the braised beef short ribs with root vegetables, which were absolutely delicious. The meat was tender and flavorful, and it reminded us of the best pot roast we've ever had. We also ordered side dishes of cauliflower gratin and roasted Jerusalem artichokes, both of which were superb.. . For dessert, we ordered glazed chocolate cake donuts, roasted bananas, and brown sugar ice cream. The individual items were amazing, but the combination just knocked everything out of the park. It was insanely good, and it managed to be rich and decadent without feeling oppressively so. Jason had a glass of 20-year tawny port, and I had coffee with a shot (read: magnum) of Bailey's. Sadly, our server had pretty much abandoned us by then, so when I needed a refill on the coffee he was nowhere to be found. Jason actually had to get up and find a servers assistant to fill my cup.. . The server did eventually return to present the check, which I perused only to find that the head cheese was still on the bill. I flagged our server down to alert him to the error, and he fixed it when asked, but I thought it was a pretty careless mistake. It was as if that disgusting stuff was destined to stay in my memory forever, as it just kept inserting itself into our experience. After all was said and done, the total dinner tab, with tip, was $290. So, with our previous rounds at the bar, the whole evening rounded out for just under $350.. . I knew Craft was going to be expensive. I have paid similar amounts for other dinners, and I truly believe that an amazing meal is worth that kind of money, as it is an experience for all of the senses. But did Craft live up to its billing? There were some incredibly high points, but there were also some significant flaws, specifically with the service. Craft touts itself as specializing in simple food, but forming an overall opinion has been anything but simple. I think, in the end, that I liked Craft--but I didn't love it. Perhaps with a different waiter, I could have loved it. Unfortunately, without a hefty expense account, I don't plan on finding out anytime soon.
