ReviewID: OODZb8q3Wvt2kkW_hN7AlQ
ReviewerID: BGU8Kse4PTTFmFt03vZlZg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Let me start by saying this place offers 5 star food hands down! Why the 4  stars then you ask? With that 5 star food comes 3 star service. Hence the simple laws of averaging. . . Came here over the weekend with the family after attending the Dwell on Design event thanks to a friends recommendation. When we first walked in, the hostess was a bit preoccupied in her mind. Asked us ho many in our group, we said 6, she said 8, we said 6 and then she said, 'okay, please wait to the side". After about 5 minutes the a gentlemen came to seat us and asked..."Table for 8? we said no so we had to wait for them to now find us a table for 6. . . When we got there we were given the "Little Menu" which is a smaller offering of what they offer. And when they say little menu, they weren't kidding, it really was a little menu! . . After we were seated we waited about 15 minutes for someone to come around and ask us what we wanted to drink. After we placed our drink orders, we waited around another 10 minutes to get them. This was starting to get a bit embarrassing since it was our idea to invite the family here. . . They came and took our orders and since we were a large group we ordered 3 pizzas to try and even though they weren't on the little menu, asked if the portebello fries that everyone raves about were available. Hey said yes, so we ordered those as an appetizer. . . After about 10 minutes the 3 pizzas we ordered came to our table. As they were being brought to our table I saw our waiter look over to us and read his lips as he said "Oh F**k!" Why did he say that you may ask? 'Cause he forgot to bring us our appetizer!. . He brought the Portebello fries which were very good. They were thick slices of Portebllo breaded and fried with some interesting spices. Our 3 pizza's were served and they were amazing! We had a Pepperoni, Margarita, and a Napoli. The sauce was amazing, the cheese perfect, and the crust incredible. Hands down these were some of best pizzas I've had in a long time. The ingredients are super fresh, the pizza sauce had the perfect mix of sweet and tangy. Of the 3 pizzas I have to say, the Pepperoni was the best. The pepperoni was top quality, thick cut and not greasy at all. Other people in our group were big fans of the Napoli pizza. . . We will be going back soon sharing a Pepperoni pizza and a Cesar salad and  hitting that desert section and knowing in advance, the food is to die for, but you can die waiting for service and the may never notice!
