ReviewID: ooL_PhH18yCj6L9EAdWqUw
ReviewerID: lwMEMOf2xCESxSPAtjebeg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
This place should be called MILKSHAKE...because yours is what's going to be getting bigger by eatin' here.. . As mentioned by other posters, this bright corner restaurant is a welcome addition to the area.  The name and curbside appearance is a bit deceiving.  One might think MILK is all about ice cream and frozen desserts.  It's not.  In fact, if you're heading here with one of those "dairy-is-the-devil" people (you know who you are), don't panic.  There's enough dairy free food here that you can make it all work.  Actually, it might be sort of fun to take a lactose-fobic friend here, just to see the look on their face when they first glimpse the name of the restaurant and the panic sets in.. . I think the owners have at least shown a little restraint in not naming the restaurant "Milk &amp; Meat"...I think that might have caused the kosher neighbors here on Beverly to pop a gasket.  (just for the record, they DO mix the milk and dairy...and it was delicious). . There are a handful of sandwiches and salads on the menu.  I've had the media noche.  I'm seldom impressed with this sandwich outside of a Cuban restaurant, but this one was pretty good.  The bread was crisp on the outside, but still soft and buttery just below.  They had chunks of moist pork, ham, cheese and pickle all layered nicely between the warm bread.  I hate when this sandwich tastes dry and nasty.  This one was good.  It's served with the pickled veggies...which is an amusing side dish, but I would have preferred a choice of some fresh kettle chips or something I'd actually eat. (you can buy bags of chips though). . The salads all looked really terrific.  They're generous servings in huge white bowls.  I've had the chopped cobb, which is enough for two people, and the California Chicken salad may be even better.  Can't think of too many other lunch spots in the area offering a better looking salad for the price.. . Speaking of the price, I found the salads and sandwiches to be reasonably marked.  The sandwiches are about $9 bucks, but they're quality offerings and worth the extra $1.50 it costs to buy your food here, as opposed to Quiznos.  Salads are basically priced the same as the sandwiches.  You're getting a far better product for the dollars.. . As for the sweet stuff, I'm very impressed.  I think MILK is almost immediately the best dessert restaurant/bakery in the area.  What I like best about it is the choices they've made in the sweets they offer.  There's something for everyone.  So often in this part of town, you'll find dessert places like Sweet Lady Jane, which is great for cakes, but not much else...or like Manis, which is great for a "healthier" cookie or cake, but has nothing for folks who don't want fruit-sweetened baked goods.  MILK offers some of the fancy cakes and tarts, but they also have delicious chocolate chip cookies for 75 cents each homemade ice cream bars, to name a few options.  I also like that they have some fun with one of my favorites, the red velvet cake.  MILK offers a BLUE velvet cake...looks pretty damn good.. . As for the decor, I really appreciate the bright and airy space they've created.  Even though it's a small space, they made the most of it.  Some might say the all-white walls and glassed-in kitchen make the place feel like a health clinic...but I like it.  There are a few outside tables, and then you've got about ten smallish tables inside.  It's almost the polar opposite of the dark and loungy Insomnia Cafe next door.. . This is an easy one for The Decider.  MILK is the kind of unique restaurant this neighborhood needed for a long time.  I hope they keep MILK shakin' a long time.  I'll be back to work on mine.
