ReviewID: Opa4wtvVKH_1N01cPG640A
ReviewerID: OzdqM7BbvL27AnrTZ27g-w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Devon Seafood Grill
Category: Seafood
$1 shucked oysters during happy hours!!!!!!!!!. $1!!!!!!!!!. . Who would have thought it even existed in the Midwest?!?!?!?. . When I saw this insane offer I was instantly sold.. I grabbed my wallet and ran to Devon. Well - took the bus and the train and ran the last block or so between the El station and the entrance.. . Even if I was a little surprised by the type of crowd that greeted me once inside (think along the lines of older ladies and gentlemen in their best outfits and definitely not the young office crowd that I associate with the words HAPPY HOUR - but then again maybe it is just me and I might watch too much TV) I felt immediately comfortable and chose a high table with a view on Chicago to take the pulse of the city.. Rubbing my hands in anticipation.. OYSTERS!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!. . After 3 lazy hours of gulping and slurping here is the rundown:. . + $1 oysters!! That's a pretty sweet deal.. Came with 4 different condiments to accommodate all tastes. Hmmmm...except mine. I am a sucker for shallot vinaigrette.... sorry.. + each day has its drink special; Tuesdays and Wednesdays are $6.50 martinis. Thursdays though offer $8 wine flights....... Just saying.. + a selection of ten appetizers for $6.50. We chose grilled oysters, mussels in a delicious white wine sauce (classic but still very tasty) and chipotle grilled shrimp. Two non-seafood options, one of them being goat cheese bruschetta.. + complimentary cheese biscuit. Yum!. + location!!!!. . - neither my friend or I were impressed by the oysters. They were big and quite bland.........seriously lacking this iodine kick that I love so much.. Disappointing.. - the waiter didn't know his drills. When I asked him if the special was limited to the martinis, he looked at me with a lot of question marks in his eyes.....I had to show him on the menu where it was indicated.. Word!!. Lame.. - downstairs bathroom. I will never get over it. Dangerous combo!!!!!! Good thing I didn't have heels for once.. - too many TVs. It's not a sports bar. Come on!!!!!!. . Conclusion:. Cannot quite push it to four.. . But dinner sounds fantastic! . If anybody feels in a generous mood....let me know!
