ReviewID: OpcBBvuWyguUI35CMh4EVA
ReviewerID: o4D3A2vBEznqJpjqiq911g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
Craft is a high end restaurant. The attention to detail, service, and the dishes makes for the ultimate dining experience. Expect to pay $$$ for your meal and you will find that it was worth every penny. It was a remarkable evening for me and I give two thumbs up for Craft!!! . What I loved about Craft is that if you ask; you may get something extraordinary outside of the menu. Last night was no exception; I came with a group of Foodies. We informed the Hostess, the Bartender, and our Server that we were a dining group. They were more than accommodating to us and provided us with excellent customer service. (Yes, these men and women know their jobs.) While waiting for our table, we asked our bartender if we could get rib eye steaks versus the New York strip on the menu. He was kind enough to ask the kitchen...twice. They have it. Our Server also reconfirmed with the Kitchen when we were seated. We got two 26 - 30 oz rib eye steaks!  Next, we ordered many items on the menu to accompany our main course and rearranged when it will be served, and how we will be billed. I tell you...Craft still accommodated. . The pumpernickel fennel bread was lovely to start. In my opinion, this little bread gave you a hint as to what you will expect out of the creativity at Craft. The hint of liquorice my tantalized by palate. The steaks were handsomely presented family style, perfectly seasoned and perfectly medium. I loved the assorted mushroom accompaniment to contrast the texture of the steak and the sweet, but savory beet risotto. Very unique and delicious. The lobster fettuccini was seasoned to my liking and the lobster pieces were quite tender in fact, just as tender as the pasta. . While we were waiting for our desserts, a "teaser" was offered from the kitchen...a butterscotch pane cotta with a green apple sorbet. OMG. Loved it!!! To compare and contrast, Craft does a better butterscotch dessert than Pizzeria Mozza who has something similar on their menu.  I ordered and I am in love with my choice...a peanut butter cup with caramel sauce, caramel gelato, and caramel gelee. I was tickled by the three variations of caramel, which softened the decadent peanut butter and ganache. . Overall, Craft exceeded my expectations in service, quality, and attention to detail, creativity, and ambience. Everything was top of the line i.e., the ingredients, freshness, and creativity in preparation of our meal. While you wait in between courses, you get a little amuse from the kitchen. I love that touch. I especially love the little token of appreciation before you leave...a complimentary packaged dessert perfectly suitable for breakfast the next morning after you wake up dreaming for more Craft.
