ReviewID: OQBRa-Bh07DXFlMzlHCdsg
ReviewerID: c3QPcuBSM7OkPsAp6y6Dow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
This place blows me away!. . Having gone to Brazil twice, I occasionally crave brazilian bbq and pao de queijo. That said, this place rocks!. . I went during DineLA restaurant week with my boyfriend for an anniversary dinner. Having made a reservation and arriving 20 minutes late, we only had to wait 10 minutes to get seated around 7 pm. It was bustling in the foyer as soon as we got seated!. . Nevertheless, the servers are so kind. They came and checked on my table multiple times for drinks, new plates, and fresh side dishes. The cinnamon/sugar bananas, crispy polenta, and mashed potatoes were all pretty good. I love plantains, so I was a little sad not to see that on their menu (especially since lots of plantain dishes exist in Brazil), but still good. Also, you can't go to Fogo without ordering Guarana. It's the national soda of Brazil. Trust me, once you try it, you'll fall in love.. . The endless pao de queijo! AHH!!! Their cheese bread is scrumptious! I had to restrain myself from eating too many so that I could save room for the meat! The bread is crispy on the outside, warm and chewy on the inside. They brought them fresh from the oven to our table every 15 minutes or so. Really good.. . The meat was delicious. The filet mignon, beef ancho (rib eye), alcatra (top sirloin) fraldinha (bottom sirloin), and bacon-wrapped frango (chicken breast) were delicious! The meat just melts in your mouth and the way it's prepared (i asked for medium-rare) was spot on. It's cool how the gauchos are all in charge of grilling their own skewers of meat. It really gives them control (and improves quality of service) when they know exactly what part of the meat is a specific heat (rare vs. well-done) and they can give you details on how exactly it's grilled.. . I'd have to pass on the linguica pork sausage (a bit dry), cordeiro rack of lamb (dry and smelled like lamb), and picanha (top sirloin). They weren't as good as the others, but since I'm not the biggest meat person, you can judge for yourself.. . We finished off with dessert with coffee. I had the tres leches cake and my boyfriend had the flan. They were okay. Both were really rich and sweet, so the coffee was a must.. . Just a warning: brazilian coffee is really strong (which goes perfect with the super sweet desserts).  Just letting you know.... . Overall, a great experience. I would totally come again.
