ReviewID: oShhV9gHC8zg89QAOM5XHA
ReviewerID: EJgM5rUBQ-mZA85VYGqMzg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Fraiche is now one of my TOP restaurants in LA!  Noreena took me here for a late birthday dinner on Saturday evening and another friend visiting from SD joined.  I have heard so many rave reviews about this place that I was ecstatic to finally be able to dine here, especially since reservations are so hard to come by.  I was not disappointed in the slightest!  . . I did find it odd that the name is French, but the food is Italian...not that I mind because I think Italian food is far superior to French anyway!  We started with the Speck, Burrata and Fig appetizer, which was so fresh and the combination of all the flavors was delicious.  My only small complaint here is that they should have added more figs considering the amount of burrata and speck there was.  In addition, we started with the Papardelle pasta with mushrooms.  You can get any of the pasta dishes in an appetizer size, which allows you to enjoy more on the menu.  And the pasta was cooked to PERFECTION!  For the girl who said that the pasta was not cooked enough...it's called Al Dente!  This is how Italians typically eat their pasta so I suggest you go get cultured before you start throwing your pasta against the wall.  In fact, just go eat at Olive Garden and enjoy!. . OK.  I digress.  For our main courses, I ordered the sole, which sat on top of a bed of green beans and tomatoes with a bit of balsamic surrounding it.  Noreena had the Branzino En Papillote with corn, purple potatoes, leeks and clams.  It takes 30 minutes to cook so enjoy your appetizers.  We didn't have to wait because our waiter timed the order just right.  My other friend had the Monkfish Francaise with spinach, white wine, and shallots on a bed of mashed potatoes.  All three dishes were not only visibly pleasing, but also mouth-watering!  We cleaned our plates completely, as well as that of the appetizers...and desserts....  You'd think we were all 300 lbs, but we're not so...haha!  . . Now dessert...mmmmm dessert!  We ordered THREE desserts and got a fourth one on the house...again, it's so nice to be 3 cute girls!  We ordered the Vanilla Panna Cotta with citrusy granita and raspberries.  This was BY FAR my favorite dessert.  We also ordered the Bombolino, which is essentially a homemade doughnut filled with creme on a bed of plums...YUM.  The third dessert was the Torta Della Nonna, which they put a candle in the ice cream that accompanied it for me.  The Piccolo Pasticceria was the dessert that was on the house.  It is a selection of homemade cookies and confections, which included macaroons and chocolate chip cookies.  After all we ate leading up to this, we still managed to finish everything!  Insane!. . I couldn't have had a better birthday dinner and even took pictures of the meal and desserts to post on yelp!  Take a look and the pictures alone will entice you to eat here.  I really enjoyed the staff, which seemed to pay extra attention to us.  The owner gave me his card and told me to call him personally if I ever wanted to dine there again.  The outside seating is ample and pretty, as is the classy interior.  I will defiitely recommend this to all who ask and will eat here again and again!
