ReviewID: oSHzwDbbP3-on0dyllFuUA
ReviewerID: 37_Lh52DeoFmvU-C8r-Qxg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: El Barco
Category: Mexican
Are you people high?  This is/was the worst restaurant experience I've had in Chicago, possibly anywhere, anytime, which includes both a fly in my food and a platter full of flies at a Mexican seaside joint.  I'm writing this Monday and am just now feeling a bit better, as is my Wife, from our atrocious Saturday evening dinner.  I'm not one that gets heartburn and indigestion, but, after the slop that was tossed at us at El Barco, my chest and stomach was on fire, I was unable to sleep and I continued tasting their, not by design or request, alcohol-free margaritas long into Sunday afternoon.. . Arriving at El Barco early Saturday evening, the three of us were quickly seated outside, which was extremely lucky as the inside of this restaurant was absolutely sweltering.  A young lady, slim, very attractive, never cracking a smile, or offering a pleasant look and certainly never a kind word, quickly arrived to take our order.  We had literally just been seated and only just then handed menus so we asked for a few minutes but were lucky enough (unlucky as it turned out) to grab her as she was fleeing to order a pitcher of margaritas.  The margaritas were quickly delivered by a male server and tasted like processed limes on steroids, I don't know if I/we were expecting fresh-squeezed lime, nor do I think it absolutely necessary for a decent margarita but, holy jeezus batman, this stuff will turn you inside out AND, I challenge anyone to show me there was ANY tequila in this mess!. . We ordered one of their "signature" platters for three and after begging our server not to run away, were lucky enough to slip a salad into the order.  We did not have time or the opportunity to order soup or an appetizer, as the server was clearly not interested in being at our table or helping us.. . If giant American portions are your thing or perhaps you measure the pure heft of the food as a quality indicator then this is your place.  The platter arrived and can only be described as seafood nirvana, it had everything you can think of, was 3/4 the size of our 4-top table and could not be lifted by anyone with one arm!  The food however tasted rubbery and overcooked at best, bland, unappetizing and prepared last week at worst.  Not at any point did our server or anyone else ask how was our meal or if we'd like anything else.. . So, I repeat, are you people high or was our experience, soup to nuts, just an aberration?  Actually, I don't really care to know, as I will never go here again, no matter what.  The service was as unkind, unfriendly and rude as I've ever experienced, the food is not fit for human consumption and, ironically enough, God bless the ether their patrons must clearly be on for it to be the money maker (hand over fist by the look of things) it clearly is.. . Check Please be damned!
