ReviewID: OsJ_scDQ6woUzwYbgvSoCQ
ReviewerID: uWBdcZ54-cpE6jug4TUFyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pops For Champagne
Category: Wine Bars
Look at all those beautiful people! Look at that HUGE bottle of champagne! Look at how happy they are. Look at their fancy clothes &amp; sparkly jewelry. They're all just so beautiful! Oh, if I only could be one of them.... . Well, ladies &amp; gentleman, last night I finally was! Mister manfriend &amp; I noticed the 37% off food from 3-7 pm sign last weekend &amp; decided to treat ourselves to some fine dining. Have I been on a kick or what? And just a warning to all before diving into my review, I ate a lot. I mean a lot a lot, so please brace yourself.. . We entered Pops &amp; were warmly greeted by this adorable older gentleman who continued to call Ryan &amp; I "dolls" for the rest of the evening. In love? Check! We started out with the truffle guoda cheese &amp; crackers. Oh..my..God. Sex in my mouth. The cheese was very mild, but the aftertaste was to die for. The truffle oil definitely lingered. We then ordered the frites, which were pretty good. They come with a mayo based dipping sauce, so I was not a fan. They had garlic &amp; celery salt on them, but were just a bit too heavy for me. Of course we finished them, but at the end of the meal I said I could have done without. We then decided we wanted more.. . We also ordered a garlic &amp; herb soft cheese &amp; crackers. Well, Mr. Doll must have liked us because we sure got a friendly helping of cheese alongside crackers, roasted red pepper jam, and hazelnuts. This was also very, very delicious yet the truffle gouda was just a tad better. Okay I'm lying, it was almost my favorite part of the evening. We were still hungry &amp; decided on the steamed mussels in a Champagne, Leek, and Fennel broth &amp; a pulled pork sandwich to finish off our divine date.. . The mussels were delicious. I couldn't get enough of the broth &amp; they gave us a good amount of mussels. I think I had about 5, while Ryan had 6 or 7 God bless him. The mussels also came with some sort of garlic/pepper bread, which was too hard for my delicate (ha!) mouth to handle so I gave it to Ryan. This I could have also done without.  The bread, not the mussels! The pulled pork sammie came out &amp; what a site it was. It seemed more like a Cuban due to the pulled pork, slice of ham, swiss cheese, HOMEMADE pickles (omg, good!), mustard, and a bit of spicy mayo. I ate my half before Ryan had even picked his up. Embarrassing. It was so good though. I'm still thinking about it the next day. I might even go to Pops just for that sammie.. . 2 Pilseners accompanied this meal &amp; I couldn't have asked for more. I was full, but not too too full. I was so happy that I almost didn't want to leave, but knew the 3-7 deal was over &amp; didn't feel like hiking our bill up anymore. The waiter came with our check and as I hesitantly looked over I saw that everything, including 6 beers (Ryan had 4) was $66.00 in total. Yeah....$66.00, I couldn't believe it either!. . This place will become one of my favorites &amp; after work regulars if the deal keeps up. I mean how much happier can a girl be? Champagne, food, and people watching? Just an fyi, the menu changes seasonally so if you're craving that pulled pork sammie like me you better scoot your little oh so fabulous butt over there stat!
