ReviewID: OsLFoz0WmDRu4ATsexoCfw
ReviewerID: kRLkHf0lJWNOoJrxA5HA3A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Graveyard Tavern
Category: Bars
I love, love, love! the Graveyard Tavern.......Yeah, I have been trying to get to this place for a while now, and honestly? I even forgot about the place for a while. That was until last weekend when I went to an ubercool gallery art show down in the EAV area where afterwards, we strolled down the street a few blocks to Graveyard Tavern. . Mad props to Randy G. and Alayne H. for suggesting this spot for a warm me up drink. . . As our group walked in the first thing I spy is a slim looking, Billy Bob Thorton's Bad Santa version of Santa Clause. - Ummmmm, yeah, Santa waits tables at the Graveyard Tavern during the off season. I mean, I know the economy is bad Santa, but waiting tables!?!?!?!? . . Seriously? . . Any who. So of course what do I do???? Yep! as Kristine M. mentioned in her review, I yelled out "SANTA!" as I ran to him and jumped on his back. Ok, it wasn't exactly on his back......so much as in his arms and he had better catch me or run the risk of both of us crashing to the floor. aaahhhh, it's always good to see Santa. . .  I totally love the decor of this place, as it is a perfect mix of Denver mountain lodge, rusty good'ole tavern and new age mix with it's sexy black flat panel and projector screen TVs. . It's nice how they have individual little sitting stations around the floor plan of the resto. This compliments the bar seating and regular dinning area as it adds a "sit and stay" feel to the atmosphere. . . Service was great. Our waitress is a fellow USC (U of South Carolina) alumni and I could tell, she totally had that southern bell charm down to a pat. We had a table of 6 and she kept all of our checks separate with out us having to ask. How cool is that?!?!? Go Amelia! . . I can't say a whole lot about the food, as the sweet potato fries we ordered just didn't live up to what we were expecting. Let's just say, these ain't no Vortex sweet potato fries! . But one thing I do know! and that is that they serve New Castle on tap and any where that has New Castle on tap, is my kind of spot. . . Yeah, I love the EAV area and Graveyard Tavern has given me even more reasons to go back to the area.....as long as they have Santa Clause waiting tables! Ho, ho, ho! Merry Christmas!
