ReviewID: OsmDoG7GKC1q3rOPl7puYA
ReviewerID: EK5kGo91Um_Ly6awQQ7V0A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Barney&#39;s Beanery
Category: Bars
Barney's Beanery... . For those who know me I am one of those people who will not lie about the kind of service I receive from any given place... And as far as Barney's goes, it is one of the best places in Old Town Pasadena, this is one of my kick back places to chill in Pasadena and is one of the most interesting places, since the main concept of this place is what I can only conceive as a outran Sports bar, and is always a cool place to hang, since it is also a pool hall and has a Different channel on every table, along with a road show vibe with a school bus built into the décor of everything... so it is no wonder why I like it so much. I always tend to eat here with a small group of friends after a hard day of hitting the books. But tonight I just dined her for this particular home work assignment, I am normally writing about places like Mi Place and Villa Sorriso but tonight I like to take it back to the basics. . So let me start with the type of food they serve, and that is basically anything, since they serve breakfast all day a wide selections salads and burgers for lunch and dinner and also you can go Italian with a selection of pizzas and pastas and basically anything else your imagination can consider for this place since it is also a bar need I say more about the wide selection of appetizers and drink selections, I don't want to bore you with the details of it but it is a lot. I would just classify the food as Road food since the featured theme is rout 66 and I find it to be interesting I feel that the only thing on the menu I would not order is the calamari but other than that everything I have tried form there was excellent. . The décor is more or less what I go for since it sets up the vibe of a junk art feel and has wall to wall TVs and "junk yard art" with license plates from all over hanging from the ceiling and the tables are decorated with magazine cut outs very moving for the artist in me. . As for the service what can I say, the servers are very eye catching candy, they are both friendly and beautiful to look at. They are hospitable and busy in the nature of their job, and are always checking on their tables. The food comes out always in good timing almost as if not to notice the runner dropped it off. They also know to monitor peoples drinking and not to over serve people. The servers like to talk and do everything with a smile or at least when it came to my table and every time I come in. There really is nothing else to say about the service but that the women are beautiful and friendly to just. . As for cleanliness it is hard to say since the floors looks clean all things considering they are old hardwood. And since I never really used the rest room there I can't really comment on that. And the servers I just have to hope since they do look like they fallow most rules in regard but after working in the industry I really cannot be sure since most often it is rush, rush and things slip through the cracks some times and so I can only assume the same for this place. But that still does not hinder my opinion of this being a great place to eat. . And most defiantly I would go back to Barney's Beanery it is my top choices in Old Town Pasadena. And I recommend this place to anyone who just wants to have a good time and enjoy a beer after work and catch a couple rounds of pool or a late game on the TV while you eat some good food. . For an overall rating I would give it a 6 out of 10 for the food since too many choices and some times it is a hit or miss this the goodness of the food, 8 for the décor because it may be really cool to look at but everything seams to me a vary big distraction and servers I really like so I give that a 9.5 on the scale even if that would give an over all grade of 8 on it so I give it an 8 out of ten over all and would recommend anyone who is new to Pasadena to check it out. And yet again I will most defiantly go back to Barney's Beanery.
