ReviewID: OsUZEY2MImoWmluqfNMd1Q
ReviewerID: SY1A9bpeEYHiVIDZtsrj4Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Pancakes on steroids!!!  4.5 stars!  .5 off for the super long wait.. . Oh my goodness!  I took my brother, bf, bf's brother here to try this LA/Hollywood icon.  My brother and bf expected the pancakes to be big.  I warned them!  My bf's brother on the other hand was expecting small fancy pancakes.. . Then, *plop*.. . 3 pairs of eyes open wide.  Mouths open in awe.. . Yep, these pancakes are HUGE!  Bigger than your head.  But all very delicious.  They're pretty heavy, too, when you put it in the to-go box.  Plus, you have to eat some so that it will fit in the to-go box!  Seriously.. . Now...onto the pancakes:. -Banana nana: (3 stacks) brown sugar baked bananas with buttermilk pancakes.  I didn't try this so I don't know how it tasted.. . -Golden ticket:  (3 stacks) basically banana nana, with caramel, walnuts, and struesel, topped with whip cream and caramel.  Yummy!!  Tasted sweet from the caramel but had a good crunch with the walnuts.. . -Bluesberry:  blueberry pancakes (2 stacks) with blueberry sour cream and powdered sugar.  I got a taste of this, too, and it was delicious!  Love blueberries?  Get this one!. . I ordered the muscle bound protein omellette so i wouldn't be full on carbs.  It came with egg whites, green onions, tomatoes, and i chose chicken for the meat.  It was ok, but not worth $11.95.  But for a "healthier" option, this was a good choice.. . The other two times I've been here, I tried the original pancakes and the nutella stuffed french toast.  Nutella stuffed french toast is awesome!  If you love nutella, get this!!  So yummy and sweet.  Warning:  it's really really sweet!  But order it with your french press coffe, and you're all set!  I also tried the hoagie omellette which was ok.. . We waited 1 hour and 30 minutes to eat on a holiday Monday.  I suggest going early like 9 am, to avoid the same type of wait.. . Service:  not bad.  only the 1 1/2 hour wait sucked.. . Price:  a little pricey for pancakes but you get a lot of food!. . Overall:  Delicious yummy pancakes.  Mmm...
