ReviewID: Ot5eHALv3q8zV-E0KMB4yA
ReviewerID: gVIO3jE9b5G31jv7WatdoA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
My wife and I recently took a weekend trip to Chicago. A big part of the trip was going to taste the various culinary treats that range from Al's Beef to Gino's East, Blackbird and Tru.. . My first impression was that there seemed to be a very up-tight vibe to the dining room that night. My wife semi-agreed, but not as much. I understand fine dining and the associated feel, but this still seemed stuffy to me. We chose the standard five-course tasting menu, which goes for $110. There was no pre-set wine pairings, which would have been a nice option, but oh well. The wine list was EXTENSIVE and very high-end. Almost so that I don't believe there was an option under $100. To me, that's just not providing options for your diners. I've been to the Napa region many times and there are quality wines to be had under $100. Whatever, it's wine and again, it's fine dining. Understandable.. . As for the food... overall it was great. Very refined and showed a great amount of skill in it's preperation. However, I felt that the meal lacked a true inspiration or soul. I did not feel like the chef was truly inspired by the menu or wowed me with much. Yes, it was one of the best gnocchi I have ever tasted and well executed. However, it was a gnocchi in broth. Ok... ? I mean, it was good, but thank you for the potato dumplings in broth with a parmesan twille? Have we not seen a twille for about 10 years now?. Anyway, the meal had it's highlights. Specifically, the caviar with avocado puree was delightful. The main courses (Ribeye and Venison) were perfectly cooked and delicious. The pastry chef needs to be recognized nationally for his/her skill. Also, the service was absolutely impeccable and the front of the house was on-point.. . So, to wrap it up. If you want to taste the best version you've ever tasted of something... go to Tru. If you want to be inspired by interesting combinations and enlightened to new tecniques or styles, go elsewhere.
