ReviewID: otQEQLLIHPcX7DUtEYYtvA
ReviewerID: q8lqqiUW4-q2HvI6VpsIeA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cafe di Sol
Category: American (New)
Erin:  Hey Kel. wanna go grab brunch?. Kelly:  Sure where do you want to go?. Erin:  well, there is always Murphy's or South City Kitchen, and you know we always have great meals there, but let's try something new. . Kelly:  Ok, what did you have in mind?. Erin:  I don't know. Let's just get in the car, drive around and figure it out.  . Kelly: sounds good to me.. . Scene- driving down N.Highland.. . Erin: What about that place Kara mentioned over near the new Urban Outfitters of Ponce?. Kelly: Eclipse di Sol?  . Erin: Yeah, do they serve brunch?  . Kelly:  I don't know, lets check it out.  Oh, there is parking for it right there on the right. Nice.  I love a place where you don't have to search for a spot or pay!. . Tucked in right next to the Highland Inn; Eclipse di Sol emits a sense of a place you might find in a small town in Europe.  The interior is rustic, but clean and inviting.  Suggesting that you "stay a while and enjoy your meal" in true European fashion. . . Our waitress was great, and service was speedy, but not rushed.  We ordered the cheese plate (of course), and it was delightfully paired with fruit, and just the right portions of cheese.  . . I enjoyed the fried egg sandwich with Gruyere cheese, sauteed onions and bacon.  Normally, I ix-nay the bread because I am not a big sandwich fan when eating brunch, but the bread was so light and fluffy that you didn't become bogged down with that " Oh, lord, I ate too much now I am going to burst feeling". . . My friend {Erin}, had the turkey burger with cranberry mayo, cheddar cheese it came with two types of house chips.  Regular and Sweet Potato.  This is a big bonus in my book.  Anywhere that serves sweet potato fries or chips gets a big Gold Star! It such a great change from the everyday potato chip.  Plus, being the daredevils that we are. We took the left over St. Andre Blue Cheese, and added it to the sweet potato chips.  SCRUM-Diddly-UM-tious!. . The drinks were good (cant really mess up a mimosa now can you?), but Erin had the winner.  The Bloody Mary mix they use is perfectly concocted.  Not too spicy, but not watery and bland.  I will have one of those next time I dine there.  My friends and I are a bit of Bloody Mary Mix connoisseurs if you will (lots of  UGA tailgating has led to this). . Overall, good place for brunch, and I am interested in trying it for lunch, and perhaps late nite lounging.  Of course I will always pay homage to my company favorite South City Kitchen for brunch; but it's ok to try new places, and this place was great!
