ReviewID: Ou8LNgdfy4WgYzVNgtaOTg
ReviewerID: g41lgsBsJ-XHr6iUugd1nA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
This restaurant does not belong in Logan Square! The restaurant is tucked into the plethora of Ma and Pa sell everything and anything shops and cheap discount furniture stores that line that strip of Milwaukee Ave. However, when you walk in, you're invited into a whole new world. A wall of about 50 golden Buddha heads shimmer to one side of reception desk. Once you walk into the main dining room, the décor is mix of Asian accents and modern touches. I wanted to shed a tear, as a loyal Logan Square resident, I was proud to have such an establishment in our neighborhood. We're movin' on up to the East Side!. . Since the décor was so inviting and dynamic, our expectations rose for the most important criteria to review: the food. For appetizers, we ordered the Appetizer Sampler which consisted of egg rolls (3 stars), cigar egg rolls (2 stars), pot stickers (3 stars), crab wonton (4 stars), lollipop shrimp (4 stars), BBQ ribs (4 stars). I'm not the biggest fan of Crab Rangoon, but I must agree with other reviewers that is the best I've tasted so far. The cream cheese and crab ratio was perfect. For the main course, we ordered the Spicy Honey Orange Chicken and Salt and Peppered Crispy Beef. This is where our elevated expectations took a dive. The Orange Chicken was good but not anything better that what you would order from something as unauthentic as Panda Express. The honey flavor was slight but did not add that much more to the taste. Unfortunately, the Salt and Peppered Crispy Beef suffered from the same fate. Good, but nothing to write home about. The Crispy Beef did come with a dipping sauce - maybe to compensate for the main dish being only average? I give both of those dishes 3 stars.. . I must say that this review is a little more critical because of how much everything was. Our bill came out to be around ~$55 w/ drinks (non-alcoholic) - which is generally more than what you spend at standard Chinese restaurant (for some really great Chinese food for a decent price, try Lao Shanghai in Chinatown Square). Unfortunately, the food didn't live up to its surroundings.
