ReviewID: OufQDzTXbuhBFM92DNZvwg
ReviewerID: ar6ahAtqYusTHZ0npN5OXA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Porter Beer Bar
Category: American (New)
I will join in and write a review for The Porter, though I am not sure if it is even needed at this point.. . We first went to The Porter about a month ago, on a Friday night. As expected, it was crowded as hell, with a wait for both a table and the bar. I was happy to see one of my old friends was the bartender, so we got a drink there for round one, then moved to a table for dinner, then back to the bar for round three and four. (Only four...I'm trying to cut back.) I had a really good porter to start with, and my friend got a Delirium Tremens, one of his favorites. (At a much more reasonable price than I have seen at some other places. *cough* Edgewood Corner Tavern *cough*) For dinner, we had the scallop special, which was great. The scallops were perfectly cooked, served over roasted tomatoes and fennel, and it was yummy. We tried the mac and cheese too, which was also good, but I hate when it says macaroni and it is actually shells. (Hey, they are still getting five stars, it isn't that important. Just let me know what I am ordering!) We also split the burger...ah, the burger was great. Bacon and cheese, cooked just the way I ordered it? You would think this would be an easy task, but many places over cook to the point that I might as well start ordering rare so it will come out correctly. Our server, Justin, was nice and sufficient, even though he was very busy. . . We grabbed a seat at the bar, and Ty made me a perfect mint julep. (or three.) Matt moved around the beer menu a bit more, and tried the special cask of the night. (We were there pretty late, and they do allow smoking after ten, for those who are bothered by it.) It was a fun night, so we made plans to go back for my birthday. . . We took a few more people for my birthday, and they nibbled on a few things, like the mussels, which were well-received. The real star of the night was the two desserts, one of which was a special that I don't recall the name of, and a fresh tiramisu. . . The Porter is a great place to find good beers you have never heard of, enjoy wonderfully crafted food, and run into people you haven't seen in years. What more do you need?
