ReviewID: oug-b8ZCokJ873VhzJ8bXA
ReviewerID: T763DnqDps68STPygHdczw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Loteria Grill
Category: Mexican
Loteria is a small Mexican eatery in the middle of the Farmer's Market in L.A. It was also listed as one of Jonathon Gold's "99 Things to Eat in LA Before You Die", so I felt pretty confident that this was a great spot for good food...I mean, have you seen the size of Jonathon Gold? This man knows how to eat. And I totally trust  him.. . Unfortunately, Loteria was a bit of a disappointment. I mean, it was good. But not "must eat before you DIE" good. I'm afraid I'll have to disagree with Mr. Gold here...I don't mind dying before I eat here.. . Maybe it was because I had so much anticipation. Or maybe it was because I failed to get Jonathon Gold's recommendation of the Chicharron de Queso. Or maybe it's just because I'm not the biggest Mexican food fan. Or maybe it was simply because the food didn't measure up to the quality of the company I shared with my companions at the time. In the end, it just didn't wow me.. . I ordered the Probaditas-Sampler: All 12 of Loteria's tacos, mini-size, on hand-made corn tortillas. I have to admit, the presentation of this dish was magnificent. It was like being handed a platter of your own tapas bar! t was certainly impossible to keep track of each tastes. By the time I was done, all I could remember was that some were better than others. I particularly liked the Chicharron en Salsa Verde. The fried pork rinds drenched in tomatillo sauce just glided through my throat. It was ethereal.. . The other one I really enjoyed was Cochinita Pibil (pulled pork) and the Papa con Rajas (mashed potato thingy). But I wasn't too thrilled with some of the meaty ones like the shredded beef taco, which was rather dry.. . My friend was kind enough to share her Nopalitos Ensalata:Fresh Cactus paddle with tomato, Chile Serrano, Onion and Cilantro in a light lime Vinaigrette. Decorated with corn tortilla chips. It wasn't the best. The cactus tasted sort of bitter, kind of like artichoke. But it was rather interesting, and was a unique flavor and texture that you needed to get used to.. . Overall, Loteria was a fun and interesting place, but not somewhere I'll visit again. The portion was just too small for its price, and I came back home with a half-filled stomach. But I guess that's the point...there's SO many things to eat at the Farmer's Market, you kinda want to leave enough room in your stomach for more snacks. Rip-offs.
