ReviewID: OWLteVhOWNeRn2TGNr_vfQ
ReviewerID: 7zwue6zsWzaYNh51KbVHdg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Came here on a Thursday night at 6 to beat the crowd, but it was STILL somewhat crowded! There were 5 of us.. . What to do: wear something you don't mind getting food spilled on or won't wear until after you wash it, girls need to wear a hair tie, and don't wear a sweatshirt. Oh, and make sure ALL your party is there b/c they won't seat you until you do.. . Ambience: very chilled and small/med place, so don't be suprised you may bump into people on your way to the bathroom to wash off the garlic on your hands!. . Service: given that it was busy, I would say 5/5. We ordered sausage with our shrimp and it didn't come with it, but our server was pretty fast in getting our 6 pieces of sausage. . Food quality: ok, here is where I compare with the Crawfish House (CH)in Westminister.. . shrimp (3lbs) with 6 pieces of sausage and 5 pieces of corn, medium spice, the She-Bang sauce: smaller than CH, however, the sauce (She Bang) was much richer and more powerful and can actually see the garlic pieces!!! (can I get some shrimp with my garlic??). . crawfish: did not get here b/c i didn't want to work so much today. . sweet potatoe fries x 2: the seasoning was better at CH, but it was still good. . king crab legs (2 lbs) with garlic sauce, med: good!!!!! next time order butter. and make sure you don't cut yourself b/c the sauces will burn and you will DEF know you got cut/knicked by the legs. . 6 oyster shooters: CH def. has better ones. Be careful to suck slowly or else you could almost die from choking like I did..... . cajun fries: goooooood . . clams (2 lbs) lemon sauce, mild with sausage: I was very surprised with the large sized clams!!!! i was happy.. . Good for: out of towners, small bday party, and it was debatable amongst my friends if this place was good for a 1st date.... i think it would be a fun 1st date. . . For the 5 of us, it was $28/person including tax and tip. Oh yeah, and I heard the XXX is really spicy, so we avoided it, but medium spice was spicy enough.
