ReviewID: OWpoLYx_e518c8oyi82CDg
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Bluebird
Category: Wine Bars
Ahhh how the charming Bluebird sings! Effortless and graceful, simple and classy, proving to be a genuine delight to the ears - and especially tastes - of happy couples, clusters of friends and even duos of lovely ladies wining, just like mine. . . A highly recommended rustic and sexy spot for the languid sipping of enchanting libations, good conversation and even better munchies. The wine list is lovely, albeit quite Spanish heavy, it's a breeze seeking out something palatable for every vin lovah and even unique, new treasures you'll be longing to add to your own personal collection at home. That was certainly the case for me with my crisp, fruity and most refreshing Chilean Hondurabbi Beltza Ameztoi 2007 from Txakoli. Pfft, try saying that five times fast - but with its irresistible tiny bubbles (enter ukulele here) and subtle cherry undertones (bing!), I'll call it Henry if it asks me nicely. . . The food menu is sparse and with good reason, no sense in over-saturating the savoring of your melodious wines with items that would be anything other than complimentary to the experience, eh? Pick small bites like a selection of nummy, nummy cheeses, the cana de cabra goat and Italian gorgonzola dolce are as creamy and luscious as one could hope for and the meat list beckons with a spicy pork chorizo and iberico jambon.... mmm, salty! I'd skip the slimy, lackluster smoked duck in favor of the arugula and orzo salad, you need the veggies anyway and the layers of tangy, peppery arugula over an orzo dotted with feta and chick peas was positively what the summer doc ordered! . . While I found myself a wee bit bummed at the Bluebird's lack of barista skills - uh, no coffee here, folks - they do keep the hits comin' in the bubbles dept with a generous pour of a rich, vanilla tasting Vignoles champagne. L O V E D I T ! Attentive and polite service rounded out this solid wine bar experience that left me, too, tweeting like a songbird. Chirp!
