ReviewID: owUKuQE4AziH-zELCC4q2Q
ReviewerID: NaDwZsvtHQkdN_V3ULlsHg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I can't seem to remember the last time I've gone to a restaurant in LA and actually leave more than satisfied. After a couple of months of nagging from my family, I finally decided to make the trip out to Griddle with my brother and boyfriend. Good thing I brought my brother too because I never would've seen the restaurant and know that parking is in the back. . . We came around lunch time on a Saturday and waited a good 30 min for our table. The inside was incredibly chaotic and a bit stuffy so we happily took a table outside. We ordered the classic french toast, eggs benedict and banana pancakes. The pancakes and french toast were soooo good. If and when I crave breakfast, I don't think I could ever be satisfied like I was here. The eggs benedict are served with potato skins instead of biscuits, and the hollandaise was perfect. The dish is heavy itself, but the hollandaise was perfect in such a way that it didn't leave that overly cream taste that overpowers the entire dish. The ham is DELICIOUS. I'm not ham's biggest fan unless they are cut into thinner than usual slices on my benedict but Griddle's ham is so good, I was eating it by itself. . . Their mocha is amazing but not as amazing as their french pressed coffee. I think I died and went to heaven. Nothing like starting off your day with fresh coffee, seriously. We also ordered a side of their steak fries - I know - breakfast with french fries but hey, that's how we roll.. The fries were really good. Crispy and soft and just enough salt, mmmmm.. . . Tip: If you don't mind the random bums that walk up and down the street, honking on the streets, tourists on the double deckers waving hi, sit outside. During peak hours, outside is less chaotic than inside, surprisingly. Plus, you get fresh air and the ability to hear what you're saying to each other. . . Also, the host was funny as hell. He made waiting 30 min the most amusing 30 min wait for a table in my life. . . In conclusion, my favorite breakfast spot.
