ReviewID: OxS8jHoVgyGD6LQLP_2Spw
ReviewerID: fa0rqQUGmPua_KJmDQdwdw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
Well, I liked the coffee. And I liked the chairs. And I really don't care about the interior - although is it just me or are light blue and red the official hipster colors lately? It's like Nacho Libre invaded hipsterville. . . But, ordering a latte here was the most confusing experience ever. I should cut them some slack because I went the second or third week they were open, but I walked in and didn't see a menu, so I just ordered a latte. While I was waiting, I saw a paper menu sitting on the counter that I hadn't noticed before. Anyway. I also got a scone because all I saw to eat was the food in the bakery case. The scone was amazing. . . I went to sit down and waited a really long time for that latte. And as I was sitting down, a waitress came over with a menu. I didn't even know there was more food and wished I had known b/c I actually wanted something more substantial than a scone, but whatever. (and ps- if you call yourself a coffee boutique, people are not going to come expecting lunch) So I look at the menu and then there's all these coffee options I didn't see when I was ordering. Oh well. . . So then my friend comes and goes through the same confusing experience (she asked for, and I quote, "a cup of coffee" and they were like - "we don't have regular drip coffee") and we sit down to talk and we are SCREAMING at each other because the place got really crowded and the acoustics are TERRIBLE. . . Also, three waitresses were just kind of standing over our shoulder the whole time, waiting for people (who, similarly confused, had already ordered at the bar) to sit down. It was all really awkard. I might have gone back later just to see if they worked the kinks out, but it's so expensive, probably not. . . However, the scone and latte were awesome and I enjoy drinking coffee from a ceramic cup and not a tree-killing paper cup, so kudos to La Mill for that.. . ps - As a Silver Lake liver and lover, I'll kind of say that I think most of the neighborhood is a bit pretentious, but I love it anyway. And I admittedly love Intelligentsia, and that is the most pretentious name for a coffee shop OF. ALL. TIME. But seriously, La Mill comes off as sooo pretentious, even for Silver Lake, that I felt really uncomfortable the whole time. Do they really have to wear all black?
