ReviewID: oXSe3OY79a6ocq_xT1XsZQ
ReviewerID: XrZTuTkvph3H5MO2DRrAKg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Papa Cristos
Category: Greek
Papa Cristos is an all-in-one experience. Market-Deli-Restaurant-Family Gathering!  . . The market has a large assortment of Greek foods like bottled olives, peppers and jams, frozen spanakopita, seasonings and dressing, and on and on. It also has a large selection of wines. And now, a small section of Italian foods as well.. . The deli has a large selection of meats, cheeses, olives, hummus, spices, oven-hot baguettes and rustic loaves. It also has a fine assortment of pastries. Last, it has a small number of hot dishes to get on the go.. . The restaurant has really great Greek food!  I've been to other Greek restaurants with higher prices and nicer atmosphere, but NOT better food!  My favorites are the gyros (plate or sandwich), for one. The plate comes with delicious greek-style potatoes and salad. They make and sell (in the deli) their own dressing.. . The grilled baby octopus are really great--ask for them "really well done" and with extra lemon wedges on the side. They are best when brown and crunchy as opposed to lightly sauteed. When I am away from L.A. (usually in Mexico), this is what I hanker for!. . The rack of lamb is the best lamb dish--much better than the lamb chops. Thick perfectly cut lamb ribs, seasoned to perfection! It is hard to resist this plate. One way to try it without buying it (huh?) is to take advantage of buying one rib or two as an add on to something else you are eating. Yes, you can do this. Sweet!. . They have a new plate that features 20 shrimp, I think it says grilled. It is served as a plate of 20 (or more) large shrimp that you peel and eat--but the best is the large bown of bouilabaisse that accompanies it. Just dip some fresh bread into it (buy a baguette) or just eat it with a spoon. Ostensibly it is intended as a dipping sauce for the shrimp--don't just use it as a dipping sauce! Eat it!  It's is delicious on its own--I don't know why they don't sell it that way.  . . Make sure you check out the 8x11 pictures tacked up around the menu. These are NEW items and some don't even show up on the menu on their website (or the printed ones). Consider them every day specials!. . The stuffed grape leaves are excellent. They are, however, served cold. If you like them served hot or warm just ASK! The people here are very accomodating.. . That brings me to service. Be sure to take a number at the deli counter--that's how it works. One you have a deli person, they will serve only you until your order is complete. Everyone is very friendly and informative. They'll let you sample a slice of meat or cheese or an olive before purchase. You'll stand next to Greeks who've been coming her for decades and the staff will make you feel like an insider--even if it's your first time there.. . The restaurant works like this: you get in line (take this time to decide what you want, it moves fast), you order, get a number. They give you your drinks right there. BEFORE YOU SIT DOWN look to the left and behind the refrigerator case holding the sodas and snapples are two trays. One with olives and one with peppers and garlic. It's FREE to customers! We get a small container (provided) of olives, then fish out blackened cloves of garlic. Delicious!  Then sit down, display your number and they will deliver your food to your table. DO NOT expect them to come to your table to see if you need something else afterword--though they might--this is NOT how it works. So get everything you want on the first pass or be a sport and go back for more. The attendants in the dining room are cleaning off tables and delivering food, not taking orders or handling money.. . Finally, on warm days, you might want to eat out on the patio they have set up on the east side of the building. There the wait staff WILL take your order at the table and serve you in the traditional manner.. . There is a parking lot in back with valet service (on weekends I believe). It's free.. . Finally, on Thursday nights they have a their Big Fat Greek Thursday Night Dinners which feature a Prix Fixe menu It starts at 6:30pm with appetizers and wine tasting followed by additional more substantive appetizers, Greek salad, freshly baked bread, two entrees, several side dishes, baklava and coffee. Soft drinks are included. In addition, there is music and live belly-dancing. It is communal seating on long tables--take advantage of talking to the person at your elbow. It is more fun that way!. . Be aware that the Santa Sophia church is across the street and on Sundays, when church lets out, everyone comes here for lunch!. . The last comment I will make is to compliment the owners for forging a real multicultural environment in their business. They have multi-lingual staff including Greeks, Latinos and Ethiopians. They constantly make efforts to forge ties to the local community (once a predominantly Greek area) and their website even has pages in Korean. ( . http://www.papacristos....  )That's why I love L.A.! Diversity embraced--it's a beautiful thing.
