ReviewID: oYc3sGCksNqBoVVKlktcsg
ReviewerID: hoAon6eIdQ1bwDiMHj_KEg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Stanley&#39;s Kitchen and Tap
Category: Southern
Have you ever been to Bizzare-o World?  . If not, go to Stanley's on Lincoln.. We arrived around 1pm on Sunday and knew there would be a bit of a wait.  The hostess wrote our name down and we sat at the end of the bar away from the hostess.  My husband went to tell her we were at the far end of the bar just in case we didn't hear our name called.  After about 20 minutes, I went up to her and noticed my name was crossed off the list and I said, "How is the wait going for us for two? Why is my name crossed off?" She was like, I'm really sorry, I told the other hostess you were at the far end of the bar but she must have just crossed your name off (speaking about the second "new girl" hostess, who kept walking over to her friends at a bar table and talking to them).  The dining room had plenty of two tables and the dumb new hostess was like, oh I can seat you!  So we got seated and waited like ten minutes until our even dumber waitress came.  She brought the buffet plates and I was like, can I see a menu please?  She brought over one menu.  Mind you, my husband was sitting at the table with me.  She was like "oh you want to see a menu too?" Guess something outside the buffet was too much to handle.  My menu had syrup on it with a hair stuck on it. Gross.  We started with the "signature" macaroni and cheese.  Lukewarm with hard-ish melted cheddar on top.  Okay tasting, but again, lukewarm and no one likes lukewarm curdled cheese.  I ordered the chicken fried steak and my husband got the chopped steak.  She brought us the food not too much of a wait (5-10 minutes?).  The chicken fried steak was fine, the gravy on top was watery and then the mashed potatoes tasted fake and had some odd orange gravy on top.  My husband's chopped steak was pretty much just sirloin meatloaf.  He said it tasted like ground beef.  I took a bite and was like "that's meatloaf!" So we laughed about how bizarre our dining experience was going and waited like 15 minutes until I asked another waitress to get our super absent waitress.  My husband asked "I do not know exactly what chopped steak is, but I'm pretty sure this is meatloaf."  The waitress rolled her eyes and said, well it's steak ground with green peppers and I'm pretty sure the chef who has been working here for 50 years knows what chopped steak is." Ohhhh!  Thanks for the insight, airhead.. To conclude: terrible service, terrible hosting, less than mediocre food and an overall BIZARRE-O world experience.  If you go and it's the same, I told you so!
