ReviewID: oYLgqpcYNc7Pu_hPAmsobA
ReviewerID: pD4c0eVE0ImAgcag4w4-lA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I don't really believe in love at first taste.  I mean it's rare that you have that perfect moment, when the first bite of something leaves you speechless, near tears, euphoric, and have that moment consistently happen the second, third, fourth time around.  That's probably why it took more than one trip to finally fall in love with this place.  I'd like to think that lasting impressions take more effort than a fleeting moment, or one meal.. . This time, appetizer was skipped so that plenty of room would be saved for dessert (which we find out later that this never works, and that dessert just need to be stuffed in, in the classiest manner possible).  The night started off with a nice bottle of the Franciscan.  Unfortunately, they no longer have the St Francis, but the Franciscan was a suitable replacement.  The food came out relatively quickly, though if you are in terrible company, it may not come fast enough.  Lucky for us, we were with good friends and the conversation never dulled to an awkward silence.  . . Between the four of us, we ordered 2 boned in ribeyes (22oz for the gentlemen) and 2 filet mignons (16 oz for the ladies).  The steaks were cooked perfectly to what we ordered, every lasting bite savory, scrumptious, and melt in your mouth good.  I'd have to admit the bone in rib eye stole the show, as the aged filet mignon isn't for everyone.  It does have a sour lemony taste, so if you're not into that, get the bone in rib eye.  The sides included lobster mash, which I found to be delicious, though I probably wouldn't order this again, as the garlic mash I had last time was already delicious enough, though if you must have lobster, you must have it.   The sauteed broccoli had wonderful flavoring, that I was left contemplating how they cooked this, perhaps in a bag sealing in the flavor, with some stock and garlic: delicious, delicious, delicious.  The gorgonzola mac and cheese is also not to be missed.  Had it last time, and had to have it this time.  Just as fantastic as I remembered it.. . Though, as previously mentioned, we were already stuffed, we managed to order a warm butter cake and it topped off the meal in the most perfect way, which I liken to all the colors coming together in a Van Gogh painting.  The cake was fluffy, moist,  a la mode, and had a pan of freshly whipped cream on the side.  . . Great atmosphere, great company, fantastic food, great service.  You know you're in love with a restaurant when it's the subsequent trips, and not the first, that leave you wanting more.
