ReviewID: Ozs_tw9J1NCzb650YauRIw
ReviewerID: WWnhqRnWWjutMqh-2SzEuQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
When I eat out, I tend to focus a lot more on food than on service.  Fraiche is one the rare places where I left thinking more about the service than the food.  Now this is both good and bad.  The food was good with a few great bites, but on the whole short of amazing.  The service, on the other hand, was awesome.. . I guess you can say I was bribed.  I'm all for courteous and informative and friendly, but it's hard to beat the good old-fashioned comp.  Dee C. and I had dinner at Fraiche the day before my birthday, and we were given two complimentary flutes of Sauternes with our desserts, one of which came with a cute lit candle tucked into a slice of strawberry.  When the people at the table next to us noted how much better our dessert looked than hers, the waitress brought her a copy of ours free of charge.  Freebies for the win, Fraiche.  Oh right, and our waitress was nice and helpful, too.  Really wonderful service.. . I like the vibe of the place too.  It's very cool and casual, like there might be a fireplace tucked away somewhere.  The open kitchen adds to the laid-back charm.  Something about the combination of decor, lighting, and location shouts "trendy," but not in an obnoxious way.. . Backing up - the food.  The bread basket was decent, with two types of bread, fluffy and crusty.  It was served with a great flavorful tapenade in which I was a little surprised but not dismayed to find a pit.. . For our starters, we split the speck and burrata and the salad of baby beets.  The speck and burrata came with watercress, almonds, and aged balsamic, and sounded awesome on paper.  The actual dish was disappointing.  The prosciutto tended towards rubbery and the cheese lacked the gooey oozing soft mouth-filling qualities that cause me to salivate when I hear the word "burrata."  In contrast, the baby beet dish fantastic.  It came with hazelnuts, mache, and house-made ricotta.  The hazelnuts were toasty and full of flavor, and the ricotta was lush and creamy.  The beets themselves were sweet, tender, and beautifully roasted.. . We shared the monkfish "Francaise" and the duck agnolotti as our mains, and we agreed that the pasta outshone the much-touted monkfish.  The fish was cooked perfectly - three lightly battered hunks of fork-firm, meaty monkfish.  The sides of spinach and potato puree were lovely and grounding.  The whole dish, though, was completely doused in a thick tart citrus sauce, almost like the goop on orange chicken.  The flavor was actually okay, and would've been on point if it hadn't been so overwhelming, but both Dee and I found the whole thing oversauced.  We would've done nothing to change the duck agnolotti, though - it was the best dish of the night.  The agnolotti was served with clam shell mushrooms and truffle butter, and it was so aromatic that I could taste truffle before the first piece of pasta hit my tongue.  The duck filling was tender and silky but distinctively meaty, and the pasta melted to nothing.  The mushrooms were incredible - each tiny speck had a lot to say in terms of flavor and even more, texture.  While truffle butter or truffle anything is kind of cheating, I thought it was put to excellent use here.. . Since birthday calories don't count, we decided to go for a trio of desserts.  We ordered the torta della nonna, the beignets, and the chocolate coulant.  The beignets were disappointing - I like my beignets with a little crisp on the outside and porous fluffy insides, and these were just too doughy.  The strawberry jam they were served with was good, with slices of strawberry in syrup, but not enough to save the dessert.  The torta della nonna, a dense little tart with Fuji apples, pine nut streusel, and mascarpone ice cream, was excellent.  The pine nut streusel was awesome, and I'd like to add this dessert to my own baking repertoire, as it seems simple enough.  The winner of the desserts, and the one our neighbors envied, was the chocolate coulant with toffee, spiced bananas, and peanut butter ice cream.  The peanut butter ice cream was phenomenal.  It tasted intensely of peanuts and was good enough to eat by the pint.  The spiced bananas were nice, too, though the spice didn't really come through.  The coulant was divine.  It oozed chocolate as soon as we broke into it, very molten and very rich.  Toffee crumbles and some nice chunks of nut dressed it up, but it had me with that brown lava flow.  Sadly, the coulant brought to our neighbor's table was a minute or two farther cooked, but at least it was free.  Our free Sauternes was less flawed and went down sweet and easy with our sugar feast.. . Overall, the food was hit-or-miss, but I'd recommend Fraiche and would be happy to come back.  A three-courser of beets, agnolotti, and coulant would've been a home run, and I'll bet there are other gems on the menu.  The service is really hard to beat without whipping out the white gloves, and I'll take a free glass of wine over a pulled-out chair any day.
