ReviewID: p-lrdvGehLCMfYiGajWokQ
ReviewerID: M76T9FuUpzpJkqYvGzISHg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Pasta Bowl
Category: Italian
This place really has a 4 star average? First of all this place is kinda dirty and run-down. And not in the "charming" hipster definition of the word. I'm used to eating in dives, but something struck me about this place and it stuck with me. Scratches and dents adorned the Pasta Bowl sign near the back of the restaurant. I know you are trying to keep prices down but, it didn't look that hard to fix.  The bathroom had random posters for other (huh?) bars plastered over it. Bathroom advertising has struck me as tacky ( I do appreciate the reading material though) especially when they say things like FREE BEER and GIRLS GIRLS GIRLS. There was some weird brown liquid on the wall of the bathroom and its overall appearance seemed dirty. The water in the sink was ice cold (is that a health violation?) and didn't want to stay on. . . Now onto the food. My boyfriend ordered the Rigatoni Bolognese and nothing was wrong with it. I tried it and it tasted good and I am not even a fan of Bolognese sauce.  My meal did not fare the same. I ordered the B.V Pescare and was not overjoyed. The sauce was EXTREMELY watery. So watery in fact, that I have had better pasta sauce that my mom (who is by no means a chef) obtained directly from a jar of Ragu. The bay scallops were also watery and had a bit of grit in them. I am no expert in scallops but, they lacked any flavor whatsoever. Their menu stated the fact that the dish came with plum tomatoes but I could barely spot any. . . My main beef with this place is the service. I do have to admit that our food came out quickly but, I am starting to wonder if our food wasn't given enough attention to begin with. After tasting my meal and having the obvious complaint about the watery sauce I waited for our server to ask us how our meal was going. This never happened. After trying to spot the waitress I noticed her eyes were glued at the basketball game on the tv. A-ha! So, that's where she was. She passed our table once to go by the staff area and did not say one thing to us.I had to stop her and ask where she was and she replied that "I was going to stop by but you were so far into your meal..." In fact, I was pretty much done with my meal at this point. Why eat a undesirable meal that you want returned? BECAUSE I'M STARVING AND FEELING SICK. I don't see what is the big deal with eating food that you want returned anyways when management is just going to throw food away. After I told the waitress how miserable the food was she came back and said that the best she could do for me was a free dessert. I asked to speak to the manager and he told me "Normally we don't comp pasta that has been eaten but, you said she never came back so I'll do that for you..." At least the manager had some sense.. . All in all this place needs to clean up, repair things, hire new staff and turn down the loud non-Italian music so I can actually talk to the person sitting across from me.
