ReviewID: p05ySz7VBN0e66rp5_6mDw
ReviewerID: qF2VjQ13QXtOT8qB2GqgAQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Alright, so since everyone already knows this place is the fucking best; I'm just going to share my first time experience.. . I walk up to this restaurant littered with hipster jeans so tight I think most everyone's balls are going to pop. Also, with it being somewhere around 80 degrees, I'm pretty sure we could have clothed the homeless with all the flannel being worn. Anyway, I'm instantly thinking this place isn't for me. Oh but wait, the most magical place in the entire world laid around the corner. I walk in and drop my jaw to the site of nearly 40+ beers on tap. And we're not talking PBR to make the 'trend setters' feel special; we're talking $12 a glass premium beer.. . Without even looking for a table, I B-lined it for the bar to quiz the bartender. Oddly enough, dude knew what he was talking about. He wasn't just some punk out of work actor trying to make a buck, he actually studied his shit. So after talking for a good 5 minutes, I finally decided and went with the typical IPA style. Oh my god, I can't even begin to tell you how amazing the beer was; it had to be comparable to Megan Fox and Kate Beckinsale showing up at my door naked.. . So, with the place more packed than a sweaty frat party, you had to pray for a table to open but the beer kept you occupied enough to not care. After a good 20 minutes and at least 4 beers, a table finally opened. We sat outside and basically had to yell to hear each other. Whatever, at that point you would have been yelling anyway from drinking so much. . . Our waitress came rather quickly and we ordered the staple, burger and sweat potato fries. Don't bother asking for a menu or trying to tell them how you want your burger cooked. Just order the fucking food and don't ask for condiments.  If you want to look like a jackass who obviously doesn't deserve the food, ask for ketchup. I dare you!. . The burger came and we dug in. I'm going to remind you about Megan and Kate because eating that burger with a beer by my side is like the two of them showing up with a large case of money.  We devour the burger and turn to the fries. I think the Olsen twins just knocked on my door. After finishing the food, I couldn't give up. We kept drinking until the flannel was blurry.. . As we stepped outside and realized we needed to call a cab, all I can say is, THANK GOD FOR FREE PARKING!!. . Next stop, Lubitsch!
