ReviewID: P0JwSgRfmUszr-zE5oGT_w
ReviewerID: 0BEfDWfsKa4c0jDieRcL5g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mr. Pizza
Category: Pizza
So I've been to the og Mr. Pizza in Seoul when I went to Korea for a little family vacation. I knew what to expect from that and took my parents there because I knew they would enjoy the sweet potato crust (crispy cheese on the outside and sweet potato filling on the inside)- they are such typical korean parents! Although we had a difficult time ordering in Korea (their menu was so complicated- you can have certain things under certain sections, but then you can only choose from a few options within that section- blah), most probably because Korean probably sucked, my sister and I still enjoyed the strange assortment of pizza options (I think we ordered the besemal or whatever it was called and the sweet potato crust!).. . So for lunch today, they had a new individual special option or for larger parties/groups they also had a lunch deal. We decided to get the Mr. Pizza Combination (lots of meats and veggies) with the sweet potato crust (apparently called gold- and it was an extra charge, but so worth it). The combo was for a large pizza, large pitcher of soda/drink and a special appetizer (nothing too special, just buffalo wings or potato crisps) for about $23, which was pretty decent if everyone was sharing (luckily our parents paid muhaha).. . The hot buffalo wings were typical- you can find them at any restaurant or tailgate party- nothing special. But then again, I'm glad they didn't manage to mess that up, because that would have been tragic.  The pizza was pretty good too, just as I remembered it to be in Korea and of course my parents loved the sweet potato crust, especially with the cheese on top. The pizza itself was nothing phenomenal (the middle portion where all the meats, veggies and cheese are located), but it's really the crust I think that's unique and delicious.. . Next time I think we will try the lunch special so we can all try a different flavor and perhaps try the salad bar. But overall I think its a good place to go with a group of people for lunch!. . Parking: ample street parking- and it turns out that its pretty much the same cost as parking in their lot next door- $1.50.
