ReviewID: p1EFy_0D0FHKfT5XjDh_QQ
ReviewerID: DGszSnRNWoAOtD8WGf9wpg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I have to stand with my 5 star review because the food is just sooooo good.. . Sure the wait sometimes bothers me, sure the policy that you have to have the entire party there to be seated bothers me, sure the fact that you can't add friends to a table after the fact bothers me,  sure the times I have come at 8 p.m. and been told there is a two hour wait and they can't even guarantee that we will be seated/served before they close bothers me, sure the fact that they don't take any type of reservations in advance even for a B-day party bothers me.......but with all that aside it just makes you have to plan your BC experiences better. . . Some tips: I go on Sat afternoon around lunch time when there is less wait or on weekdays between three and five, I order to go and pick it up in just 10 minutes and make a mess at home sometimes when I don't NEED the raw oysters, or how about sending a friend in an hour early to put the name in and get shit-housed at the bar in the meantime...this is a good idea, sometimes that friend is me like tonight.. . I have found that the shrimp with Sha-Bang is the best bang for your buck. I know many folks like to eat the craw fish but just not enough meat in my opinion, if you really like to suck and I know some of you do than stick with those craw fish but I am fine sucking on the shrimp. Although the crabs, lobsters and others are good they just cost too much to really stuff your face til it hurts or at least it will hurt you wallet before it hurts your stomach. . . Tonight we went with 9 lbs of shrimp, three mild, three medium, and yes you said it three HOT. Tons of corn, potatoes, sausages, two orders of gumbo, 24 oysters, and three orders of sweet potato fries. Yes this was for a group of about ten for my belated B-day food fest. Christina was a great host, she was gracious enough to deal with my drunk ass and get us seated when all my friends finally dragged their late asses there. . . Moral of the story is good company, good beers, and spicy shrimp make for a wonderfully enjoyable experience. Boiling Crab I will always remember you at least for a few day since I can't get your smell off my fingers. . . P.S. Just a word of advise for that bathroom break, don't touch your genitals with those fingers cause it will burn like the jocks of the alpha betas and even when you are drunk that is no bueno!!!
