ReviewID: P1ShD8P-R1Dm1KdKZtAd2w
ReviewerID: ZkZQm8HeR8GU_9AysY_aXA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pylos
Category: Greek
Overall, a GREAT dining experience! . . Was there for a dinner for 4 on a Sunday night - made the reservation on the Saturday afternoon prior, at which time I learned that they were booked until 8PM! (Waitress later told me that for a Fri/Sat reservation, you need to call a coupla weeks beforehand!) We got there a little late, and got seated a very short time later, so the wait experience wasn't bad at all. . . We ordered wine, and while I am a "wino", I asked our server for a recommendation, and she was right on the money with the Porfyros, a very pleasant and drinkable, medium-bodied red (cab sauv/cab franc/merlot blend) which I rate a 7 out of 10 (high praise since I'm a tough critic!). And at $38 a bottle (I found it to be a steal after drinking it), it was nice to know the waitress wasn't simply trying to push more expensive wines on us, and eventually we were happy to order a second bottle.. . Now onto the food. Overall, it was TERRIFIC. As many have written, warm pita and hummus  are complementary. I had the saganaki (baked cheese) as an appetizer, which was lite and tasty (especially drizzled with lotsa lemon). Other friends got the soup and the phyllo pastries (which were delish!). For entrees, I had the ouzo and tomato cream sauce shrimp (is really an appetizer). You get 4 decently sized shrimp, and I found them very savory, with the ouzo kept to a nice delicate minimum. Other entrees ordered were the free-range chicken served over very large tube like pasta and the salmon. Both were tasty, and the portions were nice (with the chicken being quite generous), and while I love salmon in general, I did find the chicken the better dish.. . Service was attentive, very friendly and overall, EXCELLENT. With the combination of amazing food and service - and combined with a very hip location in East Viallage and an interior design which grabs attention, I can see why reservations are getting tougher and tougher to get - so get out there and make one quick!
