ReviewID: p2tJk6yfpH3N0Vvx8pYvfA
ReviewerID: fzpOxa746vt8n977iBWhTg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
A group of us made the trip to Orochon this past Saturday. One of my friends is a serious "Man vs Food" and "Food Network" fan and apparently this place has been featured on both.  Since I am on a perpetual hunt for a place as fabulous as the ramen-ya I left behind in Japan, I am always game for a mini road trip to slurp-ville.. . Having heared rumors about the wait times, we didn't go for lunch or dinner.  We arrived at 3pm to avoid the rushes.  Even then it was packed..including the tables they have set up just outside the entrance door. Groups were gathered around the shopping center mezzanine waiting to hear their names called, and groups larger than 4 or 5 were being asked to break apart so they could be seated.  Our wait wasn't too bad.. maybe 20 minutes?. . Our party of 5 took seats at a table inside and watched with amazement as the wait staff ran from table to table, to the kitchen, outside.. it's some impressive choreography!  There are no slackers and the service is good considering how busy they are.. . We looked at menus outside and knew what we wanted to order. The 3 adults ordered the Shio (Salt) Ramen with the pork, bean sprouts and onion, two included egg, but each at different heat levels.  The kids went for Chicken teriyaki and fried rice.  The Level 7 broth (no heat) was good, but not what I'd call outrageous.  The Level 6 was not noticeably different from the 7.  I had ordered the Level 5 having been told that Level 4 is "medium" . Since everyone medium is so semantic,  I was playing it safe. I have no need to prove how "macho" I am!  Mine was like a regular ramen if you added some white pepper to the bowl.  Just a tiny bit of heat, but nothing that lingered. I am not sure if it was a coincidence, but as we went up the heat scale, the sodium level seemed to rise. Not sure why.. but mine was QUITE salty and I am a confessed salt-a-holic.  The broth was better than most packaged ramens, but not as spectacular as I was hoping for. I think Kyushu Ramen in the San Fernando Valley has them beat. I do like that you can "make your own" bowl by choosing the ingredients, but for what it was, it seemed more expensive than other places. Had it been amazing, it would be OK.  not like it broke the bank anyways...  I will try it again someday and take the waitresses advice.. Miso.  I am not usually a Miso based fan, but she may know best.. . We did have some entertainment. A table of guys came in so that 2 of their buddies could attempt the "#2 Bravery Challenge". Apparently that is one spicy bowl of noodles because they were both sweating visibly, wiping running noses and teary eyes and struggling to beat the 30 minutes on the clock. One went into a coughing fit, it was so spicy.  They tried to pose brave for the prying lenses of their friend's camera, but after a while there was no faking their way through. They were groaning, grimacing, and I thought for sure they would make it seeing all of the pain they were enduring.. but alas the ramen won and they were defeated. They even asked for milk 10 minutes into their quests, but that didn't help.. I will not be doing that anytime soon. One guy actually became ill (will spare you the gory porcelain details). . Was the food bad?  No.  Would I go back?  Definitely, to try another soup.. but only if I had to wait 20 minutes or less. I wouldn't endure the 2 hour lines they are famous for.. . Based on what some of the Japanese locals told me, our next adventure will be to Daikokuya.  I understand they are "the real deal". Maybe after the holidays!
