ReviewID: p3-eOaytj-8bsCr8GYbD-Q
ReviewerID: fRIS3H-HltbktixjkFO2xQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Toro Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
At long last I was able to try Toro Sushi and see what the fuss is all about... . Went with my roomies after a nice long morning of moving stuff and sat down at the bar.. As we sat down Mitch (owner/chef) asked if we've been there before and names. He also, gave each of us fist bumps and even blew up his last fist bump with the last roomie.. Really cool guy!!. . Mitch gave us plenty of suggestions for sushi and cracked a ton of jokes.. Being a good sushi chef isn't all about the knifework although he does a fine job with that.. It's about how they can interact with the customers.. Mitch did that brilliantly even giving my roommate advice for his upcoming marriage.. . . The waitresses themselves were very much like ninja serving us the tofu and refilling our waters without us realizing what was happening.. Then again, Mitch was quite entertaining!. . As for the food.. well, you can't just get 5 stars on service alone! Here's what we got:. . AgeDashi Tofu - A gift to us from Mitch.. Really good broth. It was the second time I've had this and this was just phenomenal. The tofu had a almost gelatinous coating to it.. Soo delicious... . Kamikaze Roll - Jeebus.. All of us thought this was by far the standout item.. Really good spicy mayo with all the fish.. What made it so special though was the sunflower seeds.. The crunch and flavor of the sunflower seeds matched perfectly.. Genius I say!. . Oh My God and 'O' Roll - Two customer favorites per Mitch.. These were really good as well. They weren't standouts however.. . Saba/Superwhite Tuna/Salmon/Yellowtail Sashimi - This was where we could really see the freshness and quality of his fish. He has fish delivered 2-3 times a week and you can readily see that this is really premium stuff! What stood out for us was the saba. It was by far the best saba I've had and I get this everywhere! Even a roommate said this was excellent and he usually doesn't like mackeral! Really, all the pieces of fish were really good though!. . Hopefully, I'll be able to make it over again sometime soon.. As Derrick T. said in his review, Mitch made 3 customers for life.. Soooo good!!!
