ReviewID: p3eodne3pbn9tR0tnpK_yQ
ReviewerID: BLOIh8zEO0JQppJMvhKmBw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Gastropubs
Disappointing sums up my experience at Umami Burger.  I love a good burger and I try to seek the best out, wherever I am, while traveling or at home in Los Angeles.  So when I came across the review of Umami in Wednesday's LA Times Food Section I knew I wanted to try it.  . . We went around 7:30pm on Friday night and it was surprisingly quiet.  There was a group of friends at one table and couple at another.  Some other patrons loitered around the bar.  A bare, industrial space, it was a bit cold for a rainy night, but my hopes where still high, that was until I had to ask the waiter for a glass of water 4 times before a guy from the kitchen brought me one (about 15mins past).  OK, so I could obviously go on (about how the Ice Tea on the menu is not the traditional black tea that us Californians have grown fond of, but some awful floral green tea flavor - fine if they had listed as such, but I was lured into thinking it was a standard Ice Tea.  Or that they don't have shakes... though the waiter tried to convince me they had something better - root beer floats... or that before I ordered he assumed I wanted him to suggest a girly cocktail for me, though I prefer a nice dark ale instead).  . . OK, so that bring us to the burgers... hopes still high... nicely presented, yummy soft brioche like bun, good size - not too small or too large, but upon first bite, disappointing and very greasy.  And I'm talking greasier that ordering Chili Cheese Fries from Pinks or Buck Fifty's in Westwood.  And yes, I ordered the Port and Stilton, but too much cheese and no hints of the Father's Office burger that the LA Times had mentioned.  The caramelized onions were great, but few and far between.  And the fries, um, well... they were very salty.  Like a bottle of salt had been poured on them.  And I'm a gal who puts loads of salt on fries at In-n-Out.  They had a nice flavor and were crisp, but too much salt to ignore.. . And to add insult to injury (so to speak), we weren't aware of the specials, because the waiters hadn't mentioned that any existed and the small sign listing them by the cash register was being blocked by a few people standing around, so the Pork burger my boyfriend was so hoping for went uneaten.. . Needless to say I won't be returning anytime soon.  . . I realize Lots of people love it, and that's great, this is just my personal opinion and I was compelled to share.  I'll be sticking to Granville Cafe for my burgers and longing for the old recipe of Father's Office Burgers of 5 years ago, since they don't seem to quite taste the same.
