ReviewID: P5nTOvP0y3Tjv4xhP1wKeA
ReviewerID: U3nrf4OrpAqLZB3xBXx97w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Belly Shack
Category: Latin American
I've been wanting to try Belly Shack for a long time, but I have stayed away because I've heard/read mixed reviews from friends and yelpers. I am now kicking myself for not coming sooner and forming my own opinion (you yelpers are quite persuasive though). I took my boyfriend here on a Thursday night, because we both were in the mood to try something new. Belly Shack is a pay at the counter, then find a table, where the servers will bring you your food, establishment. I had every intention of just ordering the Tilapia Sammich because I was in the mood for fish, but when we got to the counter we were informed that they had only one left  of their Belly Dog special. I am a firm believer that if any restaurant tells you  they have one left of anything...YOU ORDER IT! So in addition to the Belly Dog, we order the Tilapia Sammich, Asian Meatballs, Tostones, Greens &amp; Chirizo. Yes that is a lot of food for two people (which is something we were told when paying), but when trying a new restaurant, my motto is go big or go home. . . Let me start out by saying everything was excellent. Really bold flavors, unlike anything I have had before. Surprisingly the Greens &amp; Chirizo side was both of our favorite dish. I don't know what Bill Kim has put into that broth but my boyfriend and I were fighting over the last spoonful. On to the Asian Meatballs...yum yum yum. The flavor combination of the sauce on the cold noodles with the hot meatballs was spot on. There was also a very strong lemongrass flavor that I was very please with. Then came the Belly Dog. One juicy beef dog sandwiched between fried egg noodles and kimchi salsa. I specifically remember my boyfriend asking if it was alright for him to finish that last few bites...my answer...hell no! It was by far my favorite of the sammiches (my boyfriend liked the Asian Meatballs). Also, the Belly dog comes with amazing seasoned fries with a curry mayo. Genius! Lastly we shared the Tilapia which was tasty, and I do not regret ordering it, but it wasn't our favorite. The Tostones were delicious as well. Fried plantains with Chimichurri Sauce, how could they not be? Lastly, we ordered their soft serve with homemade toppings. I know your probably thinking how in the world could we have room for dessert, but we all know there is a separate dessert storage in our stomachs. We ordered the tapioca &amp; strawberries (have to ask for it, because it is not on the menu) and the chocolate chip with bacon. Both great!  The fruity one was more light and refreshing while the chocolate bacon was rich and bursting with bacon flavor (can you guess which one I choose?). . Our experience at Belly Shack was superb. I understand where the yelpers are coming from as far as price goes because our bill was around $55, but it is also BYOB so I understand that they have to make SOME money on their food since they aren't on alcohol.  I will 100% be returning to Belly Shack, and bringing my foodie friends with me.
