ReviewID: p5XuMkl08TAMNF_MA7CYNg
ReviewerID: RjBDWtqhgK6ux-8OWHgJKA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Got here before 6pm on a weeknight.  This gigantic place (compared to the original one) was almost empty and it was very easy for us to grab a table at the outside patio.  What a surprise!  We can grab a table without any hustle at Father's Office?  Wow!. . As they don't have a wait service, we went inside to order our drinks and munchies.  First thing that caught my eyes was cheese plate!  Wow, I didn't know that Father's Office had a cheese plate!  So I ordered one as well as Spanish Mushrooms, thinking that it'll be a great munchies with a glass of wine.  So I looked into the wine section, and see that they only offer about 3 to 4 selections each per glass.  First one, $9, second one, $14, and third one, eve more expensive.  Call me cheap, but I wasn't gonna pay $14 for a glass of wine, so I went with the cheapest red.  We also ordered sweet potato fries and we went ahead and sat at the table.. . Food came relatively quickly.  Cheese plate came with this cheap un-toasted French bread that I was very unimpressed with.  But the horrifying part was that none of the cheese out of 5 varieties on the plate was good.  What?  Is that even possible?  I can even pick out some random cheap cheese from Trader Joe's and it tends to turn out to be decent.  But no, their cheeses were all below satisfactory level.  I've never had such a sad cheese plate in my life.  Spanish Mushrooms were just... mushrooms.  Nothing special.  And their $9 red was disappointing as well.. . As more people joined us, more items were ordered.  The boy was very excited to get eel here, but it also turned out to be yucky.  The eel tasted like pickled herrings.  Eew.  Who pickles eel???. . I must say, their burger and the fries (both sweet potato and normal one) were very good.  But lessons learned.  Do not, I repeat, do not order anything other than burgers, fries, and beer as Brian C says.. . 1 star for wine, cheese plate, mushrooms, and eel.. 5 stars for burgers and fries.. 3 stars to average them out.
