ReviewID: p76drTHSrz_J67Ntsu0x1A
ReviewerID: 2hrnULNz-LkW8o-jVQ51AQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lola&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
There have only been a few times in my life when I've felt as neglected at a table as I feel with my girlfriend.  I guess I can add Lola's to that list.  . . I walked in and the woman at the front was lukewarm--or maybe mildly warm (whichever one is worse)--at best.  . . The ambiance is romantic, something nice for a girl, but since I was with 2 other guys and only 1 girl, it was way too dark.  It's kind of loud for the lighting situation, but whatever, the room had a pool table, I guess they were going for divey-chic.  . . Anyway, here's where it began to suffer.  It took quite some time for our waitress to come attend to us, and even after she took our orders, it took over 10 minutes to get our waters.  We had an apple martini (not mine I swear) and a beer come before waters made it out.  In fact, I had to remind the waitress to get the waters, which she immediately blamed on the busboy.  Way to apologize lady.. . The busboy finally came with the waters and place settings--of course he just left them in a pile for us to separate ourselves.  Seriously, I'm not high maintenance, I just expected a little more out of a restaurant like this--it's not TGIF or Chili's (although I'm sure their water would have come faster).. . Anyway, so we ordered and our food came out and I asked for ranch.  Of course, it didn't come out until I had to stop and remind the waitress to get it, yet again.  This time, however, instead of blaming it on the busboy, she just rolled her eyes--much classier.. . Alright as for the food--for 5.50 at Happy Hour, the food was pretty good.  The mini-burger had a nice thick patty and the fries were fresh.  I also had the BBQ chicken pizza which had a smokey but sweet taste.  . . The good part didn't last long, as my friend decided he wanted to order as well.  Again, it took us TRACKING down our waitress to order the pizza, which she took, literally, on-the-run.  . . So by now I've finished my water, and am in need of a refill.  No such luck.  . . But wait, something that finally came out quickly?!  THE BILL!  I guess they wanted us out, so we got the bill pretty quickly.  But of course, it took forever for them to actually take it and charge it.  . . Needless to say, all in all, the service at this place ABSOLUTELY SUCKED.  . . I'm not sure I'll be back here again.
