ReviewID: p7f2npcxy_sYpJ78DsrKZw
ReviewerID: 3uJootQ876cXOb4Q2H39IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Maison Akira
Category: French
This is a tough one.  See, in my experience, the quality of the meal can markedly change depending on whether Chef Akira Hirose is there.  I've had some forgettable lunches, "meh" to uninspired dinners, yet I recall some nice dishes when Chef Hirose was in the kitchen.  On the other hand, the Sunday buffet Champagne brunch is always a delight.  Surprise, surprise, guess who graces us with his presence?  The master chef himself.  Coincidence?  Sure, kind of like gravity.. . Regarding the Champagne brunch, do not fear the all-you-can-eat element.  Generally, I, too, run far away from buffets and AYCE, as quality always overrules quantity for me, but this buffet consists of a tasty and fresh line-up.  You are not deluged with choices, so for those of you expecting a Vegas extravaganza, well, you'll no doubt, pout, so I dunno, just go to Vegas.  The sushi is nice and fresh, and includes crowd-pleasing spicy tuna and California rolls, tuna, salmon, tamago, and unagi nigiri.  Lovely salads to choose from, like caprese, Caesar, and fresh beets with seared ahi or beef.   Meats include roasted lamb, braised beef, poached salmon, and my personal favorite, roasted prime rib.  There is always a soup, sides of veggies, and a selection of cheeses.  Lastly, the desserts are wonderful and it's no secret that Chef Hirose knows how to amp up the decadence factor (I loved him at L'Orangerie).  From fresh fruits with plenty of my favorite valentine, strawberries, and a cornucopia of masterful tarts.  Delicious desserts!  And Champagne!  Mimosas aplenty to get your Sunday off to the right rosy-cheeked start.. . But, honestly, how do you review a place that is completely contingent on the head honcho's presence?  Other than Champagne brunch, I usually find the place ho-hum, to be perfectly blunt.  But, it's true.  I do enjoy that brunch.  Skip dinner (unless Chef Hirose presides) and I cannot speak for regular brunch, but on Sundays, pencil in Maison Akira every once in a while.  It's a treat.
