ReviewID: p7H0BBnzI1MaW5gyyic0XQ
ReviewerID: KILReHgA6VVdZiedpC5PqA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Desta Ethiopian Kitchen
Category: Ethiopian
quick question:  when are we going to get a 0.5 star option?  how/why is it that the corner of briarcliff and clairmont is like a ethiopian restaurant free for all? is ethiopian food usually spicy or did i just imagine that?. . sorry for all that extra. but if someone knows any of those things, please...let me know. . . okay. on to my review.  so desta was tasty...food comes out quick and hot, looks very much like the pics below.  the veggie combo was a great deal. it was quite delicious and had lots of variety (6 things).   for me, the best thing was the cabbage (thank goodness this was finger food...otherwise some serious fork stabbing would have been going on).  the lentils were a little bit meh (totally edible don't get me wrong) and i really liked the collard greens as well.  they were coarsely chopped and not cooked down to baby food, which i liked, but i could tell my friend was less than impressed. only miss for me was this mashed potato item.  maybe it wasn't potato, but that's what i thought the server said before she darted away.  either way, whatever it was was cold (on purpose cold)  and that was the only thing left on our veggie platter.  (pretty good for a crew of dedicated meat lovers).. . on to the meat- we had lamb tibs with awaze (not sure where that disappeared to...) that were good...but nothing to make me want to come back for more tomorrow.  the portion was ample, seasoning was subtle and the meat wasn't too "lamb-y", which i guess is the difference between lamb and mutton, but it was a wee bit greasy... it was however, very tender...and a little tenderness, well...it goes a long way. . . no spicy heat to anything, hence my question at the top.  maybe only certain things are supposed to be spicy....i can't remember.. . this place feels tiny...but it is a cozy atmosphere, and the service was decent. attentive,  not chatty, but friendly enough....and they kept the injera basket filled.  love  that.  nothing like getting down with your ethiopian food and having to stop shoveling your food in cuz you are out of bread.  . . i haven't had ethiopian in a while, so i'm looking forward to trying some more spots and who knows...this might be the best of the best. i have definitely had worse at a bigger spot located off of north druid hills...vowed to never return there based on my dry flavorless tibs, so desta was a welcome fix.  . . psst...gotta love that you can place your order and pick it up without ever getting out of your car.  yep. desta has a drive thru!  that appeals to the lazy lazy beast in me.. . oh. one more thing...they serve breakfast too (never had ethiopian breakfast) but i am very curious as it sounds delicious.
