ReviewID: P7pR-7lHNh6VA2Qg-oVSmQ
ReviewerID: rAlisFH5uO6bKbqA_H92rw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I really WANT to like Bottega Louie. I live downtown and have been there quite a few times at different times of day. Here's the good stuff: the building is very cool, the ambiance reminds me of a Dean and Deluca in Manhattan and the restrooms are very clean. Ok, full disclosure, sometimes I go in to use the restroom and don't eat there. Here's the bad stuff: The food is mediocre. I did like one of the small plates, the beets with goat cheese. But when I recently went for brunch and ordered the Caprese frittata I was completely disgusted. It smelled bad when it was served. I took a few bites and it was overcooked on the outside, which is why it smelled like sulfur. It was completely runny on the inside and had NO flavor. I get not oversalting things, but to make the flavors come alive in a dish like a frittata, you must salt before cooking! Ok, another time I ordered the crudité platter. It came with garlic aioli which might as well have just been a whole head of garlic. I took one bite and was shocked by the heat of the garlic and the overwhelming bitterness. I asked the server for blue cheese dressing and another server cameback with crumbled gorgonzola. After trying to flag down our waiter for 15 minutes, he finally came over and said, I kid you not, "Ma'am this is an Italian restaurant and blue cheese dressing is not something that's Italian, therefore we don't have it." Excuse me, you have gorgonzola crumbles and all of the ingredients for dressing...it isn't hard to make.. . When you walk in Bottega Louie, you are overwhelmed at how many people they have working there. Good-looking people. There must be four people to every diner so you'd think the service would be excellent. Think again. I have had great waiters, but for the most part, the multitude of waiters and busboys congregate and rush through like a blur. Friday I stopped in to grab a sandwich to take with me. After getting a sandwich from the bakery, it took 15 minutes to pay for said sandwich. And it was well past the noon hour- 2:30pm. Come on Bottega Louie...impress me. Really, or when you see me in the future it will just be because I am using your clean restroom!
