ReviewID: P7T8rkX2ltHGTQ7n_ZrykA
ReviewerID: m-LYFTQcvbdVmEWqj4LEAA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Over Easy Café
Category: American (Traditional)
I'm a little torn between 3 and 4 stars here, but I'll give Over Easy the benefit of the doubt.. . Met a friend here early this afternoon for a little lunch.  The place was cute, intimate, and very busy, but we ended up waiting only about 15 minutes.  The hostess and our server were very charming and polite, and more than willing to answer any questions we had.  I would say we definitely had 5 star service.. . First, I ordered tea.  Rooibos orange, and it was fantastic.  A complaint--the tea pot they served it in was adorable, but not the easiest to pour from.  Both my friend and I ended up with tea all over the table even before we ordered.  Our server then came over to tell us that this is a common problem, which made me feel slightly less like I ride the short bus, but would have been nice to know BEFORE I tried to pour my first cup.. . Perusing the menu, many items looked delicious, but ended up having something that I don't/can't eat (red meat, fish, pork), so I had very limited options.  Making things even more complicated--I don't eat onions or mushrooms, and the only veggie-friendly options that were not sweet contained one or both of these.  The pancakes and french toast all sounded amazing, but it was just a tad too early in the day to go into a diabetic coma, so I decided to pass (though the blueberry crunch pancakes and banana-spiked french toast were tempting).  So, limited menu items for me to eat without consuming 8 cups of sugar= 3 star menu.. . On our server's 3rd visit, we were finally able to settle on things we wanted to order.  I got the Sassy Eggs, but substituted vegetarian chorizo for the real thing, with multigrain toast.  The dish was very good, but the chorizo was a little sweet for my taste.  My friend very much enjoyed her omlette.  4-star food.. . Average everything together, and we arrive at 4 stars overall.
