ReviewID: p7Vb1myUEPDi_rGUm4qiOw
ReviewerID: ya3mbvTaymecfrTc08SxhQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: JCT Kitchen &amp; Bar
Category: Southern
We're supposed to be on a budget, but when I saw that JCT was on the list of Dining Out for John Henderson, I couldn't resist.  Wanting to eat quickly and casually so that we could get home for Lost, we ate at the bar upstairs.  . . We were there early, so there was only one other couple.  We snagged the back corner.  Cozy in thought, but cold from being by the windows, and boy was it dark!  One little candle on our table made it a challenge to read the menu.  But this was the bar area, not the restaurant, so it's really our own fault for snagging the darkest corner of a drinking space to eat.... . We started with the angry mussels.  Delicious, but I would say upset mussels rather than angry.  I love spice, and there just wasn't enough to claim anger.  Next was the beet salad.  Best beet salad I've had since discovering my love of well-prepared beets.  Perfect combination of avocado, cheese, beets, olive oil, and acid.  Seriously, before telling anyone that you don't eat beets, try this first!. . The main was not quite as exciting.  We got the fried chicken, green beans, and mac &amp; cheese with a side of grits.  The fried chicken was just ok - the breading on one of the pieces was a little too browned - making it dry and crunchy.  The mac &amp; cheese tasted like it had too much flour, but I did like the lemony flavor that it had to it enough to try it again.  The grits - not sure what went wrong there, but something tasted metallic.  Exactly like the weird taste sensation that I got from the nitro milkshake at Flip.  Maybe the sauce sat for too long in a pan?  Whatever it was, it left my teeth feeling weird, and made me eat more of the mac &amp; cheese.The green beans were actually the highlight of that dish for me - crisp and fresh without too much oil.  . . As we were walking out, I spied the scallops dish - I will be back to try that!
