ReviewID: P8mmuKqgy5ImAC72QhAL9A
ReviewerID: hAKMBjyqeNNkivCB-zTWsA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ping Pong
Category: Chinese
I realize I have a few complaints and yet I still want to give Ping Pong a five-star rating. But, I'll settle on four to keep it honest.. . First, the good-. . Ping Pong has a great atmosphere. With it's ultra-white interior I always assumed this place would be way too trendy or pretentious. But on trying it, I have no such complaints. A little trendy, sure. But, I've always been made to feel at home.. . The food is, for the most part, very good. There are a number of unique options (not your token, paint-by-the-numbers Thai menu) and a lengthy list of appetizers. I am constantly trying new things here- where at your standard Thai place I always get the same thing. There's just so many things to try.. . They have four dollar glasses of house red and white wine. Perhaps you get what you pay for... but, c'mon... how many places are you gona find with four dollar glasses of wine? Particularly places that one might call trendy? In addition, I think, if I am not mistake, that they also offer cocktails, and permit BYOB.. . Chocolate Fortune Cookies served on a ping pong paddle- very clever.. . But now the bad-. . Service is what it is. Servers never seem to be personable (though, I question if its because they don't speak much English). This also allows them to cover more tables, and in my experience have never been left waiting, or without a full glass of water.. . The Chicken Lettuce Wraps have a sauce that it is really heavy on the peanuts and really light on the CHICKEN. How do you mess up a chicken peanut sauce? The edamame appetizer was literally like maybe twelve pieces... C'mon.. . As stated above- the serving sizes are very small. Entree rice and noodle dishes could ALMOST be considered small plates. Which makes it essential to order appetizers to supplement your meal. Prices appear cheap - but it starts to rack up when you have to order extra dishes to fill up.. . We ordered delivery from here recently, and the sesame chicken dish came with literally 4 pieces of broccoli. It was so disappointing... I'm not sure if this was a delivery portion, or if that's what is actually served on site. Dish size seems rather arbitrary, some dishes giving much larger portions than others.. . But Ping Pong is fun and cool. Totally worth a try. Make sure you order enough, and you should leave happy. Expect to wait for a table at peak-times. This is one of the most popular spots in Lakeview.
