ReviewID: P9aSUUff4_sLn3ay1MrnRA
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Dogwood Restaurant
Category: Southern
I love fried chicken.  I am a normally fairly conscientious eater who opts toward healthy and veggie options.  But, I love fried chicken.  Therefore, when an opportunity to dine at Dogwood and partake of a prix fixe menu which included fried chicken presented itself, I couldn't say no.. . Everyone here is very friendly.  The parking valet was nice, hostess was nice, the bartender was very nice and chatty, and our server was nice, too.  Our server was also extremely efficient especially considering we were a party of ten.. . Everything on the prix fixe menu was very good.  The tomato bisque was flavorful and not too heavy, and it had a nice fried goat cheese ball in it, too (I love fried goat cheese balls).  I chose the fried chicken breast as my entrée rather than the short ribs.  I did see the short ribs and they looked good.  The friend chicken was quite good.  It was flavorful, tender and very, very crispy.  I cannot stress this crispiness enough - it was remarkable.  It came with a sauce on it, which I actually liked; it was a white sauce that tasted a little like tartar sauce and a little like ranch dresses and maybe some dill.  Anyway, I liked it.  It came beautifully plated on a large serving of macaroni and cheese, and greens.  The macaroni and cheese was flavorful, cheesy and not greasy.  I liked it.  The greens were very good, although they did have more bacon in them than I have ever seen in a serving of greens (which is not a bad thing).  I also have to say that the chicken passed my cold chicken test.  I ate my leftovers cold the next day and the chicken was still very good, although some of the breading did flake off and it wasn't all that crispy anymore (this is to be expected).  As a table, we sampled the grits, which I thought were all delicious.  I particularly liked the grits with lobster and the pimento cheese grits, although the mushroom grits were very acceptable, too.. . The dessert was a maple cheesecake served with a cranberry and apple compote.  It was really nice.  The compote had little cranberries and what seemed like candied apples.  Since I was taking half my entrée home in a box, I felt no guilt in devouring my entire dessert.. . The prix fixe menu was $30 for all three courses and I think is only available on Mondays (check the website to be sure).  The servings were generous - this is no frou-frou food restaurant.  This combined with half-priced bottles of wine under $100 on the same night makes for a very complete meal at a good price.  I will definitely return for this and will also likely venture out to other regions of the menu.
