ReviewID: P9iRRtAOHrSY6oZjgckVMQ
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cameli&#39;s Gourmet Pizza Joint
Category: Pizza
I used to come here when I lived in the ghetto on Boulevard years ago and remembered it being a pretty decent pie. Then I started my quest for the best 'ZA in metro Atlanta and haven't been back to this joint in ages. I'm glad it's still opened for business because it really does put out a tasty pie... unlike some things on the corner of Boulevard and Ponce. And I ain't talking about my pals, Popeyes.. . Just walking into the joint is an adventure. The stench of urine after a hobo's night on the Train is intoxicating to say the least. He's all aboard on the midnight express and it only runs from sober to slumber with no round trip ticket available. But once inside, this shanty is quite cozy. I swear, the first question on the job application must be "How much ink do you have?"... because everyone there had tattoos. Whatever... what about the 'ZA?. . I ordered a couple whole pies a few weeks ago and it was decent. Thin crust, tasty sauce, just the right amount of cheese and melt. The bottom was charred ever so slightly. It was decent. But then went back a week or so ago and got the "Monster Slice".... . This was a whole different creasture... It was G O O D. They serve this Frankenslice on a friggin plastic cafeteria tray... that should give you a scope on how big this thing was. The char was really good. The crust was thin, crispy and totally foldable given the size. The sauce and cheese was just about the same as the whole pies, tasty. The only little thing I noticed was the edge of the crust... It looked like a friggin comb-over but for dough. It was a lean-to big enough to fit my Min Pin under. It could quite possibly weather the wrath of hurricane Fay.. . Overall, a 3.5 star because it's a pretty decent NY style 'ZA to go with a tasty Brooklyn Lager... the best in Atlanta? No, Rosa's takes that spot... for now (patiently waiting for this highly ass kissed Varasano 'ZA). BTW- No guidos allowed.. . Yoooo Cameli!. . Burp!
