ReviewID: pA7hAQC4IAuXaHY6uIPAqw
ReviewerID: VtEl0J8tf0ICGQXa3OLe3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I've been foiled from trying Mastro's on two separate occasions now, and i'll be damned if i let that happen again. So when L told me she couldn't make it because she was working late, I had to step it up and get a replacement. Enter B to the rescue.. . We had reservations at 8:30, and due to some last minute firefighting at work, we arrived 10 minutes late. Not a problem. . . I must admit, I felt a bit under-dressed. I'm still in recovery from a wild weekend in SF so I was in total comfort wear: unshaven, in an informal brown plaid short-sleeve button-up and ripped designer jeans and my patented spiky fauxhawk (this time it's purple, red and blonde). The clientelle was a bit on the more formal end of the spectrum: suits for the men, evening gowns for the ladies... and me. B wasn't all stylish either, seeing as we both just came from work. That said, the staff treated us no different. Kudos.. . After a brief wait at the lobby, we were escorted upstairs by a deliciously attractive brunette that kept playing with her hair as we followed her gorgeous pilates-sculpted ass up to the dining area. I was definitely getting hungry.. . The dining area is very nicely decorated, with dark woods, a piano bar, and a modicum variety of table sizes and configurations. We were seated at the back. There was a pretty good sized crowd, and one thing I did notice was that the noise level is above average, and there is not much privacy to be had; The people seated next to us might as well have been sharing our table.. . Service was impeccable. Our host made sure to coddle to our every question, and made sure that we felt at home at every turn. I ordered the Chef Cut bone in Rib Eye and B went for the bone in Fillet.  For sides, we went with the Lobster Mashed Potatoes and an order of Shoestring Potatoes. I didn't feel like drinking (like I said, I'm recovering from a wild weekend), so we both went with a cherry coke.. . Portions were humongous. Just. Huge. I did my best to put my steak down but it pretty much put me down instead. Our sides came in such huge bowls that I could not believe, let alone describe. The cut was good, the marbling on my rib-eye must have been sublime because I could taste each pocket of goodness. They also know how to cook a medium steak.. . For dessert, we went with the gelato (two scoops of vanilla bean and one scoop of chocolate). Mmmm... . . I'm happy I finally was able to eat here, and I must say, it was worth the wait.
