ReviewID: PaTRfdmtPcesBCRQNtZECA
ReviewerID: uhvnUbOo9cOIlcns0sq54w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
There was a lot of pressure on this place to really step it up to get a good review.  I tried for weeks to get a reservation on a Friday or Saturday night, but to no avail (unless I wanted to eat at 5:00 or at 10:00).  I decided to make a reservation for a Sunday and was able (two and a half weeks in advance) to get a reservation.  Then they called the day before to confirm that I still wanted the reservation.  Not only did they do this to remind me...I had to call them BACK to really confirm that I would be there.  A little overkill I thought.... . When I showed up at the restaurant and they said "we are waiting for a few tables to turn over..would you like to sit at the bar while you wait..." I thought: Oh HELL no!  I made a reservation three weeks ago, they better not make me sit here for long...blah blah blah...you know...you have all said it before!!. . Then I realized, in my excitement, that I was ten minutes early.  Okay, my bad.. . They were able to seat us at our reserved time.  The place was packed!  For a Sunday I was really impressed.  The decor is very interesting because it combines the old feel of the warehouse district with a modern flair.  Not only does it capture the ruggedness of the old days of the warehouse markets, but it also captures the classiness of that era as well.  They have brown "Sepia"-toned colors( I know...surprise surprise!)  in the room as well as antique chandeliers, but they also have modern-style furniture.  Great space.  The mirrors even look like they have been around for decades.  . . The service was great.  Lisa B was our waitress and she greeted us with a nice smile, took a water order, and left us to the menu and wine list.  There was no pressure to hurry and order and there was no pressure to decide on something to drink right away.  . . They have a wonderful wine list full of selections from the US to Lebanon to South Africa.  I was deciding between two Shiraz and Lisa B suggested one from South Africa.  Again, she went and got our wine before pressuring us to think about what to order.  . . When she had returned with the wine we were able to ask about the entrees.  This is where she came to life.  She was able to speak to all of the entrees on the menu.  The only problem: She didn't have anything BAD to say about them!!  Didn't help us decide.  Once we directed her to some choices we had been toying with she directed us towards a good way to go.  And she was spot on!  I will get to that later.. . We ordered flat bread with apple wood bacon, cheese, and apples as well as a mixed green salad with seasonal veggies.  Both were absolutely wonderful.  The flat bread came on this serving plate that was a slice of finished wood...like we had been camping and used nature as our serving dishes....You know 'cause I do that ALL the time...make apple wood bacon flat bread while I am camping...Anyway.. . And our entrees:. . I had the sturgeon...I almost ordered the skate, but the Lisa B really convinced me to get the sturgeon and I was very pleased. It was perfectly cooked and well-seasoned with lots of flavor.   My boyfriend was between the flank steak and the short ribs and Lisa B came through again with a great recommendation for the braised beef short ribs.  It came with a herb noodle pasta and caramelized pearl onions.  The meat was cooked perfectly, melted in your mouth and their pasta is homemade and was delicious!!  . . Then there was more...even though we were full we felt we had to go there (and probably should have ordered only one)...Dessert.  . . My boyfriend had the banana bread pudding and I had the cranberry upside down cake.  Both were delicious, but the bread pudding was not sweet enough for my boyfriend's sweet tooth.  . . All and all, it was a great dining experience.  The staff was very friendly and the atmosphere was a nice place to spend a few hours.  I will definitely go back and will recommend it to others.
