ReviewID: pbFt5sWhnALVIm35CR0x0w
ReviewerID: qaefCW7au9kQOWvq6lLKGg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Serpas
Category: American (New)
Sitting right on the corner of Irwin and Auburn, Serpas makes a point.  No, literally, it is a triangular building that abuts the towers above the intersection of these two streets in the Old Fourth Ward.  This is merely the first surprise of many that this wonderful restaurant has to offer.  Beginning with the valet and ending with dessert, Serpas does not disappoint.  . . I have been to Serpas more than a dozen times over the last year and I am disappointed in myself for taking so long to write (day job and frequent dining prevent more timely reviews).  Nonetheless, after my last several visits over the past two months I felt a duty (and had the time) to take pen to paper and add to the wonderful reviews my fellow Yelpers (and GQ "Ten Best New Restaurants in America") wrote before me.  . . As one drives up to Serpas they are greeted by one of the most ebullient and amiable valets in town - Hank.  He is full of energy and really sets the tone for the visit.  If he offers a food recommendation, take it, as he definitely knows his Serpas cooking!  After leaving Hank and walking inside, the diner is subsumed in a high energy environment from the bar to the dining area.  The place is energetic and gives off a great vibe.  I would define the actual space as warehouse chic with vaulted ceilings and exposed brick.  The tables and chairs are very simple (think 60s diner) but inviting.  The staff is friendly and knowledgeable.    . . Although an updated space and friendly/knowledgeable staff are important, it is the food that ultimately brings you back.  In this case, Serpas does it very well and at reasonable prices (Apps $8-12; Mains $14-25).  Most of the food has what I would characterize as an Asian Southern feel.  This particularly comes out in the small plates.  I have had the pleasure to try many of the dishes over time and really have come to love the tuna tartar with chili sesame dressing, green apple, house chips; fried Green tomato &amp; crab salad stack with herb vinaigrette, avocado, toasted sunflower seeds; flash fried oysters; and the mussels in a Sweetwater 420 red chile broth with toasted foccacia.  The broth in this last dish is so delicious you just want to pick up the bowl and drink it!  The main plates are not what I would call exciting but every dish I have eaten has been executed and flavored well.  If I had to choose, my favorite dish on the menu at present is the Jumbo Sea Scallops with spaghetti squash in a panang curry.  The sweetness of the perfectly cooked scallops is contrasted by the slight bite in the panang curry.  The desserts, much like the mains, are mostly safe (Beignets, fried apple pie, cornmeal cake) but executed to perfection making you forget how underwhelming they would be at the wrong place.  . . In the end Serpas is well worth being put into the regular dining rotation.  I try to get here often and am always happy I when I do.  The space, energy and food all make it a wonderful experience and I look forward to many more visits to the Old Fourth Ward to see what Scott Serpas has in store for me.
