ReviewID: pbRiEbzOYgAKWp-pammQiw
ReviewerID: H183Fg4ku9mIQsmAa0fsOQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
After hearing that such a thing as a Blue Velvet cake existed, my boyfriend and I decided to make a date of it: Watch "Blue Velvet" (1986) while eating Blue Velvet.  It's kind of demented in retrospect, as a dude is found dead with a piece of blue velvet stuffed in his mouth, but damn is that some good cake.  I love blueberries, and cream cheese frosting is right up there with buttercream in my book, so Blue Velvet was nothing less than an orgasmic explosion in my mouth.  But consumer beware, as the rumors are true - blue poop!. . Other desserts I have enjoyed here:. . SNICKERDOODLES - fair, just a little too crunchy for my cookie tastes.  It was late in the evening, though, otherwise I suspect I would've had a yummier experience.. . MOLASSES COOKIE - yummy!  Soft, with a satisfying crunch.....clearly, it defies physics.  I think I'll save this for autumn, though.  It just has that seasonal way about it.. . OOEY GOOEY DOUBLE CHOCOLATE COOKIE - take it home, and zap it in the microwave for 19 seconds.  Best served warm, to enhance the "gooey."  Don't let its size fool you, because this little guy is RICH.  I needed two glasses of milk to help it down.  Less of a cookie, and more of a dense brownie with a surprise in the center.. . CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKIE - nothing terribly special, but delicious none the less.  It's certainly worth a try!  Crunchy on the outside, soft on the inside.. . CHOCOLATE 3X - cakeGASM.  So decadent, get a box because it might last you a few days.  This is the definition of chocolate cake.. . RED VELVET CUPCAKE - very delish.  Pretty large for a cupcake, but the frosting to cake ratio remains acceptable.  My favorite part was the "muffin-like" crust it had formed on the top.  Nice texture, and perfectly moist!  I'd stay away from the poppers, just because people tend to report back that they are too dry, and then never give it's big brother a chance to shine.  Go straight for the good stuff, I say.. . GRASSHOPPER ICE CREAM SANDWICH - my first venture into Milk's ice cream sandwiches did not disappoint!  The mint chocolate chip ice cream was smooth and dreamy, but not super melty.  It stayed pretty solid as I made my way through the sandwich.  The macarons were soft and had plenty of give.  Not crumbling bits here!  It being half dipped in chocolate was just icing on the cake, so to speak.  . . SALTY CARAMEL ICE CREAM SANDWICH - I usually find caramel based desserts too sweet and rich, but this hockey puck of love really hit the spot.  The ice cream was actually less sweet than the chewy macaron, which made for a great blend of flavors.  Beware: it IS salty!  You might not notice so much while you're eating it, but I started chugging water immediately after I finished.. . TRIPLE CHOCOLATE MILKSHAKE - I thought I had properly prepared my stomach before taking this bad boy on, but apparently not.  Delicious?  Oh yes, but not for the faint of heart.  Sooooooooo rich, almost sickeningly.  I was doing fine until about halfway through, when what I had digested finally settled and turned into a brick.  My boyfriend tried to take the beast on, but after one sip, he made a face and said, "It's gotta be dark chocolate, I hate dark chocolate."  I tried to convince him that it was Milk's normal chocolate flavor, but there's no denying Milk's chocolate ice cream is not normal chocolate ice cream.  Final verdict is that I loved it, but probably won't attempt it again, at least not by myself.. . MILKIE WAY MALT - Just like the candy bar!!  Vanilla ice cream, swirls of caramel and chocolate, and studded with these tiny malted chocolate chips.  Very sweet, but not disgustingly so.  It was far easier to inhale than the Triple Chocolate Shake....but jury's out whether or not that's for the better.. . BLUEBERRY CRUMBLE PIE ICE CREAM - Holy crap, it's blueberry pie....in ice cream form.  It only took a tiny sample to convince me to buy an $8 pint, I was so won over.  It's super creamy, filled with flavor, and it actually tastes like PIE!. . A note about their ice creams: Scoops forever shall win in my heart, but Milk has a few things going for them, despite being more expensive.. 1) Consistency.  For the most part, you know what's going to be there, and if you have your heart set on something, you're not likely to be disappointed.. 2) Location.  It's Beverly Blvd., I can walk there if I want to.. 3) Stock.  I know if I slide in quarter to ten, right before closing, I'm going to have options, and not just what nobody else wanted.. . The customer service is great.  Everyone who has ever served me here has been the most pleasant person in the entire world.  Makes you wonder what they REALLY put in the blue velvet cakes.  The ambience is fun, but I'll admit, I rarely stick around.  I like to stuff my face with blue cake in the privacy of my own home, thanks.
