ReviewID: PcEu1T-OZPEwc0JLMBy71Q
ReviewerID: omJUEayO0J0UfNEpW3QnTw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
I have to say that I didn't notice the problems that other people are complaining about during my meal there last Thursday night.. . Yes, the place was packed and we were in tightly arranged tables.  This made private conversations a little difficult to come by.  But, it made sneaking a peek at other peoples' meals easier.. . No, the service was not horrible.  Our server was super friendly and attentive to our needs (empty glasses of wine/water, the need for more bread, etc.)  This also seemed to be the case with the other tables around us.  We didn't have to wait and we weren't rushed, it was a good paced meal.. . The food was excellent.  I'd give the experience a 4.5 stars, but that's not possible so 4 star will have to suffice.  . . Starters: I started out with a summer corn soup with basil creme fraiche and a corn fritter.  I would have preferred the soup to be served cold, because the restaurant was quite warm.  But, the soup was a solid way to begin the meal.  My friend had the special appetizer that included figs, proscuitto, and this cheese whose name escapes me right now (it was fantastic).. . Main:  I followed the soup with the monk fish.  The fish was sauteed and served over a bed of whipped potatoes and spinach.  My only complaint was the lack of seasoning in the spinach (but that's nothing that a liberal application of salt and pepper can't fix).  My friend had raviolis stuffed with leeks and served in a chicken au jus.  Both meals layered the flavors very nicely.. . Dessert:  Upside down olive oil cake with plums.  Yum.  Simple, moist, and flavorful.. . Wine:  The wine menu is super complicated and could probably use tabs so you can avoid thumbing through their endless selection.  But, our server suggested a really good New Zealand Cab Saugv, which went perfectly with the meal.. . I'd go back for seconds because I enjoyed everything I tasted.  Although, the price point is high enough to make this a special event place (as opposed to an everyday place) for me.
