ReviewID: pCxLkoLfN7y47NOmHL0nBA
ReviewerID: hQYc90YPvI5WAhxUF4Bo5Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
3 WORDS: BLACK TRUFFLE EXPLOSION. . There's something about automatic glass sliding doors that turn me on...                                                  ..being named #7 restaurant in the world doesn't hurt either.. .                               . What better way to celebrate a long weekend than to hit Alinea on a Good Friday. After you valet ($10) your car, you enter into a discreet looking gray building which you would never surmise to be a Culinary Heaven. Upon entering, at first, you feel like you are entering a posh nightclub, with floor moldings full of pink backlighting. Your resy is confirmed and you make your way to your table. You immediately notice that tables are against the wall with ample walk room. As you sit, you notice a pair of chopsticks in a metal vessel holding up what appears to be sandwiched edible flowers between summer roll rice paper sheets. You are told not to touch and are left to your imagination as to what that will be used for later. Upon sitting, your waiter asks if you have any dietary restrictions to cater to. You state them and the feast begins.. . THE MENU. Since I wanted to enjoy dinner sans taking notes, I asked the waiter if I could request a menu after the dinner service was complete, hinting that I wrote about food. Unbeknownst to me, you are never shown it during service, but the menu is tweaked for each guest and you receive a (virtually indestructible) dated custom menu on your way out. As for the menu itself, the fuzzy circles represent a map of your meal - the area of the circle corresponds to the size of the course, and it's left-to-right position corresponds to its relative sweetness or savoriness. A stroke of pure genius IMO. We were told the menu evolves daily and changes every season so I will definitely be back!. . THE DISHES. Each dish..scratch that..food vessel is tailor made to GA's liking, most of it being stainless steel and minimalist. There was the squab dish that was served over a birch log a lobster dish which had literally 3 layers of food, reminding me of a Russian babushka doll. The sheer number of ingredients used to prepare each dish is a remarkable feat in and of itself. Those who actually cook will appreciate that. If you notice the ordering of the entrees, they don't sequentially go from light to heavy. The hostess agreed w/ me when I mentioned palate fatigue so they know how to change it up. Note the curvature and size of the bubbles on the menu change as an intentional way of circumventing that.. . PICS. GA hates bloggers &amp; pics so I think the lighting is intentional. NO FLASH so pics were still taken but none of which I would proudly publish. When GA himself prepared our dessert AT OUR TABLE (perhaps hinting about writing about food had something to do with this, as the table next to us only got his Sous Chef...Suckers!), we didn't force the issue of taking a pic with him, although we were feening for one. . . THE FOOD. Some dishes were farfetched for me. ALMOST EVERY DISH was on point, besides the eucalyptus which overpowered the squab and the steelhead roe w/ plantain, ginger, papaya which was served in a candy purse, which messed with my senses, teetering back and forth from sour to sweet and vice versa. In the 2nd to last dessert, the lemon was too tart and didn't synch with the white chocolate, despite the ingenious idea of serving the plate OVER a deflating earl grey infused pillow. BTW, I later came to find out that the summer roll rice paper sitting on our table was for the deconstructed summer roll dish which had this CRACKTACULAR pork confit in it. On the flip side, if I had to name ONE DISH that blew me away, it would have to be their signature BLACK TRUFFLE EXPLOSION. You are told beforehand not to face your dining companion and to clench your mouth shut before biting, and for good reason.. . THE PIèCE DE RéSISTANCE. Grant serving you dessert...AT YOUR TABLE? Are you kidding me? No other high end restaurant has done that for me. The unforgettable finale was that of a NITROGEN CHOCOLATE MOUSSE emptied out from a loaf pan, chipped at with a custom mini metal dagger and placed atop a soft gray silicone tablecloth. Chunks of chewy white coconut are then placed strategically before Grant uses a metal spoon to create a coconut milk dotted trail, one dot smaller than the next. Menthol is also placed randomly and turns into a square shape, with hyssop meticulously placed over it with tweezers. He then walks away and you are left in awe of what just transpired, too fixated on the Chef to have paid attention to his 'tangential' actions at the time. What a jizzmatic combination of flavors. . . JUST GO.. . Apr 2, 2010 Tour Menu ($225/22 courses): . http://i42.tinypic.com.... . . Sample pics: . http://www.foodinmouth.... . . Grant prepares dessert for us, exactly like this:. . http://www.youtube.com.... . . Total $324/pp after everything (and worth every penne
