ReviewID: Pdp0y731VpudFeAzZDeIVw
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft Atlanta
Category: American (New)
I was delighted to join some fellow Yelpers for Craft's first official night last evening.  We had a lovely time and I very much enjoyed the experience.  I do really, really like this place and I am waffling between giving it four or five stars - for me, it's a solid 4.5.  But, I'm going with four simply because it's a quite pricey restaurant and, all things considered, that does tip the scale down a bit.  I am not saying that the food and the overall experience are not worth it (I think they are) but I needed to make this decision somehow.  Here is a breakdown of my scorecard (not including price considerations):. . Five Stars:. . * Valet parkers called me by name, were exceedingly polite and gave me discount coupons when I left.  And, it was complimentary valet.. * All the staff members were uber-friendly. * They have an extensive wine list and we had a very lovely Malbec. * They have an extensive list of ports, dessert wines and aperitifs. * There were many fish or veggie options for those of us who are not so carnivorous. * The food:. o Starters like the squash tortellini, mushroom risotto, beet salad - these were excellent. o The monkfish was excellent. The cod and scallops were very good, too.. o Side dishes like the gnocchi, spinach, Brussels sprouts, fingerling potatoes, braised red cabbage, potatoes au gratin, and parsnips (fried not mashed) - all were excellent.  What a mean veggie plate I could create from all these.. o The desserts were overall delicious.  I loved the chocolate donuts and, eventually, the hazelnut financier.. * The space: very modern, nice lighting, loud fun music that you can still talk over, nice bathrooms (although there was a bit of a lineup at times because there are only two single unisex bathrooms upstairs). * They gave us a nice little bag of granola when we left. . Four Stars:. . * The food:. o My entrée, the swordfish: It was very good but did not wow me like some of the others did.  It had a slightly citrus-y flavor and I tasted fennel, as well (which I really like), and it was served with olives and capers.  It was good and seemed light and well-cooked but I felt like I ordered the wrong thing.. o I know it was the first night and I will allow for some confusion but my dessert (the hazelnut with something else financier with pears) was delicious but served with the wrong ice cream.  It was supposed to come with cardamom ice milk but it was served with Kit's Meyer lemon sorbet instead which was a truly dreadful combination (and we couldn't tell the difference until we tasted each thing and did our own matching up).  Once we all switched our ice creams around, it was fine, but this would be really bad if we were diners who are not sharers and tasters like we are. The financier with cardamom ice milk was delicious, BTW.  . . I would love to return (and I just bought five lottery tickets so that I can afford to after I win!).  I get the feeling that my next visit could bump it up to a five-star rating.
