ReviewID: PDytNG7P7EMwhzN_-S5Btw
ReviewerID: eOEDBLlZsBai88w9UchouQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
Pho-reaking delicions!  . . We went over to Tank Noodle this afternoon because we were feeling like doing brunch a little differently.  Dayuuum, am I glad that we did!  . . We just beat the lunch/brunch crush and decided to start with delicious "squid salad."  It came with peppers, peanuts, yummy fish sauce and these rice-based chips that were airy.  The only way I can think to describe them is that they had the consistency of funyons (gross), but no flavor.  An interesting vehicle to get the marinated squid-ness down the gullet!  Squid was good, and tasted a *little* fishy, but we seemed to get out of there unscathed.  . . Next up, the main event.  She got the Tank Noodle Pho Special, and I got the Rice Vermicelli Special.  Pho special came with allllll the fixings.  Especially the ones that might seem odd to your typical Western or Meat and Potatoes diner.  These included tripe (stomach lining) and beef tendon.  Both tasted exactly like the beef broth, and where the tripe was a tad on the chewy side, the tendon was nice and soft... almost gelatinous.  MMmmmmmmm.    Bonus: It was spicy enough to clear up any lingering cold symptoms too!. . The Rice Vermicelli came with egg roll bits, shrimp, beef, "pork patties" (which tasted great, but came in a weird little hand shape.  funny!), shoots, green onions and all the other delicious fixings.  . . By the time we were almost done we were suprised to look up and see two other friends from WP looming over our table too!  They sat with us, and we talked about our respective NYEs while they got their meal started and we paid our bill.  By the time we were ready to leave, people were standing 10 deep by either door, salivating over the food that everyone seemed to be enjoying.  We decided to say goodbye to our friends before someone stepped in and got loco.  . . Tank Noodle:  A shiny beacon of Viet-style goodness on Argyle Street.  Sure, she's the most popular girl at the (Argyle Street) dance, but she sure is tasty.
