ReviewID: peIoVapu4_VSi-KKRho3TA
ReviewerID: 59Zmdh7FJ3xTn68D6uc-HQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
Yelp, you have led us astray.  . . Now, you may discount my review because I stuck to the salad bar, but I came with two meat-loving men whom I grilled for feedback (no pun intended).  First, there was J, who had heard about Fogo about a year and a half ago.  While he wanted to go for a while, we realized it didn't make much sense because I couldn't eat the main attraction.  Then there was my brother.  He's the family non-kosher eater and loves a good treif meat.  He was out visiting from the east coast and I wanted to take him out for a nice dinner to celebrate his college graduation.  I asked him his favorite cuisine and he said "Brazilian" having once worked as a gaucho.  So Fogo it was.. . We made a reservation the night before and arrived early enough to find street parking on one of the few non-metered, non-permit streets.  Nice, since the Fogo lot was filled with luxury cars that would give my Corolla an inferiority complex.  We were seated within 5-10 minutes of arrival. . . The interior is pretty nice with lots of wine cellars and wood.  It's dark and a bit swanky, with the grill in the back corner (or is it front corner?). . Although we weren't in the far corner of the room, we were in a "corner" such that two of us were against metal grates, the people who had arrived at the hostess basically saw us, and many a gaucho just walked by.. . The server came by and explained the whole process.  I opted for the Salad Bar meal and the other two were all about the meat.  The server was nice enough, though apparently they have zero clue about the pricing of any drinks since they don't go near the computers.  So you have to keep an eye on that yourself, since even a Bud Light will run you $5.  . . The salad bar was okay.... nothing great.  They had balls of fresh mozzarella, which were good, but the accompanying tomatoes were basically Subway quality - likely because they're out of season.  They have plenty of oils and vinegars, which I would recommend over the vinaigrette, which tasted off.  The green bean salad was tasty.  . . The sides were the highlight of the meal.  The fried polenta was crispy on the outside and soft on the inside.  The fried bananas had a little crispiness and were very tasty.  The cheese bread was yummy too.  The mashed potatoes were overly salty.. . As for the meat, here was the feedback I got from the dudes:. . Picanha - They never got this (despite it being the signature meat) because the Picanha gauchos kept passing by without even glancing at our table.. . Filet Mignon - They said that this was much tougher than they would have expected and slightly dry.  J tried the bacon wrapped one too and said it was okay.. . Beef Ancho - This was tasty and well cooked.. . Alcatra - This was J's favorite - tender and succulent.. . Fraldinha - Another favorite at the table, since it was tender and well-seasoned.. . Cordeiro - My brother's favorite - he ate several of these lamb chops.  J's, however, wound up having lots of gristle on them.. . Frango - They ate them but were underwhelmed.  Even bacon couldn't save it.. . As I mentioned, the gauchos would sometimes pass by without offering.  When they do come to your table, you can let them know the doneness of the meat that you'd like and they'll cut from the appropriate part.. . We didn't try any desserts because everyone was full, but that's another thing.  A meat dinner is $56 and salad bar is almost $30.  To eat $56 worth of meat you really need to pack in a lot, just like at a buffet.  So you're faced with that dilemma - do you want to get your money's worth but feel heavy/sick afterwards or eat till your contention and feel like you were ripped off.. . My brother had one plate's worth of food.  J wasn't amazed by anything.  Our tab wound up to be $190 after tax + tip (we had a few soft drinks).  With so many fabulous restaurants in LA, we could have had a great dinner at a place like Lucques for that amount, and been satiated both with full bellies and having tried wonderful, seasonal, and well-prepared food.  With nearly half of the meats being overdone, the salad bar lackluster, and a steep check, I really don't understand the hype around Fogo.
