ReviewID: PFMAx3nOsCziQd7n71cgSg
ReviewerID: -x1516ZG5GllZiBjDQlRkA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Modern
Category: French
Sometimes a piece of art can take your breath away. It can catch you off guard, feel a little over indulgent and beg you to dig deeper. I ate at The Modern and wondered what the chef was thinking. How many times could he trick me by making watermelon look like tomato and vice versa? How big of a piece of foie gras does one person deserve before it feels SINFUL? Does putting Pop Rocks on dessert make it avant garde? My dinner at The Modern was amazing. The unveiling of each course was a presentation in itself and one that merits The Modern with five Yelp stars. . . The Modern really takes care of you. They are all about taking service seriously. As I sat near the entrance waiting, the hostess checked on me periodically and told me when my friends would be arriving since they had called to say they would be just a tad bit late due to traffic. I had coat service (where they take off/put on your coat) and once my friends and I were seated, we were treated like royalty. The number of people attending to us outnumbered us 2:1, one apologized to my friend when he blocked his way as he walked to the bathroom and the waiters even gave us ample time to photograph our dishes before explaining to us what they were. God forbid they spoke while we were being paparazzi. Dining at The Modern requires patience. A meal here could set you back as long as five hours. Towards the end of our dinner, we were rushing to get out of there to make a show. What a pity. Now that I think back on it, I really appreciate the experience at The Modern. It's one of luxury that warrants time to be set aside. . . The Chef and Seasonal Tasting Menu was more than we could handle. Between the three of us we had 15 different dishes all of which had decided they wanted to be one of a kind, a show piece and so flavorful that they would leave a lasting impression on us. We created our own wine pairing and even got half glasses to accompany certain dishes. The sommelier was quite friendly, extremely knowledgeable, and very accessible. While a meal at The Modern is high class, it is definitely not snooty.. . The Modern used the finest ingredients in all of it's dishes. The pictures alone don't do the food justice. To sum it up, this is what we had:. . - Amuse-bouche of palmiers, fried lima beans, and corn panna cotta w/ crispy lentils and tapioca in tomato water. - Heirloom Tomato Terrine with Micro Basil and Spicy Tomato Sorbet. - Foie Gras Terrine Flavored with Juniper Marinated Raisins, Pistachio Joconde. - Tartare of Hamachi, Yellowfin Tuna and Watermelon with Mirin, Verjus, Daikon Radish and Ginger. - Tartare of Yellowfin Tuna and Diver Scallops Seasoned with Yellowstone River Caviar. - Chilled Cucumber Soup with Alaskan King Crab. - Ravioli of Escargot with Slow Poached Quail Eggs, Escargot Caviar and Mustard Greens. - Halibut in a Zucchini Blossom with Cardamom Jus. - Roasted Maine Lobster with Sweet Corn, Baby Fennel and Basil. - Chorizo-Crusted Codfish with White Coco Bean Purée and Harissa Oil. - Sullivan County Foie Gras with Fresh Peas, Banana and Almond Cream. - Black Angus Beef Tenderloin with Parsley Root Purée and Lobster Mushroom. - Pennsylvania Duck Breast with Black Trumpet Marmalade, "Fleischschneke", and Banyuls Jus. - pineapple puree, watermelon, and cream. - miniature ice cream cones. - Warm Fig Tart with Balsamic Reduction, Pine Nuts and Olive Oil Ice Cream . - macarons, truffles, pistacio cupcakes. - espresso chocolates. - Milk Chocolate and Hazelnut Dacquoise with Raspberry Sorbet. - Buttermilk Panna Cotta with Strawberry Soup, Tomato Marmalade and Pistachio Ice Cream. . Is that not over indulgent for three people? I tried everything and my favorite was the lobster. My least favorite was the foie gras. It was the size of a filet mignon. A little bit goes a long way in this case. I could only eat half. The spacing between courses was perfect except at the end when we told them we were in a rush to leave. That was when they paused twice as long to give us dessert. It was like a punishment for leaving. All was forgotten when they gave us surprise miniature vanilla ice cream cones topped with strawberry syrup. I near cried tears of joy and my smile was so big you could have thrown the cone in my mouth and I would have swallowed it whole.. . Ah The Modern. French-American cuisine never looked and tasted this good. They even gave us parting gifts of pound cake. Lastly, I won't dwell too much on the ill designed co-ed sterile bathrooms. I was not a fan. It wasn't pretty and the lighting was not flattering. I'll stick with the food and service at The Modern.
