ReviewID: pfSPrA4bLg916Zi-EY980Q
ReviewerID: Wq1JNVm9PEB6C6q-i2gyGw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gibsons Bar &amp; Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
On my first visit to the downtown location of Gibsons, probably Chicago's best-known steakhouse for the past 20 years, I can't help but give it 5 stars as it was certainly superlative. But if I could award 1/2 star increments, I think 4-1/2 would be more apt as it was not quite perfect. . . When a friend offered me a steak dinner, anywhere in Chicago, to say thanks for connecting him with what became his new job, I certainly had plenty of options. But having never been to Gibsons on Rush (though I've been to the one in Rosemont), it was my easy choice, over places I've been to (Chicago Chophouse, David Burke's, Morton's, Shula's, Ruths Chris) and others that I haven't (N9NE, The Capital Grille, Smith &amp; Wollensky). . . Did I make the best choice? Who knows, but I'm certainly not complaining. Having preferred a glass of white wine over red--seemingly the proper pick with steak--I'm certainly no gourmand. But while Gibson's has a reputation as a place for celebrity hobnobbing, predatory encounters and propositional interactions--of both the romantic and dealmaking sort--I was there for the food. Tiger Woods could've been with 3 hookers two tables over and I probably wouldn't have noticed. . . So the ambiance was fine, if a bit crowded--even at 6:30 on a Monday--for my true preference. And the service was very good, except for a blunder I'll get to in a moment. . . My Pinot Grigio was good. So was the bread, but of three varieties, the raisin bread was the clear keeper. A pair of appetizer oysters were fine, but nothing to write beyond this sentence about. The house salad with bleu cheese was nicely chilled and adequate in size, but more solid than spectacular. Even split in 2, the double-baked potato was huge and tasty. Now for the steak.... . We both ordered the W.R. Chicago Cut, a 21-ounce bone-in Rib Eye, Medium Rare, with my friend asking for his more on the rare side. Seemingly, that's the one I was served, for it was undercooked to my tastes. Certainly a quality steak, but not spectacular. After eating about half of it, as is, I had it sent back to the grill, and I imagine it was about Medium when I got it back. Much better, delicious and probably a 5-Star Steak if done right initially. But I didn't ever experience the "this is the greatest thing I've ever eaten" moment a truly extraordinary steak should give you. . . The Chocolate Mousse Pie was huge, large enough likely for a table of 6, and far too much even for two food fanatics. But it was fantastic. Hard to go wrong there. . . So all in all a good experience and I'm entirely happy with my selection and very appreciative of my friend's graciousness. But if I have a next occasion to go to a great Chicago steakhouse, I think I will try somewhere else before going back to Gibsons real soon.
