ReviewID: pFy_DC6aCO-uDzVg00NQwg
ReviewerID: 9n0yRPj_bKv-wFtP3_nteA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Gibsons Bar &amp; Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
**I would just like to note that I had a really hard time writing this review.. . As far as steaks go, this is the place to go. Friends and family of mine rave about how it is in their top five steakhouses. I am not a huge red meat craver but decided to try the pepper crusted fillet. It was the spiciest piece of meat I have ever had. They aren't kidding when they say it is hot. . . I also ordered mine medium-well. My mother ordered hers medium and my father medium-rare. They all came out with the same amount of pink (it was more of a blood red, really).. . My big problem with this restaurant is how they jam pack you in like sardines. The last time we went there our table was squeezed in so tightly between two other tables that there was no way I could get up to use the restroom. I had two wait 30 minutes for one of the tables to get up. In the five minutes it took me to use the restroom and come back they had already seated the other table. I couldn't have gotten back to my seat with out having to make three other people get up. So what did I do? I stood by the table while we paid the bill. It took over 15 minutes to settle up and it wasn't even our server who ran our credit card. . . ***I used to be a server and am pretty good about knowing when your server is terrible or if he is just in the weeds and a mark of an excellent server is how quickly the check is settled. ***. . The time before that when we came here, our table was so close to the host stand that people that were waiting for their table were practically sitting in our laps. I don't know how many times I got hit with a coat. . . Anyway, back to the most recent time. Our server was friendly but absent minded. He forgot a glass of wine and didn't remember it until we were finished eating. He offered to buy us a dessert, but after all the meat I don't know how anyone could have room. I had a cup of jambalaya that was really good and for the table we ordered a side of the mushrooms and a baked potato (for my brother). The mushrooms were great and the potato a little dry. . . This place has so much potential!! It pains me to say all these negative things, but I have to be honest. They need to stop cramming people in. The bar is almost impossible to walk through and you must have a reservation. I get that they are trying to make money but it has to be more that just good food. It has to be a great all over experience.
