ReviewID: pG1B_jLG5Vv9giGqv4eJjA
ReviewerID: AopRCUW7TeXs9zPqTBl2qQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alon&#39;s
Category: Bakeries
First off, the comparisons to Panera are unjust and unfair. Alon is Israeli, which is reflected in the absence of pork products throughout and a plethora of Sephardi dishes during Jewish holidays. Panera does not even begin to match up in food, ambience or employee professionalism, and you'll certainly never meet the founder/owner.. . The most overlooked and for the most part ignored part of the store is most definitely the cheese counter. You can find exotic and little-known cheeses that likely only the cheese connoisseur knows anything about, because that is one area they certainly do not hire high school students for - their cheese man knows his business, and they do cheese tasting on Saturdays for the brave at heart. . . Anyone who has not sampled a fair range of the desserts really ought to do so before reviewing them. There are some that are exceptional - try the Valrhona truffle if you're looking for chocolate melt-in-your-mouth heaven on earth - and some that are just plain good. It depends on both your personal preferences and how long the desserts have been in the case. I have never been disappointed going there early in the morning, since everything is made fresh around 4am every day. . . The pastries are, by far, the highlight of the shop. They are perfectly flaky and the fillings, though not all to die for (save for the chocolate croissant), are certain to blow you away the first time you try them... and will continue to do so thereafter. Of course, if you're expecting small-town France pastry quality you will be disappointed, but let's face it - you're not in small-town France. You're in a sprawling metropolitan area that boasts endlessly about the greasiest hot dogs on the planet. That said, the daily-made breads, cookies and pastries are a nice reprieve from the grease-laden hamburgers and french fries that are so overabundant. Not to mention, you can buy rolls of cookie dough to take home with you - mix it into ice cream, eat it with a spoon, or attempt the gooey, chewy cookie consistency yourself. . . Holding true to Atlanta's greasy nature, the hot sandwiches are pretty heavy. Even the vegetarian portobello sandwich manages to make you feel pretty sluggish after finishing. The flavors are good, but you'll want to take a nap for an hour or two unless you opt for a more deli-style cold sandwich. . . Catering ("delivery") is available for orders over $50, and large pastry or bread orders can be made 24 hours in advance to pick up. This is certainly the place to aim for with corporate breakfast or brunch, or for a grown-up birthday cake!. . On another note, the parking lot is atrocious, especially when it's busy... so bring your small car or park on the street with an SUV, unless you plan on spending upwards of 10 minutes getting into or out of a parking space. Believe me, I've seen it done. The parking lot was not designed for Yukons and Suburbans, and even larger Jeeps struggle. I don't recommend trying it.. . Side note: I worked here for 6 months after graduating from college (unable to get a *real* job), and everything I have read here about employees is basically what I experienced. Some regular customers are extremely rude and derogatory. It was often not pleasant to work with customers, which certainly made it difficult to enjoy my job. . . My recommendation: be courteous to the employees, even nice if you have it in you. Keep in mind this is their job and the attitude customers find aggravating is spurred by rude, holier-than-thou customers. We're all people here, treat them like it. Plus, you never know who it is you're being derogatory towards. For all you know it could be your neighbor's grown child or a high-ranking coworker's cousin.
