ReviewID: PGfJkyTBdH80tOPjqj1yYg
ReviewerID: dBBVtn98mdEV35BvAHfvRQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I learned a great magic trick at Craft.  Want to know how a $100.00 check can miraculously transform itself into two and a half bills right before your eyes?  Come here and Craft will teach you.. . We read all the reviews, heard all the stories, and I desperately had to try this place.  Why?  I was drawn by the Pork Belly.  I don't know, Tom Colicchio has me under some kind of spell.  He managed to convert a meatloaf hater into a carnivorous, meatloaf eating, ham sandwich grubbing fiend at 'Wichcraft in San Francisco.  No telling what a proper dinner at Craft would do to me.. . We went here a few Saturdays ago, and my husband and I braved the wind tunnel to enjoy dinner al fresco on the patio.  Other diners were not as adventurous as us so we had the whole patio to ourselves (romantic), and we received excellent service.  Onto the aforementioned Pork Belly.  It was amazing!  Craft's food is truly meant to be eaten family style, so for a party of two the Pork Belly was a bit much, and I literally felt my cholesterol jump a few points after eating one bite.  The belly was served with sweet chutney which was a nice foil to the salty, fatty pork morsel.  The spinach salad was also beautifully and simply dressed with gruyere cubes, bacon and a light vinaigrette.  In an almost freaky role reversal, my husband fell over himself enjoying the salad while I reveled in Pork Belly heaven.  . . Main courses were strip steak and diver scallops.  The scallops were perfectly seared and very light, despite being served over a rich butter sauce, and the steak was very tender, cooked to perfection.  I tried the marrow for the first time too.  Yeah, I don't think I'll do that again, but I was clearly getting carried away with my meal.  Sides were roasted asparagus and potatoes au gratin.  The asparagus were a bit over seasoned, while the potatoes were very good, albeit quite rich. We could have done without both.. . The pork fest continued, even into dessert.  We enjoyed freshly made donuts and I foolishly attempted the maple bacon ice cream. The sweet cream coupled with the chewy bacon just didn't work for me. . . Despite this, the food kept coming: macaroons, cookies, and muffins to take home for breakfast the next day.  The breezes were gentle, the music upbeat and fun (Rebirth Brass Band, "Ultimate"), and the wine flowed.  . . Then reality hit us once the check came.  As I gazed to the heavens and saw that we were sandwiched between office buildings housing entertainment firms and players in the "industry", I stumbled upon the raison d'etre of Craft.  This place is for moguls with expense accounts, not doe eyed culinary optimists who believe that if a meal is truly magnificent it transcends price, pretension and trendiness.  Our meal was great, but not transcendent.. . This is the kind of clarity that only time (and a credit card bill) can bring.
