ReviewID: pGhz6dFrPmbz2qIridC6kw
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Parker&#39;s on Ponce
Category: Steakhouses
. http://Restaurant.com.  lured me in again with 70% off a $25 gift certificate.  Click, click, click--I made some strategic choices, places I'd been meaning to visit, others where it's been too long since I had. Parker's on Ponce was a place I'd been meaning to visit. I mean, hey, steakhouse.  My wife, being gluten-free, approved and me, being barely a step up from a T. Rex, didn't argue. (Yes, I know meat is murder. Delicious, delicious murder.). . Our visit was spur of the moment. We called ahead. They warned us that it might be busy. We p-shawed. "In this economy?" we said to each other. Alas, it WAS quite crowded that night. In fact, almost every place we passed was packed. Apparently that night spring fever trumped the recession. Despite the crowd, we were seated immediately.  Good start.. . I looked around. Now I'd not been in this space when it was Mick's, so I can't compare the old room. What I did see was attractive--lots of horizontal lines, right angles and dark woods accented with stone and a large eye-level fireplace. It was Danish post modern meets Frank Lloyd Wright. Actually, a better description is it looks like what you'd get if you put together a Swiss chalet from an Ikea flatpack.. . The service was attentive and even kind of fun. Put another way, the servers definitely do fit more in Decatur than a typical steakhouse. The prices weren't outrageously high for a steakhouse, but their prices really do push it out of a weekly visit. Then again, that's just talking the steak. The chef's entrees aren't that bad, ranging from $16-$19. So then how WAS the food?. . My wife enjoyed her portabello and risotto so much she took a tiny bite home in a box. I had the strip which was good though not as buttery as other steaks I've had. Now admittedly 1) those steaks were in VERY high end steakhouses and 2) I realized after I ordered that I should've asked for the herb butter topping. Nevertheless, it was cooked exactly as I'd ordered.  The spinach salad was pretty tasty.. . I chose hash browns as a side which brings me to the first of my two minor quibbles. When I think hash browns, I think of shaved potatoes much like when I think "Brazilian" I think of shaved...Brazilians. Apparently only the Waffle House and I agree on this because what was brought to me were diced potatoes or, as most would call it, "home fries." Now I know you're thinking po-TAY-toe, po-HOME FRY-toe, but really, there IS a difference, texturally at least. Seriously had it said "home fries," I would've ordered something else, like the truffled mac-n-cheese. With my luck, it'd be a ball of mac-n-cheese enrobed in a chocolate ganache. Still, Parker's isn't the only one who's pulled this terrible culinary trick on me, so I'll let it slide.. . So what was the second of my minor quibbles? Well, the Guinness pour was weak.  WEAK. Why serve in an imperial pint if the actual Guinness doesn't start til about an inch and a half below the rim?   Sigh.. . Still, those are two minor complaints when stacked against the space, the service, and the steak. And it was even better with that . http://Restaurant.com.  certificate. I'll give Parker's 4 solid stars.
