ReviewID: PHSOLHFJ-yXplnwvvJYXTw
ReviewerID: 4M_f4DC2AQVkudwS76cVoA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Came here on the last night of my visit in LA. I really wanted to have a great experience. Obviously seeing the 1 star, you know the end of the story.. . The start of the night was great. We arrived a little early, 9:25 for a 9:30 reservation, took about 15 minutes to seat us, that's fine we were enjoying cocktails at the bar. We were taken to our seats in a room off of the main dining room, kind of nice since it was not as loud. We all order some apps and more drinks, things are going well (yes the $18 is a rip off for A ravioli). The appetizers that we got, ravioli, butter lettuce and one of the mozzarella burrata dishes were all very good. The waitress was amiable and explained things nicely, she even ALMOST convinced me to get the sweet breads.. . We got around to ordering dinner and when they got to my friend, they told her there was no more of the dish that she wanted. Seeing as she had already made up her mind, it would have been professional to mention at the time we sat down that they didn't have any more left, but no luck. . . So she ended up ordering the braised beef dish as I did also and we were both disappointed. The braised beef I have had elsewhere at restaurants 1/2 the price have had much better taste. The potatoes we ordered for the table had way too much salt, so much so that we had to scrape it off before eating, someone doesn't know how to control sea salt in the kitchen. Everyone else got the quail, it's difficult to screw that up and they all said it was good. Really, 3 stars for the restaurant if the night ended here, but it didn't.. . So, we waited for about 30 minutes after we were done eating and the rest of the patrons in the room we were in were gone. We had to literally go in search of service. Not sure where our server went, but common restaurant etiquette would be to notify patrons of the change in servers (they even do this at Chili's). We order dessert and it comes to my friend and I who are sharing a dessert. Well, guess what? They had no more of that one either and failed to mention it beforehand, again. Well my friend was upset seeing she couldn't order either dish she wanted and although we know this does happen from time to time especially late in the day the response we got from the "new" server Brian was, "uhh sorry" in a very condescending tone. As we contemplate what the get in its stead, Brian continued to gossip with another waitress about our table in the back of of the room. Keep in mind the room was empty except for us and they were probably 200 feet away. Needless to say, we heard every word. Listen, if you need to bitch about a table, do it in the kitchen away from guests.. . We then called the manager over to discuss the issue. He offered no apology really saying he didn't know why the server would act that way. Well, about 10 minutes later a waitress came back and gave us a free aperitif. We all had either ordered coffee or an after dinner drink already so I am not sure why he thought this would be appreciated. The dessert we ended up ordering, the tart, had so many seeds and not enough blackberry pulp it was inedible. The crust seemed like something you would get from a cafeteria, it was hard to break off with a fork and gross.. . When we got our check, nothing was comped. I thought that at the very least we would get dessert comped, seeing as the bill was over $500. . . Thankfully, I don't live close, but I will think twice about going to New York Batali restaurant in the future. I just can't understand paying so much for dinner and then leaving regretful. The most serious issue here is the management and from other reviews, it seems to be consistent.
