ReviewID: pinHiFrbMMvDS1qliR9gpQ
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
I went here on a Sunday, where The Foundry offers their fixed menu (2 courses at $29, three courses at $39, or four courses at $49).  I opted for the four courses.  I was surprised by the large portions on each course.  From starter to dessert, each course was very generous.  Often times with specials like this, they can really skimp on the portions.. . I started with the cauliflower soup, which was very good and increased my excitement for the following dishes.  The cauliflower soup had a nice creamy texture and interesting garnish--poached egg and vibrant tomatoes.  I had to eat it slow...it was really hot.. . The second course--fresh pasta sheets with duck confit--was mediocre.  The pasta sheets were not bad.  The duck confit was dry.  The whole dish was marred by dried cranberries (which didn't go with the dish) and dried rye bread (which tasted like dried stuffing mix from a box of Stove Top Stuffing).  I like different textures and crunch in my food--but not crunch like this.  The dish was kind of like an open ravioli.  It would have worked better as ravioli and without the cranberries and rye bread croutons.. . The main course (Hangar Steak and Beef Short Rib) was also sub-par (it was a little cold and tasted like it had been sitting around for a while).  To finish the meal off, I had the chocolate bread pudding with rum raisin ice cream.  Both the bread pudding and ice cream were ruined by too many raisins.  For the price, the whole meal was a pretty good value.  I just wish the food was better (this place is probably 2.5 stars).  It was a nice looking restaurant with a nice outdoor patio.  The restaurant had only a few customers, which is probably why the friendly head chef was outside sharing a few smokes with some of the guests from the bar.. . By the way (if you come when their specials aren't offered), a 3 course dinner here (without drinks, tax, or tip) will run you about $35-$60.
