ReviewID: Piphi7vCW67djm3NtKQByg
ReviewerID: 8_GSnrTYzuS1GqHkkahTMQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Best Fish Taco in Ensenada
Category: Mexican
I saw Jake's review by chance a few days ago and noticed that the place wasn't too far from where my SoCal Horticultural Society (SCHS) meets. So I made a point to visit it. I love fish tacos ever since I bit into one in the early 90's when I was first exposed to Rubio's. So I had to give this place a try.. . Its not easy to spot this place from the street because it looks like an auto repair shop. In fact, I'm willing to bet it was an auto repair shop before it was converted into a restaurant. I like the decor, marine themed of course, but with an urban art vibe, especially with their use of steel wire frame designs on the outside and the faux rusted paint. If you visit during the late afternoon, the place can get very warm, even with several fans blowing inside. The restaurant is positioned where it gets the harsh glare of the late afternoon sun.. . Inside, the place still slightly resembles a construction zone because the place is not yet completely ready. Most of the seating is still not in place or partially constructed, but there is a main table in the center that can seat 4 to 6 people. . . There's a lady with gray hair at the counter that will greet you. I think I overheard she's Guatemalan by descent. The rest of her family is Nicaraguan. You can definitely tell they aren't of Mexican descent, so I was wondering how they could lay claim to best fish taco in Ensenada. I think Joseph the owner mentioned he had been to Ensenada at least once. However, Rubio's was started by a gringo, so why can't Central Americans have a stab at doing Baja style food?. . They are still trying to build a customer base, so for now you get one fish taco for free. They only offer it to first time customers. The menu is pretty simple: $1.50 for a fish taco, $2.00 for a shrimp taco, and $1 for a drink. The fish taco is very simple as well - a modest portion of fried fish in batter in a corn tortilla. That's it. There's a condiments/salsa bar, if you want to add things like shredded cabbage, mango salsa or horse radish mix into your taco. . . I like lime with my fish tacos, but I noticed there wasn't any in the bar. So Joseph kindly provided me with freshly cut lime when I asked for it. I love the Chontaleo dry cheese (but nacho and jack will do) and fresh guacamole with my fish tacos, but alas they didn't have that available. So all I placed on my taco was cabbage and lime since I'm not a salsa fan. The tacos are good, but not the best I've ever had.  That designation goes to the similarly named Tacos Baja Ensenada. However, the $1.50 price is a very good deal and hard to beat. You'll need to eat at least 3 tacos to get full though. I do have to point out that the 3rd taco I ate, the fish wasn't fully cooked as it should be. Good thing I like ceviche.. . Street parking is easy in that part of Hillhurst.. . I hope this restaurant thrives so that I'll have a place to eat before my monthly SCHS meetings. If you can't reach Tacos Baja Ensenada, then the Best Fish Taco in Ensenada is a good alternative.
