ReviewID: pjaGGl4Bcb1gNgt7vey1Pw
ReviewerID: 9-5CZPzahJ4U0uPH_J7tXA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
This place is usually the standard that I measure other sushi places in LA in terms of quality of cuts.  If money is not an issue and you want to enjoy quality sushi, go to the sushi bar and ask the sushi chef to make you whatever...omakase is the term.  If you are there with someone, just ask to split the order (which is usually 2 pieces) that way you are able to enjoy a wider variety of sushi and then later on you can reorder your favorites.  In my opinion this keeps the experience fun and fresh and allows you to get to know your sushi chef better as well.  If money is an issue an ABSOLUTE must try dish is their sashimi plate which last to my knowledge isn't even on the menu but EVERYONE there knows about it.  Order it!  Great cuts of all sorts of fish and traditionally made.  (No mayonaissey concoctions...again traditional and back to basics which they do very well)  Sashimi plate runs at lunch time at around $11 to $13 and is very filling.  I do believe the dinner version is a bit more closer to $20.  Due to their known quality you will find people waiting in line for lunch at around 10am to get in.  The crazy thing is they open for lunch at 11am. Usually the sushi bar is less crowded for lunch since everyone is there for the sashimi plate.   Great value for what you get at lunch but note dinner menu is considerably higher.  Dinner for 2 at the sushi bar can easily carry you over $50 and probably closer to $80 to $100 if you really enjoy sushi...so definitely a place to spluge.  . . This place has been one of the few Japanese owned with Japanese sushi chefs since the sushi restaurant industry in Los Angeles have been taken over by Koreans...not that is an issue for me.  Few people feel that those places lower quality for quantity and price which works for me as well.  Recently I have heard rumors that sushi gen have been bought out by a Korean owner, but I haven't seen if that has affected their quality or call to traditional japanese cuisine.  Again I'm not knocking on other sushi places that are owned by non Japanese owners, but if you are looking for a specific traditional experience, that may be a footnote for some.  For me, if the quality is still there its all good.
