ReviewID: pjKwNaUVuJYO69VfWszJVg
ReviewerID: AzQhyUZBp3ncjsSJ3zX5Og
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I would like to add to the 200 reviews that this Cafe is wrongly located in Los Angeles. How can you place such a warm and cozy-like place with the yummiest pastries on earth, served in a courtyard loaded with an odd assortment of garden chairs and tables in chic and blase LA?? You can't!!. . Somehow people just turn nicer while sitting there in the sunlight sipping their damn good cappuccino's and unearthly great pastries in a relaxed and beautiful atmosphere.  I swear I have even seen a smile or two stretch on the newly botoxed faces of the posh and beautiful who  get in their Mercedes Benz's and brave traffic to drive across town from the  trendy, more known restaurants on 3rd to the small town funkiness of Los Feliz.  They must know something that we here in the funk have known all along! And now you do too.. . If you decide to venture out, take my advise and visit Alcove.  Anything brunchy that you choose will be a great choice (I haven't had the sandwiches yet but from my friend's satisfied look I'd say "Bingo"). I ordered a lox scrambled with fried potatoes and took a doggy bag home, but only after stuffing myself beyond comfortable because it was that good. Large pieces of thick cut salmon interlaced with onion grilled in olive oil with feta cheese. A side of potatoes and a cold fruit ice tea. Need I say more?  My partner choose a lunch special which was  complimented with onion rings that we affectionately dubbed "onion donuts'! They were deep fried, huge and unbelievable delicious.  . There is one free refill on the ice teas, many fruit flavors.  . . Attached to the restaurant you'll find a gourmet cheese shop with a nice wine selection.  A bit overpriced but free samples and lots of good varieties of cheeses, meats and condiments. Staff there is knowledgeable and will take the time to explain the subtle differences. Being a beginner, I felt at home and not like some cheese idiot trying to better herself just to go to Von's the next day and get a brick of mild Cheddar on sale. Here you are encouraged to taste, taste, taste (that is if you aren't too full after lunch).. . Parking is the only drawback to this culinary wonderland. The streets surrounding Alcove can get crowded at times and valet fills up on the weekends- a small price for such a great meal.  My recommendation, park a few blocks away and walk. This way after you're full, you can walk it off and check out the cute boutiques near by.. . Enjoy!. . **MY TIP:  Why not split a piece of cake since it'll run you $6.50 per slice.
