ReviewID: PKLPnts7ydl8cNDH7wTO4g
ReviewerID: 3GRxglOdMuEy-EQ2H5SQzQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Abattoir
Category: American (New)
Abattoir is now open for lunch Tuesday-Saturday 12-3. Since I don't like crowds and noise a few of us went to check it out; first time for all. The space as others have noted is beautiful and the atmosphere very relaxed.  We were greeted by everyone we passed on the way to the table, very friendly staff. . . Our server went over the menu with us, and was helpful in answering questions. Being midday, no cocktails were ordered but I had a glass of wine based on the servers recommendation for my taste and it was spot on.  Then the lovely baguette arrived, very nice bread, we all enjoyed.. . We ordered small plates of Mushroom confit over sourdough, arugula and beets with house made ricotta, bratwurst and melted onions, pickled cabbage, the chicken liver and foie gras with muscadine jam and the entree size fried chicken livers with pickled cucumbers.. . I am a mushroom nut so the the mushroom confit was heaven to me, you could really taste the earthy mushrooms and the bread was a nice complement to soak up the lovely juices.  I didn't taste the arugula altho it looked fresh and all, i am not a big arugula fan, but the beets and ricotta... WOW what a winning combination. It was fantastic. The bratwurst was good, not the best I've ever had (H&amp;F), but certainly good. The onions and mustard were nice complements. My husband liked it more than I did, may be just an individual preference thing.  I didn't taste the pickled cabbage so I can't comment on that, but hubby says it was very good fresh cold crisp version of kimchee. The chicken liver and foie gras was so incredibly smooth and rich and the muscadine jam ( new in the last week or so) was a lovely semi-sweet side note. We found that we liked it better on the baguette bread than the sourdough it was served with.  The baguette allowed the flavors to shine through.  And last, but certainly not least, the fried chicken livers...  They can keep the cucumbers (fried as well) these livers literally almost melt in your mouth they are so tender.  If you like chicken livers, you really must try these.. they are fantastic!!  Not overly liver-y (maybe due to the buttermilk soak)  just absolutely perfect!. . In conclusion, I'd recommend Abattoir to anyone.. Lunch and dinner menus are the same, It is excellent food at a very reasonable price point. The service is outstanding.  The space is fresh and beautiful, how can you go wrong?
