ReviewID: Plf9SP6LVqg7mVU3DgaX8w
ReviewerID: lVej_gHw2AOGniwWhRGhXA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Johnnie&#39;s Pastrami Restaurant
Category: American (Traditional)
Driving through Culver City from dinner one evening a little while back, despite the fact that I had just eaten a healthy share of pad thai, I found myself still hungry. . . Johnny's Pastrami was the first thing that came to mind. A friend had recommended it to me. Culver City is one of those unique cities in the LA area where, after 10 p.m., your choice of dining usually ranges from Del Taco to Jack in the Box. So I began the search, which I didn't think would be too difficult, since I knew it was on Washington.. . Now maybe it was late, or maybe I'm just stupid, but I had the hardest time finding this damn place. Apparently, the brilliant city planners of Culver City decided that, within 300 feet of one another, they would lay down the streets Washington PL and Washington BL. After several agonizing minutes of confusion I learned that Johnny's Pastrami is on Sepulveda and Washington BL - right next to Tito's Tacos, another Culver City legend.. . OK, now we were on to something. Except it's 11:00, and there's a line out the door. A guy's standing by the doorway, looking more like a beached whale than a man. It was hard to imagine how his tiny pudgy legs could hold his entire body up. The place looks dingy, and I notice that there isn't a health code grade posted anywhere. Hmmm. But all these people must be here for a reason, and it smelled sort of good. Inside is this man, who I figured was the Pastrami Nazi. I'm a little confused as to how you're supposed to order take-out here. There's no menu anywhere. The Pastrami Nazi doesn't seem like he wants to talk to anyone - he's too busy juggling bread rolls, knives, and pastrami.. . Finally, a lady takes my order. "A sandwich I guess." "With mustard?" she asks. "Yes." "Ok," she says and walks away. "Wait! Is there anything else that comes on these sandwiches?" She looks annoyed. Like she's sorry she came to work today. Like she's sorry she saw me. Like she's sorry she gave up heroin this morning. "What do you want?" she finally asks. "Ummmm.... lettuce... tomato..." "Fine," she snaps, "but that's extra." Total comes to $9.95. Whoa, I'm thinking, that must be some fine lettuce and tomato. Good thing I didn't order any cheese.. . It took a good 30 minutes for me to get my sandwich. Maybe it was because my order was so complicated. Maybe it's because I gave that fat bastard a dirty look by the doorway, and he's the Pastrami Nazi's gay lover, and he gave the Pastrami Nazi a head nod, which in Johnny's Pastrami Land meant take your time with this one. Or maybe it's just because there were so many damn people there. They finally bagged my sandwich, and threw it to me. I can't remember the last time the service was so good.. . It's a little after midnight when I finally get home with my sandwich, which is still hot. This better be worth it. I'm not even hungry anymore. I let it sit for a while, find a Coke to drink with it, and then... take a bite.. . Holy shit.. . In an instant, my mind switches from wondering why I'm sitting at home eating by myself to wondering if I had to give up either sex or Johnny's Pastrami Sandwiches for the rest of the year... which would it be?. . Yes, it was that good.
