ReviewID: pmekGYiL3FsN0o4ZXBCIGw
ReviewerID: g9BInElFr2z6-qNWXNi0Lg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
I love everything about Red Light! The decor is a crimson Cheesecake factory style meets the most wonderful Alice in Wonderland underground tea party! The bar is beautiful and the murals that adorn the walls give the place a wonderful intimate feel. . I decided I had to try it the minute I noted the separate vegetarian menu. It doesn't seem completely out of order in a pan-Asian restaurant but it is such a rare treat if you're in a moderately upscale restaurant that's not at Green Zebra! . I ventured there as a birthday outing with the entire Chicago portion of my family and it was a delight the entire time. Our table was ready when we arrived, the hostess knew it was my birthday before I even confirmed it with her and our long table was lining the open kitchen, which really delighted my parents! Blazing flames and busy bodies always make for an entertaining meal. . I can't even list everything the nine of us managed to eat but everyone left happy. The artichoke fritters and the eggplant dumplings were delicious. My little brother was extremely happy about his duo of pork, my curry could have been thinned out a little more and maybe a little spicier but the portion could have lasted me through the week! My boyfriend really enjoyed the 'traditional pad thai" with pork and shrimp and the whole table couldn't get enough of the sweet potato tempura fries! . So maybe Pan Asian food is not your thing. GO FOR DESSERT!! Seriously. I hate that you have to visit a patisserie or bakery or some kind of Berry Chill to get decent dessert in Chicago. When did pastry chefs go out of fashion? Dessert is always good but a restaurant with something I will remember forever is spectacular! I will remember the chocolate bag for the rest of my life! My Aunt was already a Jackie's in Lincoln Park groupie so the fact that we can still indulge on her specialty treats is a wonderful, wonderful thing. Really, even if you only go for a drink and Jackie's bag, go and go to share because I don't know who could eat so much alone after a full meal here!
