ReviewID: PmqQOtwjJNxwYXQkzjCMqA
ReviewerID: QtKuPBYkm_ZqTW6NtI1ZKA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Fritti
Category: Italian
Wow this place lost it.  Horrible pizza.  Doughy, and frankly a big ripoff.  . . Even though this pizza has declined year after year, my wife and I live in the area and like walking to go out to eat so we made a reservation one night and we showed up on time.   Before we walked in we joked how even if you are on time there, they always ask if you can go to the bar and have a drink while they get the table ready.  Of course this is what happened despite there being 4 or 5 tables ready for seating but I guess they figure they can get an extra drink out of you doing it this way.  Then after you order the drink, they come by 2-3 minutes later and tell you your table is ready.  The one next to us was available also.  This went to the people that walked into the bar right before we left to head to the table.  What a racket.  You can imagine we were in a great mood at this point.  . . The people that seat you also try and give off this attitude that we are lucky to be dining there or something.  They don't realize that this place stopped being hip 8-9 years and people with no taste or no clue make up 3/4 of their customers.  The other 1/4 are dummies like us probably hoping it has gotten better but really just rolling the dice again.     . . The attitude and making us get a drink at the bar part wouldn't be  a big deal.....if that pizza was good....but it wasn't...,...at all.  . . I have had frozen pizza better then this.  The ingredients have obvioulsy gotten cheaper and I have heard that they have gone through a number of pizzaiolas here (one went to Antico) but whoever they hired needs to keep it in the oven a little longer.  We ate half the pizza each and brought home what we didn't eat and it tasted better reheated (and fully cooked I guess) but still not worth the $13 each that we paid for these.  . . I would recommend Antico pizza near GA tech or if you want a little more ambiance since Antico is VERY casual (like eating in an Italian ktichen-still cool) then I would go to Baroanda on Peachtree near the Fox.  I have been going there for 10 years and they still do a great job.   Both serve the Neapolitan style small personal pizzas way better then Fritti.  I wouldn't recommend Varsano's at all.  Their pizza is not good despite the owner Jeff Varasno's big mouth stating it is.  But this review is about Fritti.    . . I am an Italian American from NYC and have been to Italy 8 times including eating pizza at Pizzeria Trianon in Naples (da Ciro on Via P. Colletta if you ever make it there).  My wife and I saw it on one of Mario Batali's Food networks shows many years ago and checked it out.  Still the best pizza we have ever had.  If you think you might like clam pizza check out Lombardis in NYC or Pepes in New Haven, CT.  Frank Pepe invented Clam Pizza.   . . Don't go to Fritti.  You are better off ordering a pie at Fellinis on Ponce or Johnny's on Cheshire bridge and picking up a good bottle of red from Greens or Ansley Wine Merchants.
