ReviewID: PNLRNjhm1L0Q4S4lpVcWoQ
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bite Cafe
Category: American (New)
Forewarning is fairwarning, or so they say. Unfortunately, I really can't attest since I'm a stubborn mule with a penchant for BYOBrunch - apparently even disappointing ones. How exactly does this happen? Because even after being adequately advised on Bite's shortcomings well in advance I still allowed my curiosity to get the best of me (as it often does) for Sunday brekkie despite the cautionary words of the lovely Erin P:  . . "Sure, we can go to Bite if you want to, but the service is awful there unless you're a hipster." . . Ok. Whatever, E. Little does she know, I'm super hip! Oh yes, I've got dirty chucks and black skinny jeans. I can go without washing my hair. And you know what, I think I may even be able to still squeeze into my Minnetonka's from 1987! Watch out, Hipster Barfly is on the move! Fabu service 10 feet ahead! . . Uhhhh, what happened to my well executed plan? Did the blonde hair give me away? The lip gloss? The French manicure? Betrayed by those damn sneaky French again!! It must be that... why else am I sitting for 25 minutes just waiting to be acknowledged?!? . . Hipster waitress - where oh where did you get those big Pee Wee glasses - I know you see me. And I'm thirsty. It's your job to fix this. Please? I get that my costume isn't fooling you and is probably mildly insulting, but I'm still a person who deserves some civility dammit! ...And thus goes the push and pull that became the worst service of brunch ever. Plain 'ol lazy, inattentive, negligent service. It was like pulling teeth to get coffee, juice, champagne cups, place an order, ask for napkins, get the correct sides with my entrée. Pee Wee-ette was clearly on meth. Thank God I'm not really a hipster. . . Oh! You want to know about the food? It was really good. I had a delightful herb and goat cheese omelette with a side of pinto beans (don't ask) and some wheat toast with shady grape jelly (they put Smuckers in mason jars to make it look home-made, Tricksters!)...  All enjoyable, nothing killed me, I'd eat it again with pleasure in more hospitable surroundings.   . . The biggest redeemer of Bite?? It's literally attached to the bar Empty Bottle. Oh yes, maximum convenience for day-drinking away the shame of being snubbed by the chick in the ironic Sally Jessy specs.
