ReviewID: Poa2L_V12SEQQAijEg9lhg
ReviewerID: gWIG32KTNkh3hubHihMUDA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Totally mediocre.. . I grew up in L.A....lived here my entire live. There is *NO* other place in all of Los Angeles that gets more hype than Pink's. I mean hype up the ass...people swear this is "the best hotdog" they have ever eaten. How sad. This place is just average. I rate it around the same as Weinerschnitzel. Generally a waste of time and not something to go out of your way for.. . The chili cheese dog is what I usually get and as much as I like the idea of their hot dogs having a "natural casing" (which is a nicer sounding way of them telling you that it's wrapped up in intestines) I have to say that it's pretty damn flavorless. The chili is also bland and uninteresting. . . I can eat 3 or 4 of these things, they're not that filling. They're just overpriced, relatively tastless, mediocre hot dogs. I do legitimately hate the french fries though...they totally suck and I never get them.. . Cash only? I really don't want to get into this again..... . You want to know when Pink's was the best? Back in the 1990s when there were some movie theaters that had real Pink's hotdogs served. See, then it was worth it because you didn't get anally raped in a long-ass line on La Brea and the prices seemed more reasonable (mostly due to the fact that everything in a movie theater requires you to take out a second mortgage to pay for it). I think there are still some non-La Brea locations where you can get these hotdogs and that will likely be the only way I ever eat them again. . . Not worth driving for, not worth parking for, not worth paying so much for and DEFINITELY not worth waiting for. . . This place will always get hype. I have no problem with it. Most places that are all hyped up turn out to be mediocre anyway. Aren't these the same people who watched Titanic 100 times in row back in 1998? Hype all you want. . . Nathan's hotdogs that you get at Ralph's are infinitely better than Pink's.
