ReviewID: poD99fhPKxMw8GbWJCdd1A
ReviewerID: AXgPRrA1dy47_Vlj0543iw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
The Griddle is another local haunt that survives off of trendy hype and fails to serve up much substance to warrant its high regard and reputation.  It becomes readily apparent once inside, that between the lengthy wait, typical Hollywood clientele, and mediocre service this establishment is far more about the "see and be seen" scene than any gastronomical experience.  Yes, as many have noted, the portions are huge, but to be plainly honest the food just isn't that good.. . Sadly, although I'm a breakfast fiend and easily pleased by standard café fare, in a handful of times here I failed to find an item on the menu that really blew me away.  The best of the bunch was the "Sow Your Oats" pancakes; an enormous stack of 3 hotcakes containing a tasty blend of honey, cinnamon, and rolled oats.  Due to the insane size I highly recommend sharing the pancakes and splitting another order with your dining companions to get some variety.  Being a big fan of omelets and scrambles, another time I gave the "Chicago Charlie's Scramble" a go, and while it looks great on paper, when presented on a plate it failed to deliver on any of it's presumed promise.  Breakfast burritos are also a favorite of mine, combining two of my most sacred loves; breakfast and burritos.  Like sex and sleep wrapped in a tortilla but better.  Anyhow, the Griddle's take on this edible Holy Grail, dubbed the "Caballero", is an abomination of epic proportions.  Somewhere the chemistry between the chicken chorizo, potatoes, and green chiles went terribly wrong, resulting in a heaping mass of unpalatable nastiness, the soul of which not even the sour cream and guac could save.  Very disappointing.. . I would imagine with well over 300 reviews, a 4-star rating, and the occasional obscene wait to be seated that the Griddle is doing something right, but for what it's worth I just don't see it.  Fortunately it's not the only game in town, and there are several other preferred options for me to get my breakfast/brunch fix.
