ReviewID: PQiv7X8ManTE3D5cpX85Uw
ReviewerID: WkCKFLAQ9egJAKr-nYZIew
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
Immediately off the Red Line Argyle stop is where you will find this gem of a restaurant.. . I come here for the duck.  If the rest of the food is anywhere near as well-prepared, it is amazing too.  But this is a review about duck.  Quack.. . The Peking Duck meal at Sun Wah consists of three courses: The skin/meat/bun course, the duck soup, and the duck fried rice.  . . Some people subscribe to a "save the best for last" policy, but that will not hold here.  The first course is the standout in an already excellent meal.  The waitress (who is extremely knowledgable and friendly) carves the crispy skin off of the beautifuly roast duck, and presents it on a plate, along with steamed buns, some carrot/scallion, and this amazing Hoisin sauce that they make themselves - it is a bit thinner and much more delicious than anything you will buy in a jar.  I'd drink a cup of the stuff if it weren't so awkward to ask for.  It is left to us, the diners, to assemble all of this into little sandwiches and enjoy.  It is an incredible flavor and mix of textures.. . While you are still in the midst of enjoying all of this, the servers will come out with a very large bowl of soup.  The soup consists of duck broth, duck bones (sounds a little weird, but it's where all the flavor comes from - so don't be freaked out!), some cucumber, and egg.  The soup is light, and is a great follow-up to all the meat and bread you've just eaten!  Next they bring out a giant platter of duck fried rice (made with your leftover meat), which is DELICIOUS, but difficult to eat much of at the time because by then I am usually full.. . The good news is that they will pack all of your leftovers up for you and send you home with boxes full of your leftover duck.  The fried rice reheats well, and I've put the leftover meat into dishes like duck risotto and duck nachos.  . . All of this comes for $30 per meal (NOT per person!).  Beer is cheap too.  I highly recommend this not just for the meal, but the entire experience!
