ReviewID: pqQnT20osizkfacGfn0yXg
ReviewerID: XEx3l4oGP74ClC4JTXL8Sg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I must say I was eagerly looking forward to visiting Mozza, not only because I'm a fan of Mario Batali but also because I've heard great things about it.  I even refrained from eating pizza for a couple of weeks to build up anticipation. . . Upon arriving I was pleased with the open atmosphere and a warm ambiance.   Although that changed after we sat down and found it felt like our party of 3 was sharing a table with the party of 2 immediately to our right.  The tables have approximately 6 inches between them so if your conversation topic is a bit racy or private, save it for later.  The staff was very warm and attentive, always a plus.  . . Ok, now for the food.  We ordered the cauliflower gratinate and crispy goat cheese w/lentils from the antipasti selection. The cauliflower gratin was all about comfort food as is any gratin.  It was perfectly baked with a complimenting cheese and cauliflower happens to be my favorite cruciferous cheese transporter.  I very much appreciated the cauliflower did not get lost in the dish as it was not overcooked as tends to occur with gratin and the cheese inevitably becomes the star.   Nancy's chopped salad was our choice insalate and although my companions really enjoyed it as did I while indulging I was left with a slightly bitter aftertaste in my mouth.  No worries the delicious bergamot infused iced tea (earl grey?) washed it away.  . . Finally, we arrive at the pizza choices we made; squash blossoms, tomatoes and burrata cheese (a creamy buttery soft mozzarella cheese: HEAVEN!!), and the fingerling potato, gorgonzola and radicchio herbed pizza.  The squash blossom pizza gets 4 stars because of the burrata cheese (WOW!!) although the squash blossoms were visible they were not detected on my palate.  The fingerling potato pizza gets 3 stars.  For my personal taste buds radicchio and gorgonzola are two type A personalities and don't work too well together.  I will say the crust on the pizzas deserves 5 stars.  It was absolutely perfect; slightly chewy yet light and crispy at the same time.  . . I will definitely return and try the mushroom pizza, the margherita, and a couple others that caught my eye.  I can't believe I skipped dessert the first time so I must return to sample some and hope to do so with at least a party of 3 or 4 as it makes it possible to try more dishes.  I look forward to possibly increasing their star rating...........
