ReviewID: pRrF2nVXzhAkD9Zcy6skHA
ReviewerID: tFOuweOhKpapqHVmzTWq5A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
The great thing about Tank, and the reason I believe it is so successful, is that they are forced to offer good food. Honestly, if the food was bad, only out-of-towners would come here. But as one of the more sizable restaurants on Argyle with space for plenty, an excellent location (location, location, location) and such an inviting storefront, people tend to be less hesitant to try it. "They have to be good if THAT many people are eating there!" When they do try it, they almost always go back. I did and will continue to.. . It's free-market economics. You have a business and people keep coming in and buying your product (because you're in an excellent location), so you have to make sure, if you want to stay in business, to offer them the best possible product you can at the lowest price. How do you do that? You have to keep up with demand by stocking up on supplies.. . Now, as at Tank Noodle, if your supply is food, you have to be sure you have plenty of fresh food.. . The reason I think most other Pho places on Argyle seem so downtrodden and don't get as many rave reviews on their Pho is that their Pho is not in such demand. Tank's Pho, however, has fresh ingredients all day long, and their broth always tastes fresh.. . And how could you expect them to keep food in food warmers or stored away for long periods if they constantly have to replenish their stock due to the volume of sales?. . My experience is that the service is fast and friendly and they ALWAYS cater to my idiosyncratic method of ordering. "I want the sliced raw beef that comes IN the soup, on the SIDE instead. And I want an EXTRA order of beef on the side as well.". . Their sandwiches are pretty amazing, too. Just as good as Ba Le, across the street (who I consider the standard for FRESH Vietnamese sandwiches)! I like the grilled pork sammie. Mmmm.... . Some downsides: they could try harder to clean up after people leave the table. Then again, if you eat at a restaurant in Chicago, or anywhere really, you HAVE to eat at your own risk. Seriously. Another downside is that I have never successfully picked up any of the cute waiters (or patrons for that matter). Hmph! Must try harder.
