ReviewID: prrkRRY4Ct1klM3TUF_lKA
ReviewerID: 9q_8tFKnntJBtPAwuo5I6A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
It was my friend's birthday earlier this month and I've yet to take him out to celebrate. All he eats is Pizza Hut, so I decided to give him a nice reality check on how to enjoy quality Italian cuisine in the neighborhood. I'm turning into a North Side rat and exploring every small neighborhood near my apartment. Ravenswood is a lovely, well kept secret of a neighborhood. It's located right next to old factories-turned-lofts and the Metra track. It was a little chilly last night, but Spacca's outdoor patio was too tempting to resist.. . On this cool Thursday night, the place was hopping. The interior was full and guests were waiting to be seated. I really liked the inside, slick, with expose brick, but I have vowed that if I can sit outside this summer, I'm going to. As I surveyed the other dishes, I realized I was going to skip on any appetizer or salad. The personal pizzas were huge. A lot of the pizzas had different meats and cheeses, two ingredients that don't always make me jump (especially the meat...), so I went with the Marinara pizza. When I ordered the waitress quickly noted "There's no cheese on it..." and I simply replied, "Even better!" I've grown accustomed to restaurants giving me the "do you have four heads" eye when I ask for a pizza with no cheese, so it was nice to have that actually be on the menu somewhere.. . Pizza was delicious! The bread especially was freshly baked. The pizza had basic, chunk marinara sauce, olive oil, and basil. Wonderful! I can't say that it was vegan, but it was probably the closest thing to it! I'm sure there was butter somewhere in the mix, but I can't confirm because I didn't ask. Whoops! I complimented the pizza with just a glass of red wine. Straight forward, helped the food go down.. . I would totally come by again. The atmosphere was a major selling point to me. Sitting outside on an early summer evening in the neighborhood is a major seller to this location. I think my only drawback was our waitress, who was really sweet, kinda dragged. I'm not a big fan of the whole wait for you check, drop your card, wait for the server to pick it up, and wait again for them to bring it back. Not a major distraction, but definitely a reason to knock off just one star.
