ReviewID: PRxgr5mDxFFqRtDKsdphBQ
ReviewerID: OPYJBgEcl5mD5abVkYsHMQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
ATTENTION EVERYONE: THIS IS THE SAME RESTAURANT AS THE OLD LOCATION FROM 1134 W ARGYLE STREET.. JUST MOVED AROUND THE CORNER. SAME OWNERS!. . In more kudos to the power and quality of Yelp users, I told the owner that I wanted to submit the restaurant to Check Please. She told me I would be banned if I did so, but to please submit a review to YELP!  Can't argue with that. :). . I have been going to this restaurant since I was in diapers, so I am more than a bit biased when I say that this is probably my favorite restaurant in all of Chicago land.  I love this restaurant so much that not even sampling restaurant after restaurant during my 1.5 years living in China could not deter me from missing it dearly.  . . They are Cantonese style, meaning you're going to find things you just wouldn't normally find in an Americanized restaurant.  When you order a whole fish, the fish head is going to be staring at you.  There is tripe on the menu.  When you walk in the front door you will be greeted by several hanging barbecued animals.  This is not a restaurant for the squeamish.. . What they do serve is good old fashioned Cantonese comfort food in gigantic quantities for very reasonable prices.  There hasn't been a dish I haven't loved coming from this place... and you'll be rolling out the door when you're done.. . Everyone raves about the peking duck from this place.  I do enjoy it and I think it's probably the only restaurant in the city that serves it up regularly.  Having lived in Beijing, I do not believe this is up to par with that style, but then again they do it Cantonese style, so it's not meant to be the same anyway.  . . However, when I come here, I tend to order the fish and tofu casserole (I know... just try it. It's surprisingly delicious); the seafood noodle combination; the clams in black bean sauce; the bbq combination platter; any of the veggies... the soups... Oh.. I'm getting hungry again.
