ReviewID: Psop1BayuzXtKp9dZ4xzCg
ReviewerID: apUNf0oFKKzlGbk1Jvg1PQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I've been a avid fan of this place for years now.  I've gone for every Valentine's Day, birthday, Anniversary and whenever out of town friends are in LA.  Just went for my birthday and had a very unfortunate experience which I will refer to as the "Cupcake Incident". My friends and I went on Saturday night to what used to be my favorite place.  we each ordered a pizza, and got a couple appetizers and got THREE bottles of wine.  Around dessert time, my fiance asked the waitress as a heads up that we brought 5 cupcakes from my favorite bakery in Bakersfield.  She said that we could eat them but that if we needed a plate, there would be a $5 plate charge per person since it's outside food.  . Since we didn't want to pay the ridiculous $5 per person charge, the 5 of us, shared 2 cupcakes.  A busboy came boy and offered us plate (which we did not ask for), so we took 2 plates.  We even ordered ice cream as dessert.  The bill came out to $300 for 5 of us and the bill had $25 extra on it for the plate charge.  (of which, we didn't even get 5 plates and 3 of us didn't even eat the cupcake).. Mind you, I had had a bit to drink at this point, but i was upset that they would be ridiculous w/ this add'l charge.  I demanded I speak to the manager and we got the $25 taken off but only after I talked to the manager about the $25 charge.  The manager said that bringing cupcakes is like bringing pizza from another restaurant and is in "poor taste".  F u manager.  It's not like I brought a Domino's pizza in for 4 ppl and then 1 person ordered an appetizer at Mozza. We ordered 3 bottles of wine, each got a entree, got appetizers and a dessert.  2 of us ate a cupcake from my favorite bakery for my birthday!  (mind you, Mozza doesn't even carry cupcakes).  I'm re-thinking this whole place all together.. It ruined my birthday and my perception of this place.  It had been my very favorite restaurant to go to for 2 years.  I have been to this place at least 20 times.. Also, every single time I go, the valet cost seems to go up.  Every single time.  Soon, it'll be $20 to park there.  Just saying.
