ReviewID: PtpeYslSqLOfL-iQnvWy5A
ReviewerID: lPe6n62Vv-xiEMenhOlMnw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
I went to Craft on Saturday December 20th, with three friends. I was excited to finally eat at one of Tom Colicchio's restaurants, and the experience was exactly what I expected. There was a definite emphasis on using the best ingredients and not getting in the way of their natural flavor. I hate to use the word simple to describe the food, because it might give the wrong impression, but they try to let the ingredients speak for themselves without getting in the way. Since this was our first visit we decided to go with the tasting menu. I will most likely just order from the menu on any subsequent meals at Craft, now that I have a better idea of what they do.. . Our meal consisted of.... Crostini with chicken liver, grape gelee, and grape salad. Sea urchin puree with cucumber and baby cilantro. Scallop with curry broth and black truffle. Mackerel with prosciutto and pickled cucumber. Maine lobster pot pie with fingerling potatoes and fennel. Veal Capaletti with roasted tomatoes and horseradish. Pan-seared foie gras with quince and diced apple. Duck breast with sour cherry and Brussel sprouts. Wagyu beef with ox tail and savory bread pudding. Cana de Cabra with grapes, cranberry sauce, pear, and golden raisins. Lavender panacota with Aperol ice. Peanut butter cup with cocoa nib, caramel gelee and caramel ice cream. Petit for with chocolate truffles, carrot cake, and torrone with pistachio and cherry. . The protein courses really stood out for me. The pot pie would have been an easy winner, but the lobster was slightly over cooked as you would expect from a pot pie. The fennel sauce was excellent though. The foie gras was incredible with the quince. I also really loved the Wagyu beef. This dish was a perfect example of what they do well at Craft. It was simply a perfectly cooked piece of perfect meat. There was no overwhelming sauce or seasoning to hide behind. Why mess with perfection? The desserts were all excellent as well. I was stuffed by the time we made it to dessert, but I still wanted to lick every morsel off my plate.. . If you have never been to Craft and you can afford it, I would definitely try out the tasting menu. It is quite an experience and allows you the opportunity to sample a good variety of Craft wonderful food.
