ReviewID: PtsB7e-oN6kXvDdVN8sFSA
ReviewerID: 5_hLSEmfLCXhdexryzNl4A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
Ew. I read about the cockroach infestations reviews right after a wonderful dinner there... not sure how to take it, but definitely knocks down a star.. . Now, pretending that I didn't see those terrible reviews.... . Bf had just gotten off work and we were cruising toward Chinatown for some Pho or bun (pronounced bum!). Except he got lost along the way... blame it on the traffic he says. Somehow the mass amount of traffics made him lose his sense of directions? (Lol). . Anyhow, pass the heart of Chinatown and we found ourselves one street across from Philippe's. During the ride he mentioned trying something new beside our usual haunts. Bf pointed out Philippe's and suggest we try it. Philippe's? That's the restaurant on Yelp with all those reviews ! I quickly agreed and we found ourselves there.. . Walking in was kind of intimidating. Massive amount of people and the restaurant had a very confusing layout. It took us a few minutes to find our way to the cashiers and several more to figure out how and what to order. . . Being a lamb lover, I easily made my choice. Bf was indecisive so I pointed him toward the pork dip, courtesy of Yelp reviewers. As we inched our way up, our eyes quickly got the better of us. . . Me: "everyone gets coleslaw, let's get that.". Bf: "potato salad too.". Me: "how about a pie? everyone got a piece of pie!". Bf: ok. . At the end of our transaction, we had 1 pork dip, 1 lamb dip, coleslaw, potato salad, lemonade, ice tea, peach pie and cheesecake. It was definitely way too much food, but we polished it off without a hitch. Interestingly, the dijon mustard tastes exactly like the hot mustard at Chinese restaurant. . . The layout of the place reminds me of cafeteria food, and bf who made it upstairs said it felt creepy and stale like a hospital. If I had known this was a historical LA landmark ahead of time, I might've been better prepared and less judgmental. But going in with a clean slate, the place creeped, food was more expensive than expected ($24.15 for everything), and food was surprisingly good. . . If I can get over the fact that it just had a cockroach infestation, I'll probably return. Despite my mixed feelings, it was a fun experience. . Oh yes, cash only.
