ReviewID: PTYypY9S8VCrNPb2Djwcig
ReviewerID: vE3k7DLKEHzc1uzFwUHjYw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Brazilian
A friend wanted Fogo de Chao for her birthday, and I'm big on making birthday wants happen, so we reserved a table for Saturday night. Due to Fogo's location and popularity, I had expectations for this restaurant, and they were immediately dashed once I stepped inside. . . The waiting area was packed. And I mean PACKED. Standing room only. We had a wait for our table - maybe 15 minutes, and during that time, I had to be careful not to step on anyone's child. There were children everywhere, and due to the cost of this dining experience, I was surprised at that. . . As we were led to our table, I was careful not to bump into the gauchos who were moving faster than the road runner (gaucho = man carrying skewer of meat). As we walked through the restaurant to our table, I was reminded of my childhood after church Sunday dinners at Bonanza! That's what this place reminds me of - Bonanza with a $50 price ticket. . . I'd been told to eat a small salad by a co-worker who'd been to Fogo, but turns out I didn't need the warning because I didn't find the salad bar appetizing. There weren't enough ingredients to really make a "type" of salad - like Greek, chef, etc. The items were all a hodge podge of things - so it was more like an appetizer bar - fill up on olives and cheese slices before your meal - I think not. But the advice to eat light from the salad bar is good if you think the salad bar looks delish - save room for the meat. . . Now...the MEAT. I tried as many cuts as I could, but I have to say I had about three servings of the bottom sirloin (the Fraldinha). It was cooked and seasoned perfectly. I flipped my little card to green each time it came by. I tried both the bacon wrapped filet and chicken. I prefer my bacon fat crispy, and theirs is a little soft, so I didn't eat it with the meats. The filet itself was nice, but I've had better, and the chicken was dry. I had the pork ribs which were tasty, but not tender enough. I had the pork loin coated with Parmesan cheese, and I liked it, but I wished it was served hot. I think if the pork loin had been served hot, it would have tasted fabulous. I tried the sausage, but I prefer my sausage a bit crispy (okay, burned!) on the outside which usually leads to firmer sausage on the inside, but this is a softer piece of meat which texturally I didn't like, and the flavoring was not very strong. I ate more cuts but as the evening wore on my palate became unreliable, and I don't want to write that meats were bland when I was just tired and full. . . Fogo also brings a few side dishes to the table - mashed potatoes (I didn't eat any but the birthday girl said they were good), caramelized bananas (no one ate any, brown bananas just don't look good), crispy polenta (reminiscent of corn bread but not as good), and cheese bread rolls. I ate about four of the cheese bread rolls; they are THE BUSINESS!!!!! And I'm not a big bread eater (years of dieting, you know). . . I ordered a frozen strawberry daiquiri - a drink I haven't had since the mid-90s, but they looked really good (it seemed like every one in the waiting area had one). After drinking some of it, I'm not sure why it was so popular except maybe these people don't drink as much as I do and therefore didn't recognize the drink as a watered-down slushie. I later ordered another drink recommended by my server - something I think he invented with raspberry vodka that tasted great - I had two! They also serve a lemonade that's made with condensed milk. I saw people drinking it and asked about it but didn't try any. . . The service is great. The gauchos are always coming around with cuts of meat, so if you're hungry, you must be standing in the waiting area. We had two servers for our table (although there were only 3 of us), and they were both knowledgeable and attentive. . . The restaurant's atmosphere was terrible. The tables were too close together, the lighting was too bright, and the restaurant was loud. My friends and I struggled to talk during our time there. At about 9:30pm, the tables with families had kids sleeping at them and that was weird to me. Maybe 9:00PM is not the best time to take out your 5-year-old. Just saying. . . In summary, if you want to try a lot of Brazilian cuts of meat at one time, this is a great place to do that. But if you just want a well-cooked piece of meat, I would suggest a more traditional steak house.
