ReviewID: PUebMG9PIDabZQ0RHRU_6A
ReviewerID: AzQhyUZBp3ncjsSJ3zX5Og
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
Toast could be best described as my favorite easy chair; comfortable and sat in often. This definition is not to give the visual of an old worn place where diners have been eating at for 50 years and the early bird special is the most popular thing on the menu because it's not. Rather chic in the crowd it attracts, it provides a popular destination to put your feet up and have a comfortable meal in the middle of the day as a respite from work, play or for no reason at all.. . The decor is casual but friendly. Large couches boast wood coffee table that beckoning you to sit and stay awhile as you eat, drink coffee and read the paper while you wait for food.  There's also umbrella tables outside where you can enjoy yourself on a sunny day.  The wait staff are relaxed as they take your order, all amidst a cozy atmosphere of wood. . . The menu provides tasty twists on standard fare for breakfast, lunch or dinner but everything's just a little bit better.  Turkey sandwiches laced with brie combine with onion rings; eggs that find their way onto tortilla shells mix with chicken, cheese, salsa and sour cream.  The list goes on.  The salad are excellent and are offered in half and full portions. Bread is served by the pile with each entree and come with pesto as a yummy touch. . . Want some dessert? The deli case boasts banana pudding with different toppings, dense chocolate cake, mounds of homemade looking apple pies and of course cupcakes in a variety of flavors. We went for the red velvet and split one between the two of us.  It was good, a tinsy bit dry, but I adhere that to the cupcake being 1 day old.  Still it was a yummy ending on a casual yet satisfying meal.. . A few drawbacks to this scene: Parking is a bitch around that area as the streets surrounding are only by permits so you'll have to find a metered space. Also, the place can get busy, busy, busy especially at lunch time and weekends. But it's just an annoyance worth putting up with sometimes to get a good, satisfiying meal.
