ReviewID: PugkdN6yGvh_MsIrSRmIPA
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Rosebud
Category: Southern
"Rosebud.". . That was fictional newspaper magnate Charles Foster Kane's last word before going to that final edition in the sky. It also kicked off one of the most celebrated films of all time and a movie career that went from cinematic wunderkind and Oscar winner to cheap wine spokesman to Orson Welles' final role as the planet-eating robot Unicron in "Transformers: The Animated Motion Picture." And in one of my lamer segues, the space that formerly held Food 101 has transformed itself into a much appreciated neighborhood hotspot.. . I was impressed by Rosebud during the Yelp Elite event. The owner was welcoming, their service never faltered, and, most importantly, the food was (and forgive me if I get too technical here) FABU. Everything I tasted was simply awesome.. . Brunch didn't disappoint either. I ordered the fittingly named "Gordo" while the wife had the shrimp and grits. The serving sizes are big enough to satisfy an Unicron-sized appetite without sparing taste. Not being a wine drinker, I don't have much opinion on the wine; the wife seemed to find some glasses she liked though. That said, I'm sure Rosebud serves no wine before its time.. . The Mystery Monday bar special is what I look forward to the most. Other yelpers continue to obsess over it. I've yet to try. I've seen pictures (yes, the yelpers took pictures), I've seen them tweet allegiance to the Monday Mystery Special. I must try. (For the record, sitting at the bar on Mondays gets you a TBD dish priced at $5. Annnnd, damn it. Subway's Five Dollar footlong song is officially stuck in my head.). . For the past few years, this space has seen a revolving door of restaurants. I'd hate for you to drive by and think, "Here goes another one." I urge you to check it out. There's more than meets the eye.. . Four and a half stars. (Reserving the fifth for the Monday I can make it out there.)
