ReviewID: PULlfG8CrUnljl7-Ggadxw
ReviewerID: gOyQKofujZ0wUpLQDq65Eg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: JCT Kitchen &amp; Bar
Category: Southern
My fiance and I decided to check J.C.T. out as a possible venue for our wedding reception.  Having dined there on occasion, this was the first time I went there with a specific agenda to review them.. . Overall decor is very neutral in color, with heavy use of white and beige.  Nothing pops, other than the over-sized lampshades that cover the overhead lighting along the pillars.  Not necessarily a complaint however it very much conveys the feeling of a place suitable for a cozy dinner or family affair.  Although curtains have been added around the pillars to reduce noise (reason given by the receptionist), it also breaks-up the space nicely- however, it did little to reduce noise.  The low ceilings and concrete will not allow for a quiet dinner for two.. . After waiting over five minutes for service at our table (didn't appear to be short-staffed), we ordered drinks and the fried oysters as an appetizer.  Service from there on was quick- no complaints there.  At first bite, the oysters were very tasty, however both of us soon realized the "fried" part of the oysters over-powers the rest of the ingredients.  They use a very thick batter on these.  As well, it is a little heavy on the salt.  The accompanying small bed of spinach and bacon chunks did nothing to temper the saltiness.  It really felt as if you were biting into a large piece of partially fried batter.. . Bread and butter came complimentary with our appetizer.  The bread was fresh (no complaints there) and the butter was VERY good.  Very creamy with a hint of honey.. . Onto the entrees.... . The chicken and dumplings I ordered, while presented well, was not exactly what I was expecting.  They certainly do their own take on it, or rather, different from the bowl of boiled chicken and large dumplings my Mom and Grandmother make.  The center of the dish contained two very small chicken thighs that looked to be baked.  Surrounding them were the dumplings- four balls of dough about the size of small walnut.  Garnishing the dish were four small, "organic" carrots.  The chicken was marginal at best.  Not much flavor and the texture was very dry, yet mushy.  The dumplings did not provide much contrast in texture, nor tasted of much.  The carrots were soft and tasted as if they were boiled in butter.  I realize this review is probably coming off as quite harsh.  My meal wasn't horrible, it just wasn't that great at all.. . My fiance had the bacon-wrapped trout, which was actually quite good, although again, there was a heavy hand with the salt.. . We did not opt for dessert, so no review there.. . Overall, it's a very nice space, and for the most part, attentive staff.  The food, however, does not live up to the price-point and presentation.  Promising, but there's some work to do.
