ReviewID: PunCRZnbyh7aRpELzx7FqQ
ReviewerID: cntt9nuxTJRqXMBpc2hiLA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Uncommon Ground
Category: American (New)
I've finally found my favorite brunch spot up in the Edgewater/Rogers Park neck of the woods, and couldn't be happier for it. The smooth, cozy atmosphere in the lounge/bar area caught our eye (fireplace? tasty tunes? a lovely first impression), so we skipped waiting to be seated, and parked ourselves at the bar. Having briefly Yelp'd the spot to get an idea of what it was like and then read up on the menu, I was already semi-intent on a certain morning drink. I picked the flying fig (a fig/vodka confection zotzed with a cream cheese-stuffed date), while my partner did something that was spicy and beery that wasn't quite to his taste; we both loved what has to be the tastiest figgy drink ever. Second round, I moved to the tree-tini, which was pear-flavored, and good, although as with any pear drink, it had a tendency to settle, while Mr. Man chose a "Tom Waits for No Man," which was whisky-ish and as good as the fig drink.. . For the non-liquid portion of the meal, we were equally ecstatic with our selections--he picked the Montana omelet with a side of apple sausage, while I tucked into the spicy chilaquiles. We sampled one another's dishes, and both came away impressed with the presentation, the quality, and how well the flavors popped. Looking around at other dishes told me that this wasn't unusual.. . Finally, the question of service--our bartender was quick and efficient with our first round, and she was unfailingly polite. Delivery of the food was well-timed at about ten minutes after the arrival of our drinks. There was a snag with the second round, but only insofar as there was some confusion on which bartender was making one of them, but then our bartender ate the cost of the round as a delightfully generous gesture.. . So, in a capsule: hip place, tasty drinks, excellent breakfast, and sharp staff. Add in the convenience of the place having its own lot, and I'm sold on the proposition that I should become a Sunday regular, and impressed enough to ponder popping back for a spot of dinner sometime, to explore the "other" menu.. . 3/12 Addendum: So, the guy and I went for dinner last night to celebrate my return after a week out of town on business, and we were immensely gratified to find this isn't just a breakfast spot. This week's special game-oriented sausage appetizer (duck, pheasant, and boar) was extremely tasty, and the evergreen scallops appy was the best pair of the little monsters--a personal favorite--that I've eaten in months.. . The main courses were also very tasty--he got the pumpkin ravioli that came in a cream sauce leavened with blue cheese and roasted chestnuts, while I decided to try something seemingly simple and tuck into the chopped salad. He's a bit of a pasta snob (too many projects took him to Italy), and really loved his choice, while my salad was ginormous, with better-than-average chicken breast, blue cheese, perfect (not woody) tomato, and a nice tomato ranch dressing. We washed it down with some more of their specialty drinks--he had a pair of the spicy/chocolate-y Frida Kahlo martinis, while I led off with a refreshing ginger/lemon martini and a finished with my favorite, the "Flying Fig.". . This is my favorite spot for a bite in the area, and add in the comfy dining space, the live entertainments, an unfailingly friendly, attentive, and easygoing staff, and you have a definite winner.
