ReviewID: PUqqj5bavMSdtDz5vPJbFQ
ReviewerID: OuVm8cGPE_RKfCyDQ28Bag
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
What a disappointment. I love garlic and l enjoy the SF location, but the LA Stinking Rose ... stinks. . . We started out with a couple of mojitos, which were great until we got to the bottom and realized both of them were slimy and sludgy from the old mint that been used to make them. Ewwwww.. . If that wasn't enough to put us off our meal, we had the bagna calda - the roasted garlic and oil starter served with focaccia - which was barely room temp and so oily, it was almost inedible. . . We each ordered a steak, and waited a ridiculous amount of time for them to arrive. When I say ridiculous, I'm talking enough time for both of us to go to the restroom, decide we should have more cash for the valet, walk a few blocks the bank and back, and still have plenty of time to sit... and wait. What made this worse is that not once did our waiter come by. The couple of times we spoke with him, we had to track him down. I should add, this was on a slow weeknight. All of the servers were just standing around chatting with one another. When we finally did get his attention (45 minutes of waiting later) to ask where the hell our food was, he said he just had to remind the kitchen to cook it because they were " experimenting with a new menu that would start that week" and "they forgot". . . What?! I'm in a restaurant and you're telling me the kitchen was too busy doing other things to remember to cook my meal?. . About 20 minutes after that the food finally arrived. The steaks were lukewarm, the potatoes hard and cold, and my filet mignon looked more like chuck steak. (I wish I were exaggerating). The whole thing was bad and at that point, we'd really lost our appetites. . . After tracking down the manager and letting him know how terrible the experience had been, he hardly said two words or even apologized (until we were actually heading out the door), but did comp our entire tab it was so undeniably bad from start to finish. . . If you're truly a garlic and food lover, I'd suggest going just about anywhere other than here to eat.
