ReviewID: pVayQZSMmjA2j3Bycf7LoA
ReviewerID: wmTAKbfa4UcSXR1IkTpOOg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Souper Jenny
Category: Caterers
I too, like another reviewer, am going to go against the grain here.  Admittedly, I went here in May.  I am doing a review months later because I put this place out of my mind after visiting because I knew I would never willingly go back.  Parking is tight, as is the space inside.  There was a long line that moved fast and as other posters mentioned, this place definitely serves a certain demographic.  I imagine, based on what I saw and heard, that there are a lot of Sarah Palin fans who dine here.  But I digress.. . One of the main reasons for my one star were issues related to cleanliness and hygiene.  I can tolerate mediocre food in a clean place.  But this was mediocre food that left me wondering if this was one of the places that helped spread H1N1.  When you make it to the front of the line, you see the pre-prepared food in front of you - sitting in dishes - not warmers or anything that reassured me that the food was being held at the proper temperature.  Strange.  While there is a small cough/sneeze guard (at least when I was there) that separates food from patrons, it wasn't very tall.  Additionally the workers were hovering over the food, preparing to serve it to you, but they didn't have on gloves or otherwise look like they were supposed to be serving you food.  It all just looked semi-non-hygienic.  Add to that the fact that for some food items, the workers were picking the food up with their bare hands (no gloves) and putting it on people's plates - I was disgusted.  I don't want your fingerprint on my cookie or biscuit.  It was like a buffet/cafeteria station, only it was really small and the people serving you did not look like cafeteria workers (no gloves, aprons, etc.).  . . Even though I had food on my plate that had been plopped onto it with someone's bare fingers, I tried to be open minded.  I decided not to eat what had been thrown, ungloved, onto my plate, and focus on the other items.  So I started eating, what I recall, may have been a barley-type organic dish, but I stopped quickly, when I saw some sort of gnat or aphid in it.  Yuck.  I like organic, but not that organic.  . . I don't see what the fuss is about.  Would not go here again unless my Buckhead/soccer mom/frosty haired friend invites me again.  And even then, I'll politely suggest we find some other homogeneous, non-diverse Buckhead locale.  This is disappointing for me, because as a vegetarian/almost vegan, I always like to find spots that can accommodate my palate and dining needs.  This place does not.. . Lastly, while I know there is always a "risk" when dining out (and even "in") when it relates to issues of hygiene, when you can see so many hygiene issues in the front, it is likely worse in the back, where you cannot see.
