ReviewID: PVdyDZQ-KH-2QX3iVr1uOQ
ReviewerID: A4HNP067h3HAjDsTm5XN1w
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
I've said it before and I'll say it again, it is really hard to fairly review a place that has BYOB with no corkage.  Plain and simple.  I will still try:. . The valet was nice coming in and a total prick when we left.  No reason to really get into it, but lots of attitude and I was upset that I was paying for a service being run by completely incompetent and unprofessional people.. . The place was jumping last Friday night but we were seated promptly and our wines were opened right away.  The little votives they call wine glasses are cute, although I was bummed that I brought as good a bottle as I did as it was definitely suffering from it's trappings.  The service here was spotty, not ever bad per se, never truly good.  We ordered a bunch of plates, everything started coming out pretty quickly.  The cheese plate was thrown down onto the table with no explanation, which is a bad move I think on any waiter's part, but it was all yummy.  The plates kept coming, offering dish after dish of something salty and fried or roasted and covered in cheese.  Most were adequate, some delicious (the asparagus and cheese dish was especially memorable) some downright awful (the fig flatbread "pizza" was quite simply offensive - the cheese was so pungent, piquant, strong, stressful).. . The wait staff didn't clear the plates fast enough, and we "got in trouble" for putting the empty ones on the bar next to us - our waiter actually scolded me for putting them there - to which I responded "if you clear them faster and pay attention to our table, this wouldn't have happened".  This after I offered the waiter some of our wine, which he took in the back and said nothing about.  Useless person and no aptitude for his position.. . I won't be back.  I'm beginning to think that there really are no truly good restaurants with no corkage - they either lack in service, stemware, or overall food quality.  This place lacks in all three.  2.5 stars rounded down.
