ReviewID: PVe3qkH4BiMiJVglBVwPqA
ReviewerID: lpKD0hwlYUCi8kmXrKYKGQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
My first attempt to secure reservations at Mozza was a joke. I ended up getting a table for 2 at 11p.m. on a Wednesday eve. I decided to follow up and see if anyone had cancelled...and they had! We were allowed to dine at 8:30 instead, and it only got better from there. . . We were seated promptly in the only empty space left in the hustling and bustling restaurant. Movement and chatter abound. After a few moments, our waiter appeared, and we asked for bottled flat water. After leering at our neighbours' food and then badgering them with questions, we told our waiter we'd have the same, Eggplant Caponata, which exploded with sweet flavors and nutty from the pinenuts,  Pane bianco with olio nuovo, the heartiest bread I've ever tasted, so crusty and hearty and so typical of La Brea Bakery, and Speck, thinly sliced, salty cured meat. . . We were, of course, still hungry, and ordered the squash blossoms stuffed with ricotta(fried), and they were indecently scrumptious. The sauteed chicken liver over crostini with bacon garnish was savory and a heart attack's worst nightmare. Mozza's version of caprese was the best caprese I've ever had, with fresh buffalo mozzerella that floated like a cloud on the plate and in your mouth, topped with vine-roasted cherry tomatoes that were sweet as sweet could be. I could rant and rave about Mozza all day and night. Already getting full, voila!, out came the mixed mushroom pizza, with a bubbly crunchy crust which was a tad bit dry, but the inner part was the perfect mix of sauce, cheese, and mushrooms. . . I'd heard so much about the Butterscotch Budino, and decided to try it for myself. The waiter, though said that despite the hype about the Budino, he favored the Caramel Coppetta, so we ordered that also. . The caramel gelato(house-made) served over crunchy toffee and drizzled with peanuts was the perfect way to wrap up a perfect meal. The Butterscotch Budino was similar to a pannacotta, topped with slightly salty caramel, and creme fraiche, almost in the style of a parfait, and made my tastebuds go awry, incorporating rich, savory &amp; sweet tastes. The last dessert, topped off with Harney &amp; Sons Chamomile tea(my favorite brand of chamomile, by the way), and off I go to visit Mr. Sandman.... . Mario Batali and Nancy Silverton are a match made in heaven. What an epicurean delight.. . * On my next visit, I tried the brussel sprouts in light balsamic and olive oil and they were divine. The lentils with crisp goat cheese were also delicious. The homemade meatballs were slightly spicy and in a rich marinara sauce and I loved them. They would've been better with pasta though...but I'm definitely not complaining...They didn't have the stuffed squash blossoms since they're out of season. Oh, I have a new favorite pizza, their sauce-less pizza with prosciutto, leeks, goat cheese, and whole roasted garlic cloves!!! Deelish! I also had the opportunity to try 2  new-to-me desserts, their profiteroles stuffed with pistachio gelato, and they knocked my socks off. They even sent a complimentary dessert over, the ricotta and orange zest filled cannolis coated with pistachios, which were pretty tasty! I adore Mozza.
