ReviewID: PwGqW9wUgJh7W4XKFHVCVg
ReviewerID: zhJZgq7psBUJoFrXvwclWA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
i've been to 3 Roscoe's locations:  Pasadena, Hollywood, West LA (pico). . lemmie tell you - i ain't ever goin' back to the hollywood location. . i ain't ever goin' back to the pico location (unless someone else is driving...i hate driving down there, i don't know LA well enough and i hold up traffic trying to look at the surroundings - epic fail on my part...). . but i will drive the 12 miles each way to go to the pasadena location and eat my heart out happily and leave content.. . on a normal "i could go for some chicken" kind of night i will order the Carol C Special. one breast, one waffle..and maybe an order of greens.. . on an  "i could eat a horse" night, i order the 1/4 s'coes and i go for my 2 favourite pieces -- the breast and the leg...and lemmie tell you, i never make it to the 2nd waffle cause it's SO much food...but it's SO good you'll hear your arteries begging for you to put the fork down but your brain and tummy win and the fork dances from plate to mouth while your tush wiggles with excitement until your stomach is stretched and filled to capacity.. . in 3+ years only once have i sent a piece of chicken back b/c it was overcooked/dry...and the server, bless her heart, returned it to the kitchen with a smile and brought back another piece about 4 or 5 minutes later (while i worked on my leg &amp; waffles..) still wearing a genuine smile and said, "babydoll if that chicken isn't the juciest breast we've got, i'll go back there and yell at the chef for you" and she laughed a little, gave me the friendly hand-squeeze-on-shoulder and a little pat on the back and went on to her other tables.  well...it WAS the juciest, most succulent piece of chicken i'd had that didn't come out of my own kitchen and she didn't need to talk to the chef a 2nd time.  i also left her a 25% tip because the bill was only $40 for the 2 of us and because she'd made me smile with her friendly disposition.  honestly i wanted to ask her to adopt me and take me home but...it seemed like a pretty hefty request.. . whether you like your chicken smothered or standard, breasts, legs, wings or thighs... roscoe's will hook it upppppp.. . they also have the only waffles in the US that i like -- though i avoid maple syrup at all cost, they do offer little "Smuckers" packets of honey with the jams/jellies on the table and to me.... . Roscoe's Love   IS... a steaming hot/crispy/light/slightly vanilla &amp; cinnamon'y waffle with a scorching hot, crispy outside, juicy inside breast and leg served atop that waffle...yes ON TOP I SAY...both chicken and waffle GENEROUSLY drizzled with honey and a thunderstorm of hot sauce and well..there is truly nothing that better hits the spot when fried chicken is what you're craving!. . 5 stars to roscoes in pasadena!
