ReviewID: PWqr5zMQbMRJiK0eWY3TMA
ReviewerID: YSfAlm6XNaym-JOrRjv3Tg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Watershed
Category: American (New)
I may or may not currently have Watershed's website open so I can listen to the Indigo Girls. Just throwin' that out there.. . The atmosphere at this lovely little spot was more casual than I had expected, but I think that's in part due to the light airiness of the space. It is a converted gas station, after all! The place was buzzing on Saturday night, filled with a great diverse mixture of clientele.. . Our waiter, Phil, was on the ball throughout the night. Helpful with suggestions, attentive but never hovering, and just gave off a great friendly vibe. I agonized over the menu for a bit but eventually settled on a special local greens salad and the country captain, which Phil described as a flavorful bone-in chicken curry. While I've never heard of the dish in my 25 years as a Southerner, I was pretty excited about it.. . Unfortunately, some other folks apparently were excited about it as well, and the kitchen had run out. Boo on that. I decided to go with the penne with cream sauce, asparagus and ham as my entree, and we were all served a complimentary little cup of tomato basil soup. The soup was wonderful; you could taste nearly every fresh ingredient within it. Yum. . . My local greens salad was phenomenal: a light dressing, vidalia onions, and hearty applewood bacon with fresh, flavorful, crispy greens. My pasta was also very good with perfectly prepared asparagus (I heart asparagus) and a not-too-heavy cream sauce. The pork chop I sampled was really great, as well. For dessert we split a special angel food cake and strawberry concoction as well as the apple cake: both sublime. What a difference homemade whipped cream makes! . . All in all, my meal was fantastic, and I wouldn't hesitate to return to Watershed, despite the distance. While it's special enough for a special occasion, I could see myself returning for lunch or brunch pretty regularly as it has that wonderful comfortable vibe. . . Oh, and they have Hendrick's gin and Chimay. Heart.
