ReviewID: pwx5s9o2TLZAKWvvy0RL1g
ReviewerID: BI43zsVnKZHtMI_4GBStng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Wow, I guess we were lucky.. . My companions and I rolled into the Hannam Korean market parking lot around 2 p.m. and pulled into a parking space in front of the Kogi truck. NO LINE!. . We pretty much already knew what to order, thanks to Austin S., so got the short rib taco, spicy BBQ chicken taco, short rib burrito, and kimchi quesadilla with spicy pork. (Hey, there were three of us, okay?) By the time we finished ordering, a line had started to form behind us. In the end, the line held about 8 people, but it moved really quickly.. . After about 5 minutes our food was ready, and we repaired to the car to feast (some people--not me--weren't ok with just standing in the parking lot to eat). . . I tried the short rib taco first. Amazing! For $2, it came with a lot more filling than a traditional Mexican taco. There was a good amount of really tender and sweetly spicy short rib meat topped with enough goodies to spill over the sides of the tortilla: julienned lettuce and cabbage dressed with a chili-soy vinaigrette, cilantro-green onion-lime relish (I could really taste the lime! yum!), a Korean salsa, and wedges of lime and orange, plus a slice of radish.. . The spicy chicken taco was also really great but I thought the short rib burrito was good but not great. I preferred the short rib taco because the meat flavor wasn't blanketed by rice and the other burrito fillings. Plus, the fresh veggies on the taco created a nice contrast of textures.. . I saved the kimchi quesadilla for last, because--to be quite honest--I was a little frightened by the idea. I love kimchi, but the idea of kimchi and melted cheese just did not compute in my head. But it was good. Really good. I actually couldn't discern any actual pieces of kimchi in the quesadilla, but there was a lot going on. The pork made it really hearty and filling, in addition to incredibly spicy. And I liked the orange sauce and sprinking of sesame seeds on top of the quesadilla too, even though I typically don't like sesame seeds.. . We all agreed the food was delectable and a good deal. If I lived in LA, I'd probably hit up the Kogi truck at least once a week. Sigh. Maybe Kogi will expand to Silicon Valley. Please, please, Chef Roy Choi!
