ReviewID: PXr1ZNcGKtkFB5d5Q3usPQ
ReviewerID: 7-kypMrvP7E5WH8kog9K7g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Another to-eat-at place I can check off the Yelp list.. . This place is near my work, not home, so we planned to eat here on the only weekday they are open.  It started out as a group of 6.  After telling everyone about it and their burgers we were ready to go.  Then I mentioned that the burgers had blue cheese on them.  Two of the folks hate blue cheese and I informed them that they will not take it off.  So, our group of 6 became 4.. . Two others in our group asked more questions.  Their website does not have a menu so I had no idea what else they served.  I did mention that they do not have ketchup and will not provide it.  Two others put their noses in the air and decided to skip our lunch outing.. . So, it was down to one person and I.  He was reluctant to go with all their "policies" about substitutions and what not.  I twisted his arm and we were off.. . So, the menu is about 6-8 appetizers and about 6-8 entrees.  They have an impressive wine and especially beer list.  I opted for a trapist ale from Belgium.  Sure, it is a work lunch but it was a Friday so I decided to go for it.. . The beer was incredible.  The bartender claimed that I should be able to find it elsewhere.  I have never seen trapist beers offered elsewhere.  At $10 it was expensive but worth it.. . The burger was great, very unique.  The sweet potato fries were excellent.  My co-worker had a steak which he said was very good as well.. . Ultimately, at $30 per person for lunch, this was an expensive lunch.  I think it is a bit overpriced for what you get.  Overall the food was 4 stars easily.. . They offer no service whatsoever, so we left no tip.  If we had a waiter I may have gotten another beer, but I am not going to chase them down for a $10 beer.. . The policies are a bit much.  Yes it's Fathers Office or f-off which is apparently what they mean.  I have been to the Soup Nazi in Manhattan.  He was crazy and a bit off.  I have seen a couple eateries in LA trying to copy his stern style with rules and what not.  It's not cute, even if your food is good.  The soup nazi was the original, all these guys are just imitators which is lame.  Plus, he was not trying to be rude whereas these guys are.. . Ultimately, they lost 4 customers today due to their policies.  With several neighboring businesses closing their doors and in a down economy, they may want to re-think their gimmick.  I can appreciate that they think people should eat their food they way they think it should be eaten.  I can buy off on this.  However, not everyone is this open minded and maybe some want salt or ketchup or table service.. . With enough people telling them to f-off, the gimmick will not last.. . In the end, I would love to return to try some of the wonderful beers they have, but may wait until I have a bit more extra cash burning a hole in my pocket.
