ReviewID: pxX9qtt26jhF4sR1DFH1gg
ReviewerID: lyqTDTzHUilKuLXK71722g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
Last night my fiance and I celebrated Valentine's Day at Craft and I cannot stop thinking and dreaming about it. One of the best meals/experiences I've ever had was at Craftsteak in Las Vegas so when I heard it was coming to LA I was ecstatic. I also had very high expectations. Craft LA did not disappoint.. . First let me just say that when we were in the making reservations process a couple months ago, it came down to Craft or Fraiche (a restaurant which I had heard very good things about and have been wanting to try) but whoever was taking the rsvns for Fraiche was not as hospitable as Craft, actually borderline rude. So Craft it was!  . Now having dined here, I can attest  that the same hospitable spirit and attitude we received on the phone reflects itself throughout the whole restaurant. Every person we came across--greeter, bartenders, bussers, runners, amuse bouche guy, servers--were effecient, knowledgeable, gracious, and accomodating. (not one bit of snootiness) Don't worry I still plan to visit Fraiche but I just wanted to touch upon how impressed I was by  Craft's consistent  thread of great service from start to finish.The staff  at Craft strikes the perfect balance between being professional and also being open and warm. . . While waiting for our table we tried two of their signature cocktails , the guava margarita and the pomegranite cranberry proseco. (sorry I can't remember their proper names) They were good but not noteworthy. I think next time I'll just order a martini. The candied  nuts and marinated olives they serve at the bar were delicious though. We tried not to eat too much of them but found we couldn't help ourselves especially with the olives!. They informed us our table was ready midway through so somebody transported our drinks and the bartenders encouraged us to just transfer our tab to our table bill (very nice). . We had brought our own wine selected from special wineries we had visited in years past. The corkage fee is 35$ by the way. We started with Le Cuvier Chardonnay. It went well with the first amuse bouche which was a small pastry stuffed with some sort of light cream. It didn't go so well with the oysters we ordered next but we enjoyed the oysters nonetheless.. We ordered 4 of each oyster: Kumamoto, Caraquette, and Malpeque. My favorite was the Malpeque which was meaty but still delicate in flavor. Usually I'm a huge Kumamoto fan but for whatever reason (the wine? not a good season?) they didn't pack the punch for me they usually do. Still good though. . Next we ordered the Parsnip Mezzaluna with Black Truffle Butter. We were still deciding on our main dish. It was between the Wagyu beef cheek or the lamb special for the night. (braised lamb shoulder and rack). We decided on the lamb. . We also ordered  2 sides--the roasted assorted mushrooms and bok choy. . We gave our server Daniel the rest of our white and moved on to a cabernet. (when we bring wine in we always try to give a glass of it to the server and also leave  a little more on the tip). OK here's one small note: the mezzaluna although we ordered it much earlier than the main dishes and sides arrived with the lamb and sides. Maybe it was our fault in not specifying we wanted it before? Although it is listed under first courses like the oysters and we received our oysters first...no matter. Once I put the first ricotta, marscapone stuffed mezzaluna and slice of truffle in my mouth, all was right with the world. (This was a good match with the chardonnay btw) I felt like the little rat on Ratatouille with all the flavors and colors bursting and swirling around my head! . The roasted assorted mushrooms (trompette,chanterelle, hen of woods,oyster, hedgehog, shiitake) were also out of this world.  Not to sound cliche, but they really were seasoned to perfection and the flavor of the mushrooms really came through.. The lamb was delicious. The shoulder fell apart  with the touch of your fork like a tender pot roast. And the rack had a medium rare center and was very flavorful. There was a sauce surrounding it but it wasn't memorable.. The bok choy was so rich in flavor I asked our server if it any sort of meat (like chicken) broth worked into the recipe but he informed me that it was ginger infused. Very Very good. . For dessert we had the glazed donuts with the chocolate,coffee custard and pear jam (?) I thought they were decent but not raveworthy like I had heard from everyone else. My fiance said "they're like krispy kreme" (gasp in horror if you wish). I also ordered a cappuccino. I appreciate that it was brought to the table in a timely manner so I could enjoy it with my dessert.. In summary, everything was great if not fantastic.. The blow your mind items were the mezzaluna and the mushrooms, followed closely by the lamb (which is not a usual menu dish) and the bok choy. . Next time I want to try the pork belly, baby broccoli and gnocchi.
