ReviewID: PYJek-Y-4WFPv4UzBby-VQ
ReviewerID: rIpgijNsqtcCN1y_7E6e0w
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
ZERO STARS!!!!!!!!!!!. . effffff this place.  i have never been treated so rudely IN MY LIFE.  i went to the alcove for an important meeting on a late Sunday morning.  i got there first and stood in line for over 20 minutes patiently waiting to place my order.  during this time i watched tons of people hawk around for empty tables and swoop in as they became available.. . so, when we got close to ordering, i left my dining mates inside with my order and hunted for a table.  i politely waited until someone left, and sat down.. . moments later, a snarky waiter swoops over and says "you have to have a number to sit at a table!"  really?  where were you for the past 20 minutes as tons of people did just what i did?  where are the directions stating that these are the rules?!  he insisted i leave, and i told him "you've got to be joking, i'm not getting up from this table."  i could have SWORN i saw my friend walk to the back with a number and told him so.  turns out i was wrong, because the server WENT AND CHECKED TO SEE IF I WAS TELLING THE TRUTH.  (she was wearing all black and i hadn't seen her in a while, forgive me.). . he imperiously returns to the table and demands that i get up.  well guess what yelpers, i got up, yanked my friends out of the line and walked to little dom's for a perfectly civilized brunch.. . what a crappy, half assed excuse for a restaurant.  there are no staff up front directing people as to the particular customs of the restaurant.  as a matter of fact every single person that got in line after me was asking me, "is this the line for a table?"  and then you have the gall to insist i get up from a table? . . sadly, this business will probably not fail as people in LA have become conditioned to crappy , rude and downright hostile treatment in restaurants.  the customer is not only not always right, clearly the alcove thinks the customer is also an asshole.
