ReviewID: pymuF0-AMNfrVOJ17ovjtA
ReviewerID: cufhYFdyrUAt4SWe-m0grQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Duck Walk
Category: Thai
Keep on walkin'. Yeesh. What happened here? I hadn't been to Duck Walk in years, but I remember it being a whole lot better than my most recent experience. . . Like most people, I have a go-to dish when it comes to certain restaurants. Get that right and I'm pretty sure that I'll like you. With Thai food, it's Pad Thai. Easy. Basic. Tasty. Good standard. I ordered the Lunch Box Special with Spring Rolls and Pad Thai. I ordered by go-to drink, Thai Iced Tea, to sip on. It was all a mess. The spring rolls had very little taste. They weren't offensive they just... weren't anything. The dipping sauce had too much fish sauce and not nearly enough garlic and lime. I didn't get through much of it. When I went to jump into the Pad Thai, again, I was knocked over by the smell of fish sauce. I was beginning to wonder if some got knocked into the pot and the chef was all, "Eh. Whatevs. My show's about to come on" and didn't feel like making any more. It was fairly dry with little peanut or egg. But that fish sauce was too much too bear. I like fish sauce in moderation. I created a curry recipe (and egg recipe) that calls for fish sauce as a secret weapon. I like it. I eat it. This? This was way too much and it wasn't satisfying. Unfortunately, it was pretty unappetizing. Thinking I could rely on my drink to save the day, I was disappointed to see that they gave me Thai tea bubble tea, rather than Thai Iced Tea. Perhaps not surprisingly, the bubble tea was more expensive than regular Thai Iced Tea. It was also packed with those 'rabbit present' tapioca balls I loathe so much.. . Step up your game, people. You can't swing a [redacted] in this city without hitting a Thai restaurant. With excellent options throughout the city (including a classic selection just a few steps up the street), you can't afford to rest on your laurels. Luckily for me, I have discovered a Thai place that (almost) erased this awful experience from my memory. Review forthcoming but (preview!) ME like a lot (there; not here)!
