ReviewID: pyTdEHrA0glUDUzxNEGV-A
ReviewerID: Cj5YPRWNVbvN7cWwnU3V9w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wishbone
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
The food is pricey.. The decor borders on garish. . The service can be slow.. You WILL wait forever, especially on Sundays.. The tables are very close to each other.. It's a drive for me to get there. . . Now: . The food is pricey, yes. And it's cooked just about perfect, IMO. I love how everything tastes non-commercial, like someone actually made this in a proper home kitchen and then thought, you know, hey - I could serve this in a restaurant! I am willing to pay for better quality, and that's what happens here. . . The decor is...eclectic. The owners were adamant about that sort of style, and they are characters themselves. Why do I know this? because my best friend designed it to their wishes, a long time ago. I think it's funky. Where else can you go and see that kind of art up on the walls? I like it. . . Slow service. Well...yeah. I can't really spin that one, other than the fact that it has been SO FARGING BUSY whenever I've been there, and everything is so...difficult to navigate...that it makes sense. It's not an awful time to wait, but figure maybe 20-30 minutes past the order when it's busy.. . The Sunday wait is unavoidable, by and large. Church groups, families, groups of sheepishly hung over friends...you will find them all here. You will be sat after them. Happens. But you know, I would rather wait a bit at a restaurant, because really, a line is a good sign when you think about it.. . The tables are indeed very close. It's annoying when the idiot the next table over continually elbows your shoulder, or won't get up out of his chair when the leg of said chair is on your coat, or talks too loud. Every so often, I have seen good conversation start up between two tables full of people who didn't even know each other. But let's face it: they are trying to pack them in. The line is crazy - there are tons of people. And they could have a mutiny on their hands if it isn't all orchestrated right. So, I look the other way on this minor irritation of the personal space bubble.. . Yup. It's in the middle of an area that is being built up right now. I live in Logan Square, so this means a drive down I-90 and then sharking for parking. But for that andouille hash...and the fresh-squeezed juices...and the corn muffins, slathered in salted butter...worth it. . . Simply worth it.
