ReviewID: Q0BFRWY5o7xuMj8eEA1A5w
ReviewerID: tXqVduTJHLbrrwVEO8JX6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
All that hype, all that talk, Bottega Louie is up to bat and actually sends one of out the ball park. I was there for dinner on a Friday. The following Monday, I was back for lunch. Not because I was craving it that bad after the first experience but because it just worked out that way. This place totally defines LA dining. All walks of life dine here, a big melting pot.. . Let's talk about the establishment. High ceilings, huge windows, and their favorite color of paint must have been white because that's the only color I see on the walls. The kitchen is wide open for everyone to see. You can literally just stand and stare at all the chefs and chef souses (however you spell) working like an army of ants.. . Food: Pretty darn good but portions are a bit small. I had the lasagna the first time. It was a little bit different than what I'm use to. Can't explain it but it was decent. I sampled the ravioli which I really enjoyed. Lots of green peas and topped with a sort of sprinkled bacon pieces. The tomato bruschetta is a great appetizer. Definitely give that a shot. Lots of tomatoes and it's well seasoned.. . The second time I tried the Mussels and Clams dish. This dish is literally just mainly mussels and some clams. The sauce is distinct yet appealing. Soak your bread in this sauce, you'll like it. Maybe dipping french fries in this sauce would be a good idea. Fried calamari, mediocre. . . On the way out, I sampled their $1.75/macaroons. They were good but pricey. They have a variety of bakery and sweets here. I think if I had a major sweet tooth, then I would be eye balling this stuff more.. . The service: average. I wasn't too impressed. It's decent, passing grade.. . One major drawback, it's loud as hell. So if you bring a date and want to have a nice, quiet time together, don't bother. If you don't mind the volume projected in this place, then this would be a good place to grab a bite.. . Parking: lunch time lot next to the Bottega Louie was $3. At night that could change, not sure. If you go for the meters on the street, some meters are $4.00 an hour!!! If you go at night, maybe after 6pm then the street metered parking are free.
