ReviewID: q0v4lgPh2M4Un0dqFgrCFA
ReviewerID: SI620L9GDuAxK81SEwj2uA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: De Cero Taqueria
Category: Mexican
I have had several people tell me this place is incredible so I was dying to try it. I bought a Groupon a few months back and was ready to put it to use. So when my birthday came around (it was Monday) my best friend and I headed straight there. . . It was a cozy little place. We tried to sit outside but the wait was 30 minutes so we settled for a table that was about 1 foot away from the tables on either side of us (did I mention it was cozy?). Fortunately it livened up in there so the neighbors next to us were straining to listen to our fantasticically fun, hilarious conversation (poor couple--I felt for them in their complete silence. but i digress..). . We began with a modified classic margarita. I was dissapointed to find out that their margaritas were made with classic sours mix. I really was expecting freshly squeezed lime juice with my margarita, with a place that was supposed to be that fabulous. Per my request, they made us a margarita that was supposedly freshly squeezed (I decided to play the role of the high maintenance guest--sorry Maria) but I'm pretty certain it was not fresh. Needless to say, I got a second one. I think it was my low tolerance that made that decision. I have had better but then again we may be to blame for modifying it in the first place. I guess I didn't give them a shot. For our second round my friend had the hibiscus margarita. That was very good. Unique, at the least. . . Both wanting something different we started with the duck nachos. They were good--not absolutely amazing but tasty, yes. . . Myself always wanting a little bit of everything--and again in agreement with my friend--we decided to get the taco combination platter. I tried the avacado (can you go wrong with avacado? never),  al pastor (pineapple goes good with everything), battered shrimp (+ avacado and cilantro--very nice) and then the ahi tuna (meh). The mango salsa they served with the tacos was incredible. The green sauce (was it tomatillo? not sure) was good--but only good. We left the red sauce alone. It looked boring.   . . Dessert time. And here is where it gets exciting. For my birthday they brought out flan. It was perfection. Heavenly. Lick-the-plate worthy. I would come back solely for the flan. The texture was perfect. The flavor was light and delicate. I was only dissappointed when I saw the check. They made us (really my friend since she was treating me for my birthday) pay for my birthday flan. El cheapo (that's mexican for, what cheap jerks they are that they can't spare a flan for a birthday).. . Overall, I would say that De Cero is good but I think that I only thought it was amazing at the time because of the two margaritas flowing through my system. I probably won't go back. There are better Mexican places out there. Maybe, though, I need to try some other items on the menu. But this rating is based on what we had so I will stick with 3 stars.
