ReviewID: q1ZmGVNJ14xTXmo-GeZ0qg
ReviewerID: nU-8mVPWAtrqOXR5u2N2YQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Back when I was an undergrad, I was a newbie to all things L.A.  My buddy tells me in passing, "Lawry's is a true dining experience."  So what does my broke-college ass do when he takes this chick out for the first time?  "Hey, my friend told me about this place called 'Lawry's' - let's peep it."  . . Needless to say, something should have tripped my brain when having to pay a five dollar valet and the overall clientele's dress (as to opposed to two people looking like they've just left a lecture for western philosophy).  While waiting for our names, my date looks at the sample menu and says "Hey, we can go somewhere else" after seeing the prices.  . . I smelled inside and decided against it.  The prime rib carts were callin' me like crack calling Pookie in "New Jack City."  Have to give credit to the hostess and staff for treating us like any other patron, even in our campus attire. Getting a table pulled out from a puzzle of other tables was a bit trippy.  And when the server spun that salad, I knew it was on.  . . Can't complain at all about the Lawry's cut - mid-rare is the way to go for me.  As the cart dude sliced the cut from the slab, I had a split second vision of the busty cow just a few months prefacing this very second, lazily grazing on farm grass.  And then I had a flashback to my high school years... hey guys, cow-tipping ain't urban myth in my high school town in the South (where such group-bonding activities are rural facts). Just how does this chronology of information pass through my head right before tasting anything?  . . Well, it all faded away with the first bite... I could feel my carnivorous role in the organism life chain come full circle. This black and white spotted animal's life provided an amazing 30 minutes of mouth-watering ecstasy for me and my date. I'm not too evil for pondering this, am I?  Well, maybe for the cow-tipping thing.  In the immortal words of Donnie Darko, "But I'm over all that now.". . Don't forget to check the cream corn... I didn't like the spinach too much, but I'm picky with my spinach.  The total bill equaled about twenty slave hours at my old work study job back then... but hey, why not?  This date led to a drawn out, on-again/off-again, drama-filled relationship throughout college.   And it's all thanks to you, Lawry's.... I owe you so much! On the real, I won't ever say no to an opportunity to eat here nowadays.  Girls come and go, but a nice slice of cow will never leave you (that is, until you drop your kids off).
