ReviewID: q2INDcrSstK4FUx_8YX2-w
ReviewerID: BSGoDj3im64f8r9Jy1fshw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pops For Champagne
Category: Wine Bars
This is a combination of a 1* review and a 5* review.  . . I came here this past Sunday and had a horrible experience that left me not wanting to return.  My friends and I bought groupons and per my request, we waited until I was nearly done with school to use them.  We were somewhere between 45 minutes to an hour when we overheard a manager tell some customers that had just walked in that they were closing "right this minute".  We asked, confused, and were informed that there was a private event and we had to go.  No one had informed us when we walked in.  No one informed us when we sat down.  There was no sign on the door.  Nothing.  Now, we wouldn't have been upset had someone told us this before we sat down as we could have had a drink and planned to come back another night.  . . The manager on duty that night was very rude.  After my friend tries to explain that we have groupons and if there was anything she could do, she snapped back that "they have expiration dates for a reason".  Yes, we're fully aware, but to be fair, this was one of the shortest I've ever seen on a groupon (3 months).  She ended up giving my friend a $40 gift card (after handing us some little "buy one get one" card) and almost redeemed herself until she told my friend that "tell your friend he never has to come back here".  That "friend" of hers is actually her husband and whether or not you care if someone comes back, it's incredibly rude to say that as you're apparently trying to salvage us as customers.. . My friend and I decide we'll come back that Monday after my class but change our minds to coming on Wednesday instead.  I get out of class early, take a nice walk down State street and meet my friend shortly after 8.  I was surprised that the bar was quite crowded, but it turns out there were many people using their Groupons at the last minute, like us!  We walk around looking for a seat when I notice employees setting up something in another room, so I immediately start to worry that we're going to have to leave.  . . The manager of the night (I'm assuming) walks by and we ask him and he assures us that they're not closing early and apologizes about what happened on Sunday.  He offers to take us downstairs with no cover to view the show going on.  We tell him we'll think about it after we grab a seat and have some food and drinks.. . Our bartender (also Greg) was great!  He gave us a sample of a wine (2006 Ferrari, I believe) while we waited for our bottle of Mawby (very nice, by the way!) that was in the other room that he could not get into.  This night was a MUCH better experience and one that will have me returning.  They took care of the food we ordered (chocolate fondue and frites, both were delicious) as well as a drink.  When I asked about the Rose I was trying (I'm a fan of a good Rose, but this one just wasn't doing it for me) the Greg in charge gave me a taste of another one that was MUCH better.  . . I still haven't gotten to try a red from here, but now that I've determined I'll be returning, I look forward to finally getting a red.  Their cocktails (sparkling mixed drinks?) were all very good, at least the ones we tasted which I know included the High Sage, Jinjitsu, Corcovado, Quebecois and something else (I know I probably butchered all of those names).  The Mawby was decided on from seeing other Yelpers mention it and honestly was very good.  Definitely recommend splitting a bottle with a friend and some frites.  Not sure about the cheese as my friends ordered some on Sunday but didn't get what they ordered (it was supposed to be a triple creme but the cheeses had the consistency of a manchego, ossau iraty and something else).  . . I might be young and don't appreciate wine like I do beer (love some good beer!), but I bought this Groupon to go to a place where I could try different wines.  After the first night I was planning on never returning aside from using my Groupon, however, after Wednesday, I will definitely be back!  Perhaps next week after I finish my first class of the quarter?. . Thank you Greg (and Greg) for changing my opinion of Pops!
