ReviewID: Q2r6YCYSPCtaPLz6awv_Xg
ReviewerID: UgQ4cOgpYSCVv7lr-WyoWQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
We were on our way to the Hollywood bowl for a concert so we decided to stop by and grab food for the show. Joan's sandwiches are OMG good. I ordered the grilled vegetable and goat cheese sandwich and it was mouth watering good. For some reason I always find myself straying towards the vegetable sandwiches. I am a lover of good grilled vegetables and goat cheese. It also helps that there was roasted red peppers and some kind of delectable spread all sandwiched in on rye bread. My only wish is that they toasted the rye because what sandwich is better toasted. My boyfriend ordered the muffaleta sandwich and it was ginormous and delicious. I am trying to open my taste buds to flavors that i do not naturally enjoy (olives)...so instead of not bothering to give the sandwich a try I went heads and took a big bite. To my surprise the sandwich was great and I actually enjoyed the olive tapenade spread. It really complemented all the various meats on the sandwich. Oh and the pickles that come with the sandwich are amazing! The guy at the counter almost forgot them so I had to ask for it. They have unique seasoning to them and are sweet. . . They also have a good selection in pastries and desserts. I ordered a lemon bar, banana chocolate bread, and this sugary dough ball. The lemon bar was one of the best lemon bars I have ever had. It's a great ratio of lemon filling to crust. Their crust is also moist and not dry like some other lemon bars I have had in the past. The chocolate banana bread was good but nothing special. And the sugary dough ball that was not appetizing at all...it was not sweet enough and it was too dry (I had to toss it). . . My cousin ordered the cupcakes. I tried the snickers one and it was good, but not amazing. . . This place is adorable and their ready made food looks amazing. The food is on the pricey side. $10 to $13 for a sandwich, but worth a try!
