ReviewID: q4fFuA6C066pOaI5ATi8qQ
ReviewerID: y0X8bWVVP6bzlIVEZovfjg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
There's something about Taste that pulls me in. I love everything about it, and have never once had a bad experience there.. . Taste offers a great meal on a glamorous section of Melrose, without being a "scene." The dining area is nicely designed with lots of dark wood, big windows, and orb-like mirrors on the wall. The simple chandelier light fixtures hanging from the ceiling cast a golden glow over the the whole restaurant. The restaurant is small and a bit crowded, but it's a comfortable kind of crowded. In the daytime, I prefer to sit on the outdoor patio, where the music is a bit quieter, and watch the Melrose world pass by.. . The menu is full of homey American favorites (burgers, roasted chicken, a variety of pastas and salads) but each dish is given a new twist with the addition of some different ingredients. . . The macaroni and cheese with white truffle oil and mushrooms is quite possibly my favorite mac 'n' cheese in LA. It's served as an appetizer or side dish so the portion is small and won't sit in your stomach like concrete, like mac 'n' cheese tends to do.. . For a lighter appetizer, the shrimp cocktail on the happy hour menu is simple, refreshing and delicious. The shrimp are large and icy cold, and the cocktail sauce has a spicy chipotle bite to it. With only four or five shrimp to an order, it's perfect for one person... but you'll be wanting more!. . The Kobe beef burger is juicy and flavorful, though a bit pricey at $17. Yikes.. for a burger? It's a much better deal when it's included on the DineLA menu. The stinky cheese choices for the burger are fantastic: gorgonzola, aged white cheddar or goat. No ho-hum American here!. . Speaking of Kobe beef, the Kobe meatballs are outstanding. The meatballs, mixed with pine nuts and golden raisins, are huge and come two-to-a-plate over a mound of linguine in a creamy cheese sauce. This dish is very hearty and should probably be ordered on it's own. As the second course of a three course meal, I got through one meatball and ended up taking home the other, and most of the pasta. (Gotta leave room for dessert!). . For your vegetarian friends, the sugar snap pasta is as light and refreshing as pasta gets, with a hint of mint. And for dessert, you cannot skip the chocolate bread pudding. . . If you feel like getting your super girly drink on, order the Ruby Slipper. This champagne/raspberry cocktail is sweet and bubbly and tastes like a Jolly Rancher. Definitely not the drink for men who embarrass easily. . . And now that we're on the topic of alcohol... I have to mention Taste's happy hour. The hours aren't the greatest.... only 4p.m. - 6p.m. so it's not ideal for the 9-5 crowd but it's offered on weekends as well. Hurrah! With beers at $3, wine and well drinks at $4, and a variety of tasty appetizers all priced at $5 or less, this happy hour deal is hard to beat, especially in this neighborhood.
