ReviewID: q4jYesskx26TdbD7WSueDw
ReviewerID: RkLg-yvK2CrBOAW7SqvpoA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
i met at mozza with a local friend and an out-of-town friend, whom i havent seen in years, plus her husband. the four of us probably overstayed our welcome because we sat there for hours, eating, gabbing, laughing and enjoying ourselves in grand fashion. that really made my experience here memorable and positive.. . however, i am really surprised at myself not being able to give this place at least four stars .. but honestly, i felt strangely ambivalent about the food [with the exception of the mozzarella and prosciutto].. . appetizers: the best buffalo mozzarella and prosciutto i have tasted out here on the west coast so far. the buffalo mozzarella just sort of melted  and was absorbed by my tastebuds .. it felt like a juicy slab of cold melted butter [if that were ever possible!] and the paper thin slices of prosciutto were divine. the anchovy dressing on the tricolore salad was very pungent. i'm not a fan of anchovies. so that's all i have to say about that. . . the pizza: i found our mushroom pizza to be VERY mushroomy!! i could taste all different sorts of funghi on it .. i think there were morels, oyster mushrooms and maybe even cremini .. am i making this up? it's quite possible. but in my opinion, i just felt like the flavor was much too overpowering. the speck with tapenade and mozzarella pizza was better. the best part about the pizza was the crust. i quite enjoyed dipping it into olive oil and balsamic vinegar BEFORE digging into my second slice of mushroom pizza. actually, i didn't even finish my second slice. . . desserts: the meyer lemon sorbet made me pucker up my face into a twist on account of its being WAY too sour. the butterscotch thing was good, but i don't understand how the pine nut cookies with rosemary were supposed to complement or enhance that dessert .. am i missing something here? we got some other forgettable caramel dessert thing .. which tasted pretty much like the butterscotch thing. . . overall, i think the food was tasty and service was mostly helpful [we did have to wait quite a bit for refills on our beverages]. i just don't think that i would want to wait an hour for a table here [walk-in] ... or a few weeks for a late reservation [9pm]. i'm glad i tried it though and am glad that my friend did the reserving for us. haha. honest to goodness, i am a batali fan. and i wasn't disappointed with pizzeria mozza. but i guess i just expected more. . . osteria mozza is next on list. that will probably be more up my alley. for what it is, pizzeria mozza is good. and LA definitely needs more restaurants like this.
