ReviewID: Q6dgxHGAaYvQAMY5cZ11Iw
ReviewerID: eLOliEa71F4o0P39lWuk9g
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
I wanted to come here when I saw this restaurant on TV as one of the best NY-style-delis in the LA area.. . I don't think so.  Not even close.  Perhaps it's "the best" by LA standards for a NY Deli, but it certainly didn't taste anywhere close to authentic, and I was not pleased with the meal.. . We both ordered pastrami-dishes.  The bf had their "famous" pastrami sandwich with cole slaw and Russian dressing, and I had the pastrami plate that came with some veggies, a side of rye bread, and fries.. . The "famous" sandwich was the better of the two flavor profiles, though I ntoe that the sandwich was mostly cole slaw with very little pastrami (and for nearly $15 for a sandwich alone, this was pretty unacceptable to me).  Also, the pastrami is thick cut and VERY fatty.  Let me repeat this.  THE PASTRAMI IS VERY FATTY.  For a sandwich that's almost $15, includes mostly coleslaw and little meat, how can you justify charging an additional $3.50 if we want the "lean" pastrami instead?  I found this to be outrageous, ballsy, and a bad value.. . My pastrami plate had the same thick-cut, really really fatty meat piled next to a leaf of romaine, some tomato, a handful of baby carrots (yes, the kind from the bag in the grocery), some black olives (yes, they were from a can), and 5 cucumber slices.  The side of fries was Ore Ida (or a similar frozen-fried-variety) and was boring, uninspired, and lackluster.  The best part of the plate was the side of rye bread, sliced fresh and still warm.  The flaky crust indicated to me that they may bake their bread on-site (and it tasted that way, too), but I can't be sure. For $19, another bad deal.. . Also, they did not sell Black and Whites.  NY-style deli with no B&amp;Ws?  Fail.  We had to go to Canters to get some instead (see Canters review for that little adventure).  . . Staff was friendly, but the food was outrageously priced for what we received, and the meat was nearing the inedible-fatty stage.  I will not be back.
