ReviewID: q7vtWWUYABm7_V93qV22HA
ReviewerID: ZYZNcugF3xUEGyLOVGiZ0Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Gibsons Bar &amp; Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
This has to be my favorite place in the city to get a steak!  Gibson's is everything that it claims to be and then some.. . Gibson's gets what service is all about.  From the bartender Joe, who has been there for 18 years, and knows your drink (a really dirty martini) and your name no matter how long its been since you have stopped in last, to the manager who comes over to greet you recognizing you as one of his "regulars", service is the name of the game and it shows.. . Even without a reservation, they will try to work you in on a timely basis- although I would suggest if you plan to go on a weekend- get a reservation.. . The bar with its live piano music is a great place to sit and have a martini or two and to people watch.  Given Gibson's location anchoring the "Viagra triangle", it is the place to watch the whole "night scene" in Chicago.  The crowd is a mix of Chicagoans and tourists as many of the big hotels send their guests here.  . . A note of caution- If you are a woman alone or with a group of your girlfriends- know that you may have more attention than you want as this bar is a known "pick up" place.  I tend to find it more humorous than anything else but others may not think the same.  I think the guys there all subscribe to the theory of a '"guy's gotta try"!!!  Whatever!!. . For dinner- know that the portions are huge so splitting sides and appetizers works well.  Tried a new appetizer the other night that I hadn't had before and it was amazing.  It was a tomato covered in goat cheese and served with warm button mushrooms.  Really great!  The bone in strip steak was also delicious- done perfectly and even a half of the double baked potato covered more than half of my plate.. . The service was attentive- they work on a team basis so there is always someone knowing what you need before you need it. . . So when you are craving beef- served up in an environment that says service- give Gibson's a try.  Oh- and if you have a drink at the bar- tell Joe that I said hi!
