ReviewID: Q8hN7gNHg6a4O6DisvDwRA
ReviewerID: RkLg-yvK2CrBOAW7SqvpoA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
i went with a group of 7 or 8 people for dinner a few weeks ago. . . upon arrival, i detected a cheesy smell in the place - a good sign for some, like myself - or a bad one if you don't like the slightly acrid tang in the air. we were promptly seated, although less than half of our party was present.. . we ordered up a storm before the others got to the place ... knowing our friends, we knew they would all arrive fashionably *very* late. oysters, steak tartare, and one chef's selection charcuterie plate later (oh, and a bottle of pinot noir from russian river) we were sort of full already, but also ready to order some more!. . in general, the entrees were good ... i especially enjoyed my lamb shoulder - yes, i finished my plate. the only *fishy* thing was the monkfish. i've NEVER encountered battered, fried monkfish medallions in my life. one of my friends who ordered the dish, had it on a previous occasion at fraiche, and said the dish had changed. it was served as a filet steak before - you know, the NORMAL way to serve monkfish in most fine dining establishments. now, i'm going to give the place the benefit of the doubt and say that they were trying something new and innovative with monkfish. but ... there was a lurking suspicion amongst the group that perhaps the shipment of monkfish that day was not up to the high freshness standards of the chef, and instead of 86-ing the dish altogether, they did the whole 'let's fry it up' routine. i don't know... i like to think otherwise. i mean, best new restaurant of 2007 ... i should think they wouldn't do anything to compromise quality or freshness. . . on to the wine selection/sommelier. very knowledgeable staff. very extensive wine list. we tried another bottle from russian river - called flowers. it was delish. i loved it... but i may have been the only one. . . the best dessert here is not the cheese plate (which i expected a lot from - remember the cheesy smell upon arrival...) the blanc fromage raspberry cake with some sort of blackened caramel ice cream (?) .... that was out of this world good.. . in any case, i was in a celebratory mood since the dinner was a bday dinner for moi ... so i enjoyed myself plenty.
