ReviewID: q8Xu7XJydFzHkCxYwYVsxA
ReviewerID: nQDHKQivemEJE1HEAXuerQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sticky Rice
Category: Thai
I had walked by this place numerous time but only ate there for the first time yesterday.  My friend and I ended up waiting about 30 minutes for a table for two, but the wait was worth it.  I have found in small places like this that when the line is long the food is great.  We had not planned on eating there so we did not bring any wine with us, but BYOB most definitely allowed, and the wait staff are very good on providing buckets of ice for your beer or white wine.  We settled on green tea and water so we did not have a chance to try any of the iced coffees.. . And, the long line did confirm our suspicion that the food was going to be fantastic!  We had:. . Gui Chai (rice flour stuffed with green chive and then fried). Tod Mun (Ground fish w. curry paste, kefir lime and green beans). Northern Thai Sausage (made with ground pork, pork skin, red curry paste, and spicey herbs). Cucumber Salad. . Thai Yellow Curry. Nan Prik Ong (ground pork, tomato and onion cooked with red chili paste and served with fresh veggies). . In fact, I am eating left over Norther Thai Sausage as I am writing this.  The Nan Prik Ong was out of this world!  It contains three of my favorite things in the world, pork, super spicey, and fresh vegetables.  Combined with the sticky rice and it was a fabulous dish.. . All of the above, with green tea, came in at under $40.  Some may balk at $40 for a meal for two, but that was four appetizers and two main courses.  Our table was literally covered in food and we had to do some creative rearranging of the dishes to fit them on the table.. . I am an adventurous foodie, but there were a few tings on the menu that made me pause.  One dish had "ant eggs" listed as one of the ingrediants.  They also have bamboo caterpillars on the menu.  Another dish had "intestines" listed as part of it.  This is not meant to deter anyone from going there.  I am mentioning it because I like the fact that the owners did not decide to American-ize their restaurant.  I am no expert but the place seems like it could be an authentic Thai restaurant in Thailand.  If you like (or love!) Thai food, then you should definitely give this place a visit.. . And they do have outdoor seating!  Of course, it is on busy and noisy Western Ave., but you can sit outside part of the year.
