ReviewID: Q9SVJ81RzSimiVxh63ISag
ReviewerID: ibwYGv0tfMfyQWRTLAb__g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
I took my boyfriend here for his 27th Birthday and he really enjoyed it. It's a great place if you're celebrating a special occasion (Birthday, Anniversary, etc.) The design and decor of the restaurant consummates a calm and tranquil Japanese aura. Yamashiro also has an outdoor garden that captures beauty and serenity. You truly get a glimpse of the Japanese culture when dining here. Although, I feel their food and menu can use some improvement. There are some things that stand out more than others. It's kind of a hit or miss with this place. My boyfriend ordered the Shoyu Glazed Black Cod with sautéed mustard greens, maitake mushrooms, wasabi mashed potatoes, soy-daikon sauce. He really enjoyed his meal. I ordered the Crunchy Sushi Roll with crab, shrimp tempura, avocado, cucumber, kaiware, yamagobo, tempura flakes and thought it was average. For $15, I was expecting a little more. We also ordered the Calamari Tempura with chipotle-cilantro tartar and were relatively disappointed. It was over cooked (almost burnt) on the outside and tough in the inside. I have ordered this appetizer before and remembered it being delicious, but I guess they left it in the fryer for too long this time around. My boyfriend ordered the Fuji Apple Sake and truly enjoyed it. It was really fruity and tasty. I truly wish the Chefs would read all these yelp reviews and try to improve their menu because it's such a lovely restaurant to only get an average of 3.5 stars. Our server was a woman and she was fairly good. The service is adequate here. I remembered going to Yamashiro back in High School and the server did not treat my friends and me well because of our age. I understand that this is a higher level dining experience, but I felt bad then. Although, I'm biased and I feel that male servers are more charming and genuine. I haven't had a female server who was truly exceptional. . . Overall:. . Atmosphere: 5 Stars (Romantic and Beautiful Decor &amp; View of Los Angeles/Hollywood). Food: 3.5 Stars (Average and Mediocre). Service: 4 Stars (Adequately above and beyond). Parking: 1 Star ($7.50 for Valet Parking)
