ReviewID: q_QKWxCkIJo14B5vpvIPlQ
ReviewerID: qnF-Fo5VDP5Tp2PxFsBNkQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
Sushi-Gen is one of the better sushi bars in LA.  The prices arent over-priced, and the fish is always fresh.  Ordering from the sushi menu gets pretty pricey, I think you can easily spend $40-50 at the bar.  But, if you order from the regular menu, the prices are reasonable.  ive been here multiple times and the fish is always of the highest quality!.      The tempura here is excellent, its nice and crispy, and they give moderate portions.  I think this place serves better tempura than most japanese places i've eaten at.  I really like the sashimi dinner, its comes with a huge plate of sashimi, tempura, rice, soup, and all the fix-ins.  The price is about $26, and it will definitely fill you up!  If your more adventurours, id suggest the sashimi deluxe.  The price is a tad high at $35, and it doesnt come with rice, soup, or anything...but they give you an excellent assortment of fish!  Pretty much everything you desire except the Uni and sweet shrimp.  They include, chu-toro, yellowtail, squid, spicy tuna, toro tartare, snapper, salmon belly, octopus..etc..It was by far the best assortment of fish I have had, and they give generous portions of fish.  I definitely love the variety in their sashimi, almost ever table orders it!  .      The one thing I really dont care in the sashimi dinner is the piece of cooked salmon they include..I really dont get why you would put a piece of cooked fish on a raw-fish platter?  The grilled salmon always seems a little overcooked and dry, I think they should include raw salmon instead of the cooked version.   BTW you dont get salmon sashimi in the regular sashimi dinner, only the deluxe.  The salmon is very fresh and tasty!  THey definitely serve high quality salmon, maybe thats why its not included in the regular sashimi dinner.   I also did not like the sushi dinner, the variety is limited and I personally feel like the sashimi is a better bargain!   you only get about 8 pieces of sushi, along with a small tuna roll, and its about $21..for the same price you can get the sashimi dinner and it will satisfy your craving more!.      Overall the prices here are reasonable, ordering off the menu averages $30 per person, ordering off the sushi menu can get expensive, but it is well worth it!  The fish here is always fresh and delicious!  The wait here is always long, so I suggest coming here before 6pm!  It really starts to get packed around 6pm, so come here early!  The parking situation is always horrible, you either find street parking (which you have to pay for) or you have to pay lot parking ( $2.50).  They use to offer free parking inside the lot with validation, but i guess times are rough, and they are trying to take advantage of everything!    The street parking is even more expensive than parking inside, they charge $2.00/hr, so i'd suggest trying to find parking inside the lot, but during busy hours this can be hard.
