ReviewID: qaISBmmYfWnhIRf5_L0D-w
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fortune Cookie Restaurant
Category: Chinese
My fortune said, "You will go on seafood diet. When you see food, eat it.". . Unfortunately, unless you're fat, dwunk and stupid like me on a Sunday afternoon... You will find that the grub here is barely passable. I must admit, I was intrigued by all the 4 and 5 stars. So, I had to see what all the fuss was about since I had to run a few errands around here anyways. Let's just say, I can find a better meal at the Dollar Tree next door. . . Ok, given that it was in buffet mode when I stumbled in, one can usually find something decently prepared and edible. Or mebbe not. I said to myself... Self, "Why is everything so God damn sweet up in this piece?". I know I was dwunk but that doesn't mean my palate was too. I found my answer when I looked up from my trough and spied the room... Sweet baby Jesus, it was like a Senior Assisted Living Home. But I proceeded to gorge myself anyways... LEAVE ME ALONE, I WAS STARVING! . . In the end, you get what you pay for... And in this case, I got forked. Seriously, not a pair of sticks in sight. I had to eat this Chino grubbery with a dusty old fork. The best thing on the line were the green beans before they dump that sweet brown eye sauce all over it and the worst thing was something they called "House Specialty" which looked like hacked up Sea Monkeys. The ubiquitous egg drop soup and hot and sour soup were your basic bowls of thickened slop, light on the flavor and heavy on the corn starch. And in between, you got trays full of eggrolls, crap racoons, lo mein, rice (white and fwied), mei fun, sweet &amp; sour critter, Yak, yardbird arms/legs, shrimp, broccoli and a giant bowl of Kotex red sweet &amp; sour sauce. If that doesn't scream "Where the white tugboats at...", I don't know what does. . . All this stuff can be summed up in 4 little words "Crap under a roof". But the servers were spot on with the refills and gave you the check 2:45 minutes into your fine dining experience. This is your basic run of the mill small town American-Chino joint. You go home now, fatboy, you eat everyting! Close your eyes, you see food no more! . . Man who stands on toilet is high on pot.. . Splash.
