ReviewID: qAyRueqv61PDo4GiYW_3Fw
ReviewerID: -u5kQutcNnqxtwi6PpV2FQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Brazzaz
Category: Steakhouses
Edit: On rare occasions I am wrong in my reviewing, and while the bulk of this review still stands for that visit, we received a 2-for-1 coupon to visit Brazzaz and decided to try it out again at the dinner hour, hoping the staff would be better and food of a high quality. While we would not dine there without a 2-for-1 (why pay the same price as Fogo and get less?), it was a fine experience. Our waitress was incredibly helpful, polite and friendly. The food was better quality (esp. the salad bar, which was stocked with a very impressive spread, including sushi and oysters, if you're a seafood fan). Over all, we enjoyed our meal, and I knocked Brazzaz up a little bit. That doesn't erase the terrible experience we had before, and since there is no way of knowing if dinner was a fluke or our first experience was the fluke, I will leave both and let the reader decide... . So far, this has been our worst dining experience in Chicago. As huge fans of Fogo de Chao, we thought we'd try Brazzaz, as it's a little closer. At first we were impressed by the salad bar selections (the tortellini was good), but the service promptly removed any goodwill we had for this place. . . We were there around 1:30pm, so the place was not that crowded, yet it took almost 30 minutes to get our drink from the bar. We had to ask for our sides, and none of the waiters that were wandering around, doing basically nothing, bothered to bring us any extra plates. We just piled our meat on top of our salad bar items.  When we did ask for our sides, it seemed as if the waiters were slightly annoyed by the audacity to request what we were paying for. . . The meat itself, which should be the centerpiece of the meal, was nothing special. In fact, the majority of the beef I was served was fat. I had a rather large pile of fat that I trimmed off my cuts at the end of the meal. The pork was dry to the point that I didn't finish eating it. There was some tasty garlic-flavored lamb, but the meat was far, far below the quality one would expect for a $50 meal.. . To cap the experience off,  we had problems with their inability to properly ring the credit card, and even then we had to wait an extremely long amount of time to get anyone to come to our table to pick up the card the second time around. My guest actually had to leave the table to find someone to take it. . . All in all, if you're going to drop $50+ on lunch (or more for dinner), you deserve top quality product AND service. Save yourself the hassle and head to Fogo.
