ReviewID: qbkhydsMwv7wD6qI-f4d2A
ReviewerID: -GQ5F31VRbtUCGqS2iinVg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
I wish they had half stars...Cause I would give this a 3.5 star.. I have had a long affair with Versailles. I've eaten there since I was in high school...let's just say it's been a long time, so I don't feel so old. . Anyway, I've even been to the one in Manhattan Beach, which is not that great and the one on La Cienega. You find yourself craving their food. The garlic sauce, the plantains, beans and rice and all. I think the last time I was there was a couple of months ago but I went for my fix the other night and there were so many changes they made. They have nice new menus now...they got smaller plates to make their portions look bigger or the portions already got smaller. Maybe they are trying to slowly transition to smaller portions. First smaller plates, then smaller portions. It's not the portions that bothered me that much because I believe we all need to eat less. But we always ordered a pitcher of Sangria. And the pitchers were always in those plastic clear huge pitcher thingys. So, this time, the pitcher comes out in a small caraft. We asked the waiter, "we wanted the pitcher not this" and he replied "this is the liter size" we say "we ordered the pitcher?" and he says, "oh, you don't want the pitcher, it's $60" But he said it with a heavy accent and we were really confused...so.... Our response, " Whaaaa? Six - Zero? or One Six?" He said "Six - Zero".  We were glad he clarified that. Whoa, they took away the amount of alcohol and charge more. I didn't mind the portion size of the food but the portion size and price of the Sangria had me in fight mode. $60 bucks for a pitcher of Sangria. It used to be $17 -$19 bucks...I don't remember how much exactly...I just know it used to be under $20 bucks for a pitcher. Who would pay that? That's like a nice bottle of wine at a fancy schmancy restaurant.  I never thought to write a review for this place cause I always eat there and I neglect to write reviews for places I have been eating at for a long time(bad yelper i am)...but I felt like I had to let ya'll know what the 411 was on the Sangria. . The food is not always consistent. Sometimes you have a great meal and sometimes, it's meh....it's definitely worth a try just to see if you like it. Just don't get the $60 Sangria Pitcher.
