ReviewID: qbRFc5J8XO0_u7HMOi9WnQ
ReviewerID: b_ED_rPl7OLwEpUlr4VI5A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
The Apple Pan is an LA institution that continues to thrive due to their great burgers and pies.  The place opened up in 1947 and has served basically the same menu for the last 60+ years.  . . The menu is fairly basic, they serve two kinds of burgers, a few select sandwiches, fries and pies.  Every time I've gone there to eat, i order the Hickory Burger and their excellent fries.  The burger itself is quite simple, meat, lettuce, Tillamook Cheddar Cheese, plenty of pickles on a bun.  What makes the burger special is the hickory sauce that is a blend of i think ketchup, smoke flavoring and BBQ sauce.  The sauce flavor compliments the fresh ingredients in the burger well.  In addition, they use the good meaty part of the lettuce head giving you a great crunch when you take a bite of the burger.  The fries are great as well, they're well cooked and none of them look sickly like the fries you get at Jack in the Box of McDowell's.  Another cool thing about the place is they serve sodas in cone paper cup with a cone holder.  This is the only place I've seen that uses these type of holders.  . . Being that it is the Apple Pan, they do make some great pies including Apple, Pecan and Banana Cream.  If you with to go fat, order it ala mode and it'll come with a couple of scoops of extra fat danish vanilla ice cream.  If your on any kind of diet, i would suggest going to the vegan place down the street as this place is pure goodness unhealthy.  . . The restaurant's seating is horseshoe style with the kitchen in the middle, as soon as you the server takes your order, the cooks immediately start cooking everything fresh.  Because there are only 16 to 20 stools, don't come here if your in a rush, and if you do come here, don't take too long to eat otherwise the people waiting to grab a seat will start giving you the stink eye.  Don't be surprised if the servers slam your burger in front of you, they don't mean to be jerky however they're older and don't look like they'd take too much heat from anyone.  Just take it in as part of the experience of the Apple Pan.  If my wife and I are in the West LA area, this is a place we always try to hit up.
