ReviewID: qC_pZ5If6i6SzOyjZjVaFg
ReviewerID: d06Bj6YnQz0OThgaaLRdRQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
The Magic Castle is one of the most unique places I've ever visited. I love magic and illusions (I'm a huge Harry Potter fan too) so when I heard about The Magic Castle, I knew I had to go. Lucky for me, a friend of mine knows a member! You have to be a member or be invited by a member or magician to gain a guest pass, without it you're stuck on the outside. I was told to leave the camera at home (no pictures are allowed inside) and to put on a nice dress (formal attire strictly enforced). The MC is beautiful. Grand and mysterious, very Harry Potter =) Valet only, $10. As you enter, they check ID (21 and over every day except Sat and Sun brunch), and you proceed to the small library. Admission is $25 with a guest pass which is cheap considering this is a SHOW. I don't know why people complain about the admission price. Magicians need to make a buck outta 50cent too ya know. The fun begins with the hidden book case and the magic phrase to get it to open! The décor is very old Hollywood. Dark dim lighting, hidden rooms, and there are bars EVERYWHERE. I'm guessing this is how the MC makes their money. I don't think a place like this necessarily needs a lot of upkeep. I think being a little dirty gives it that old haunted mansion feel, which only adds to the mystical, magical ambiance. A few different levels but thanks to the way the castle was designed, it feels much larger than it really is. Find Irma, she's very cool. The close up gallery only seats 22 guests so get in line early! I saw almost all of the shows, some were great, some were good, and a few needed some work. Most of the magicians are also comedians so you'll find yourself laughing the whole time. Magicians/Illusionists: Bill Walsh, Dave Cox, Steve Walker, Chris Randall, and Joel Ward. Joel Ward (great stage presence, funny, and keeps you on your toes with his quick hands) and Dave Cox (smart, witty, more laughs, than magic) being the most popular =) There's something about watching magic live that makes it so much better. Stuff on TV, I can't watch it. I was a little scared about dinner since the ratings on yelp were inconsistent but I found the food to be actually not bad. Expensive for what it is but it was a lot better than expected. Lobster bisque was light, creamy, with only a hint of brandy (thank god, no need to get drunk off soup). My only criticism is that there could have been a little more essence of lobster. The Magic Castle garlic bread is extremely garlicky. I love garlic so naturally; I enjoyed the bread very much. To quote one of my dinner companions, "No one's getting lucky tonight". So um...maybe skip on the bread if you are planning on getting some. LOL. Steakhouse fries are typical potato wedges, nothing spectacular but were good. The roasted prime rib was flavorful and cooked perfectly. I probably would stick to the prime rib next time. Braised short ribs were tender but flavors were plain and boring. All entrees came with parmesan mashed potatoes; I didn't care much for it, it tasted like the powdered box stuff.  All in all, this was a great experience. A must do for all magic enthusiasts and Harry Potter fans =) . . **Yelper Rant: To the inebriated douche bags and slutty lady friend companions at the 1115pm show in the Palace of Mystery. Why must you ruin the show for others by yelling out at the Magicians? DO you think they enjoy being interrupted? Rude. Ladies, it is NEVER OKAY to throw your shoes around and walk barefoot. You are not at the disco. PS. I can see your thong, might want to pull that dress down a little bit. Douche bags, if you can't even hold on to your own drink without spilling it on other guests, I think it's time you stop drinking. Maybe sign up for a few AA classes. They should stop serving drinks to annoying drunk people.  Or stop serving drinks to douche bags all together.
