ReviewID: qcTRXIBSGKjNN3GT2ZU70w
ReviewerID: Dd-TkEszFMkSF-vRih51fQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Our dinner at Fraiche was very, very, very good -- I'd give it 4.5 stars -- but for me it still lacked the 'wow' factor to make it truly excellent. . . We came for an early dinner on a Sunday after making reservations on . http://opentable.com. . Since the restaurant didn't open until 5:30 and we had gotten there about 20 minutes early, we found oursevles having to get some drinks down the street at Ugo (we were a little disappointed that they wouldn't at least serve us drinks on the patio). . . When we were seated, we asked if it was possible to get a chef's tasting menu. Our server hesitated and then asked the chef; he reluctantly said it was OK and asked how many courses we wanted. We didn't really want to commit to a limit, but the chef insisted that we must, so we settled on seven courses. We were warned that we were lucky that the chef agreed, since it was early in the evening, but that in the future we shouldn't expect to be able to do a tasting menu. . . Our amuse bouche was lardon with bread. From there on out, most of our courses were tandem, meaning two of us got one dish and two of us got another. On the one hand, that was good so that we could try more dishes, but on the other hand it was awkward, especially since two of us had asked for wine pairings and two of us hadn't, and sharing both our small portions of food AND our small pours of wine across the table was a bit of a hassle. . . So, first off, 2 of us had beet salad with house-made ricotta and hazelnuts. The other 2 had New York steak tartare with arugula. The house-made ricotta with the beet salad was amazing - I highly recommend that dish. The tartare was also delicious. . . For our next course, 2 of us had clams with black "strangled priest pasta" (strozzapretti), and 2 of us had risotto with asparagus, rapini, ramps, and spring onions. Again, both of these dishes were winners. The black strangled pasta was homemade (as are nearly all the pastas at Fraiche) and delightfully chewy. The risotto was drop-dead fantastic with all the refreshing spring greens. . . Next up, 2 of us had Fraiche's famous monkfish with potato puree, and 2 of us had wild snapper with mussels, clam, and chorizo in a saffron broth. Actually, I was much more impressed with the snapper than with the monkfish - the snapper dish was an explosion of flavors, whereas the monkfish, while it was good, didn't quite have the texture I expected wasn't terribly interesting to me. . . Next, we all had the same dish, a papardelle with oxtail ragu. This was also very enjoyable. It helped that this dish was paired with a brunello, one of my favorite wines, and that it was not tandem so I got to enjoy the whole dish and the whole glass of wine. . . We were back to tandem for the next course, 2 of us had lamb with gnocchi and tomato, and 2 of us had pork with a red pepper tapenade and an Italian ratatouille. . . For dessert, we all got a lemon meringue tart and then a ricotta fritter with blueberries soaked in wine and balsamic, both of which were delicious. . . I didn't describe all of the wine pairings we had with our courses, so here's a short list: a methode-champagnoise sparkling from Italy, a brut rose, a kerner, a white bordeaux, a chablis, a pommard, a brunello, a barolo, a 1999 Margaux, a Sicilian moscato, a sauternes, and another French dessert wine whose name I can't remember now. One of the things that impressed me the most was the fact that all of these wines were French or Italian (good quality, also), and I was especially impressed that they would serve these wines by the glass (normally these types of wines you'd expect by the bottle only). There are few things I hate more than having low end domestic wines paired with French or Italian style food, just because those are the only wines a restaurant is willing to pour by the glass.. . So, long story short (too late): basically all of our food was very good to downright delicious. The service certainly wasn't terrible but nor did I find it remarkable, though our server was friendly overall. I liked the space quite a bit, and the kitchen looked very efficient and streamlined, especially what with all the staff in their color-coded apparel. It got really crowded really quick, which made the atmosphere slightly less comfortable and the service considerably slower. By the end of the meal, I felt quite lucky that they let us linger, though I'm sure they wanted us to leave. . . Overall I think this is a high quality dining establishment, and I think it deserves a higher average rating. I'm just getting too picky nowadays.
