ReviewID: qDpR-6708hTSSB71Pn8mXQ
ReviewerID: HRYhncbWiGmzzCLKUygVVw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Finally made it to Bottega Louie after a few failed attempts and it was really delicious. My only complaint would be the service, not that they're not nice, but we had to ask for things a few times. I mean, I would be more upset but they bought my forgiveness with a cupcake. And, it worked. I'm so much less disgruntled had they just had let me left without free dessert. (Ok, we wouldn't had left sans desert since we dominated their macaroons, but more on that below.). . So, showed up for brunch with some old friends and we were all BL newbs. The decor here is absolutely precious, we deemed it very SATC. Fresh. . . PANCETTA &amp; BURRATA SCRAMBLE - -Ok, me and the bff was HUGE burrata lovers and this scramble did NOT disappoint. For some reason it was a little watery but that didn't take away from how delicious it was! Definitely worth it!. . French Toast (Brioche, macerated berries &amp; maple syrup) -- Ok, I am a pretty big french toast fan and this was one of the best I've had. It was really delicious! . . Bianco (Ricotta, mozzarella, grana parmesan, garlic &amp; rocket arugula) -- Not the best pizza ever but really good. I came here expecting the pizzas to be sooo delicious (per friend's recommendations) but I wasn't blown away. It was good but not AMAZING. Granted, I had just dined at Gjelina a few weeks ago and something about their thin-crust pizza stole my heart.. . So, I ordered a coffee (delish) with dessert, aka macaroons taste test galore! We ordered the coffee, lime, chocolate caramel and rose macaroons to share amongst us and HELLO DELICIOUSNESS! Though I'm not macaroon guru, my friends are avid mac-eaters and all agreed BL's macaroons are definitely up for gold/silver medals. The consistency and flavors are spot on and to die for. A must try!. . *Note, friends from OC got a few things to go at the front deli/dessert/to-go area and said the service wasn't organized and the people working were kind of confused and getting orders wrong. . . Nonetheless, a must try for LA!
