ReviewID: QEqGqtVRhsBcU57aRj1ocA
ReviewerID: a9jNQiEz2tJ4GSxRe227Xg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Tap
Category: Pubs
Hmm, how do I start this review.  Well the name is "Tap" so naturally the husband and I thought it was a brewery, but it's not.  It prides itself on being a gastropub.  I guess when I walked in I was expecting more of a laid-back atmosphere than a "see and be seen" one so that was a bit of a turnoff from the start.  I don't typically get all excited about super trendy places (well maybe a few, like Two Urban Licks) and this place felt super super trendy.  It was halfway decorated with a barn feel (red wood, metal statues of cows, etc) but halfway sleek with shiny metal tables and chairs.  So the atmosphere had me worried.... But our server managed to make me forget about the cheesy atmosphere because he was really polite, personable but not over-the-top, and took his time explaining things on the menu to us, both food and beer.  I ordered the Cowgirl grilled cheese sandwich with Tomato Soup and it was very yummy with 3 types of cheeses and a huge slice of basil in the sandwich to add a fresh taste.  The soup was great for dipping the cheese sandwich in.  My husband got some sort of spicy burger, which was cooked to perfection (medium rare) and he said it was one of the best burgers he'd ever had.  However, it didn't seem to have the "spicy" sauce as advertised on the menu.. . Our waiter recommended a few different beers off the beer list, one being the high gravity Victory Golden Monkey (named for its subtle banana flavor).  It was a really complex, "thick" beer if that makes any sense but was smooth and delicious.. . I rarely get dessert, and I don't know why we decided to do so at Tap, but I'm glad we did.  I got the Sticky toffee Pudding with caramel and ice cream.  I don't know if it's made in-house but it was out of this world delicious and rich.  I have been having dreams about it since.... . So all in all, I didn't care for the atmosphere but the food and beer were pretty good and I'd like to go back this spring when the nights are a little warmer to sit on the awesome patio and watch the world go by down Peachtree St.
