ReviewID: qertqrUfI6_01kvf7ycUIQ
ReviewerID: 04uPXZ-QrZ3boQ2CHPgkNA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I thought i reviewed this place by now, but I guess not.  I'll be honest and say that I didn't go to Roscoe's for nine years because I thought it was totally overrated.  I went a few times in 2000 (the Gower location), and I just thought it wasn't that great, and didn't feel like I wanted to come back.. . Well fast-forward nine years, and I'm always heading out to Taj Mahal on Pico... and every time I go to Taj Mahal, I pass by Roscoe's.  I was surprised because I didn't know there was a location there, but I also saw the Pico location had an actual parking lot.  I decided I'd go there again someday just to give it another chance.. . So one day, it was about 2:30 PM and I was hungry, and figured I should go to Roscoe's (I've gone several times since then as well).  I would have avoided the lunch rush, and it was too early for the dinner crowd.  Perfect.. . I go and park my car (even though it was nearly 3 PM there were only about 2 parking spots left), walk inside, and seated about a minute later in a booth by the door.  I ordered the dish that comes with two waffles and a leg + thigh.  I also ordered a side of rice w/ gravy.. . The food came out fairly quickly, and the chicken was really good.  Perhaps it was because I'd ordered dark meat, and maybe they just suck at preparing chicken breast (which is what I'd had at the Gower location).  So the chicken was good, and the waffles were really good as well.. . The rice was also light and fluffy and tasted really good with the thick, flavorful gravy.  It was tasty.. . So the reason I give it three stars is because the service is below-average.  It's not horrible, but it's just... 'bleh'... even when it's not busy.  Also, the way you tip if you use credit/debit is kind of weird, like you have to tell the cashier how much beforehand.  . . Also, the restaurant is really loud sometimes.  Like people who talk really really really really loud and laugh really really really really really loud.  I'll leave it at that.
