ReviewID: QFj3XuekvvUbiHm6ng9PuA
ReviewerID: H14l4pgshHB2-U0EvGxCaA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Realizing our Groupon was getting ready to expire next month, my wife and I decided to go check out Spring during the middle of the week.  We trekked out through the snow and slush for an evening at Spring.  . . I have to say the journey was definitely worth the reward.  This is one the best total dining experiences my wife and I have had since our anniversary at Alinea last June.  . . The meal started off with an amuse of garlic foam which was unexpectedly mild and smooth.  This was followed by the arrivals of the first round of cocktails, a sazerac for myself and a Salty Seal for my wife.  The Sazerac was solid - not the best I have had in the city, but well made.  The Salty Seal was good, if not a bit strong.  For apps I ordered the pork belly with steamed Chinese dumplings, which was a rather large plate of food for an appetizer.  My wife had the yellowfin roll, which was nicely prepared, just as you would expect.  . . At this point I was ready for another drink.  Noticing the lack of whiskey cocktails on the menu, I asked if they did any spins on an old fashioned.  The waiter said no, but picking up on my like for the whiskey did recommend the off-the-menu Bangkoked Manhattan.  It was a devine twist on a manhattan, replacing half of the sweet vermouth with a dry vermouth they infuse with a collection of asian spices.  Mmmm...I would return just for that drink alone.    . . The bread arrived, which was a cracker with mustard sauce.  This was good, but not exactly what I expected in a bread.  We both tried it and liked the flavors, but would have required a few more drinks to compensate for the dryness.  The main courses quickly arrived, so we really didn't have any time to worry about this , and as such weren't really disappointed.  My wife had the boullabaisse which was chock-full of seafood goodness in a mild curry broth.  I had the Maine sea scallops which were perfectly seared and provided a nice light accompaniment to the previously mentioned pork belly.. . It was now time for dessert.  My wife got the house tea (prepared as loose tea steeping in a small pot) and small bites, a trio of asian american fusion, with wanton apple fritters, sweet doughnuts and a chocolate peanut butter bar.  My wife's favorite was the apple fritters, but I preferred the chocolate peanut butter bar (not a big surprise.)  I ordered the Kingston Cocktail, a mix of Barbera d'Asti, Rum, Lime, and Cinnamon Bitters.  It was a sweet, slightly fruit drink that perfectly ended the night and helped steel me from the cold we were about to embark back out into.. . We definitely plan on returning to Spring.  This was quite a delight.  Every dish was a hit for us (save the cracker) and we would gladly pay more (sans Groupon) for this quality experience.
