ReviewID: qfydSr5o1zrwh2OxyxLb2Q
ReviewerID: Rf9LV9Ha8OYkRQCFYjxLNA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
I went on Valentine's Day this year, which is also my bf's birthday.  To my surprise, they had a special prix fixe menu for $75, not bad.  I got the kobe beef sashimi for my appetizer, it was pretty good.  We both got the wedge salad for our salad - nothing special.  How can you mess up a wedge salad though?. . Steaks - My boyfriend upgraded and got like the 45 day aged steak for like $20 more.  His was really really good, well seasoned, well cooked, juicy.  I got the filet mignon and I gotta say I was really disappointed.  I ordered mine medium well, but it came out well done and it was DRY!  Not very seasoned.  Boo.  Maybe I had hyped it up so much in my mind that it just didn't meet my high expectations.  So 4 stars mainly because he enjoyed his meal so much.. . Dessert - we both got this dessert that had like vanilla rum ice cream.  It was kind of gross - way too much rum flavor.  Get this, so I get up before our food comes to "go to the restroom" but really to remind the hostess that it's my bf's bday and that I wanted to see if they could put a candle in his dessert (we NEVER go out for Valentine's day or his bday because it's always too busy, but we made the exception this time because it was on a Saturday this year - so I wanted it to be extra special).  She said "yeah, your waiter already knows."  So when dessert is about to be brought out, I'm all excited and keep my eyes open for a candle.  Much to my dismay, our waiter brings out our dessert with NO frickin candle!  I was heartbroken :(  My bf didn't think anything of it because he wasn't expecting anything, so he didn't care.  I don't think the hostess ever told our waiter, because he didn't think anything was wrong.  But our waiter was very nice, he was very attentive for it being so busy, so props to him.. . So minus one star for them forgetting our simple candle.  Also same minus star because they sat the 2 person tables SOCLOSE to each other.  Funny story, since we were sitting soclose to the couple next to us - they see me pay (b/c we're celebrating his bday rather than Vday) and I can see them looking at each other like "wow, SHE'S paying?" And then my bf asks if I have money for the valet guy b/c he only has like $4 in his wallet, and I can see the couple next to us making eyes and trying not to laugh at us.  I told my bf about this as we were leaving, and we had a good laugh because he makes twice as much as I do, but he just never carries cash :)
