ReviewID: qGfB0KkwrlmxAQtgTzU1gw
ReviewerID: uTsG5j9CTemtQOJfz3F-bA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Highland Bakery
Category: Bakeries
Okay, so went here for brunch once morning. I've seen and heard about this place so much and wanted to try it.. ATMOSPHERE: Very cute inside. Very crowded! Tables are very close together so you get cozy with your neighbors. They definitely utilize the space inside but even so there's usually a await (see "service" below). They have a bakery in the front . FOOD: Well, we had high expectations due to the long wait and the other Yelp reviews. We ordered:. 1. Sweet potato pancakes - the pancakes were super thick so much so that the middle was batter!!!!!!!! Definitely not cooked all the way through so I go a mushy surprise as I systematically worked my way from the periphery to the middle as that's how I usually eat pancakes. That ruined it.... it was really good up until then. I wish they put the syrup on the side too. I got it drenched in the syrup with pecans on top. . 2. Eggs hollandaise with potatoes - the potatoes were burned on the bottom! but the ones that were burned were good. The eggs hollandaise were pretty average - sauce, egg, biscuit. Nothing impressive. . SERVICE: Had to wait 30 minutes to get into this place! I tried calling to put my name on the list but they said you have to be there in person and all members of the party have to be there.  That's a minor complaint though since I was expecting that. . When we finally were seated, we ordered coffee and 1 of the mugs was extremely dirrrrrrrty on the rim. It was removable by rubbing so we concluded the appearance was not due to the actual material of the cup but it was plain 'ol dirt. Like any other reasonable person we requested a new cup but the waitress said "but all of them are like that." I was thinking "WHAT?! You are going to deny us a new coffee mug? It's not such a hard thing to do...... Is there a coffee mug shortage?" We weren't rude but simply requesting a new mug. Then I said "can we get a new one anyways?" I was polite the whole time but very angry inside so I took a picture of the new mug and old mug. From the picture obviously all the mugs are not like that!!!!! OMG. Geez....  I didn't even want her to tell her about the pancakes.... she might have accused me of hallucinating.... . Service is also SLOOOOOOOW.  Waitress didn't get our order until we sat there staring at her for 20 minutes. It was busy but that was ridiculous.. PARKING: Street. Hard to find parking Saturday for brunch but doable.. CONCLUSION: If they can get food cooked properly, dishes clean, and service fixed then maybe I can give a good review BUT these are way too many deficiencies in too many aspects of the review so I'm going to have to go against general opinion give them 1 star. And why is this place so popular? WHY?! I am so confused....
