ReviewID: qIbkHVq-Bfp5IXTUYYSLhA
ReviewerID: y2hZJQiM8NaEOwaYngZcnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tin Lizzy&#39;s
Category: Mexican
I'm impressed. My friend, a Sangria fanatic, suggested we meet here yesterday in lieu of another local place we typically frequent when she insists on drinking Sangrias on Sunday (SOS). Anyway, I arrived a few minutes early and sat at the bar when I was promptly greeted by the bartender, who introduced herself and asked my name before even asking me for my drink order. Seriously?! That was totally cool and instantly lightened my mood, as I had been up early that morning rushing to prepare a presentation for work, and pissy that I had a last minute deadline dumped on me Friday night. Done with all that "fun", I was ready to chill and have a few drinks. This Tin Lizzy's has that relaxed and friendly vibe (far different from all my experiences at their Buckhead location, which felt more like a meat market on the Friday nights I'd go to happy hour with a few coworkers). . . When my friend arrived, she was also quickly served and had a $4 Sangria in a pint glass. I'm not a fan of the stuff, but she gave them the "thumbs-up" and ordered at least 3. As an aside, I don't particularly care about menu prices because it's never a deal-breaker if I really like the place. But it is refreshing that Tin Lizzy's kept the food AND drink prices mostly cheap (comparatively speaking). . . Wasn't really hungry, but I decided to order a chicken taco with no expectation that it would be anything special. It just so happened to be pretty damn good, so I look forward to trying some of the other taco choices on future visits. . . Overall a good first time experience. In addition to the staff being friendly, the other local guests we talked to were equally cool. We had a relaxed good time, nothing crazy. Something about this place has a beachy / Florida-type feel to it that I'm totally down with - the only thing that would've made the experience more relaxed is an ocean across the street. Whatever, I'll settle with a view of the cemetery, nothing's perfect.
