ReviewID: Qin6_TEtbj_fJ2r_Pqj-lg
ReviewerID: Nx1p26Da-Hb8V6pzHvNdRQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
This section on Silver Lake Blvd has desparately needed a reliable cafe for a while.  Netty's hours were kind of unreliable, and while I loved Back Door Bakery's local charm, their tables and seating were always dirty.  With both of them closed, I'm glad to see something filling the void.  Just not sure if this is the right venue.. . While the interior is beautiful, it's more suited to a sit down dinner type of restaurant.  I was expecting more informal cafe type seating.  The food is also beautiful, as are their dishes, silverware and presentation.  From there on, it's all downhill.  . . I ordered a Orange infused capuccino and the Almost French Toast.  In both cases, what arrived was so tiny I felt like I was eating doll food.  Both were tasty though.  My friend ordered the granola, mainly because it seemed like the only semi-filling dish that was under $14.  (Most of the things on the menu sounded more like a $15 snack than a satisfying meal. )  After finishing my snack, I wanted to order the Hibiscus drink, which sounded really good.  However, our waitress breezed right by us so many times without even looking at us, even when I took to waving both my arms back and forth like I was flagging down a rescue helicopter.  I finally had to ask the water guy to please send our waitress over.  Even after I was able to order the drink, it didn't arrive for at least another 15 minutes and only after I asked her a second time for it.  . . Other things I noticed:  It is very loud in there when all the tables are full.  I had to sit on the edge of my seat and lean forward to hear the person across from me, which isn't very relaxing.  The table height is too high for the seating, at least on the red bench where I was sitting, so I felt like I was sitting at the kiddy table.  That combined with the tiny food didn't help the situation.. . Bottom line:  Overpriced yet very beautiful and unfilling dishes with spotty service in a beautiful setting with uncomfortable seating.  If I do go back, it will be for a coffee to go.  I gave the two stars mainly for the attention to design, not the food or service.
