ReviewID: qItuUcAc_2_E1t1Tyt6RUw
ReviewerID: FWn2T_nF0gCIJe6vbkgH1g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Whole Foods Market
Category: Grocery
(Disclaimer: When I wrote this review, the name of the store in question appeared as not simply "Whole Foods Market", but had "Harry's Farmer's Market" in the title as well, hence the following "review" - for the record, I love Harry's Farmer's Markets, the original stores, and I love Whole Foods - both were/are fantastic food stores.). . What's amazing to me is that people refer to this store as a "Harry's Farmer's Market".  Clever marketing, I suppose, but I've lived in the Atlanta area long enough (my family moved here in the mid 1960's when I was a little tyke) to remember the original Dekalb Farmer's Market (which opened in '77), where the Blazer brothers got their start - it was Harry Blazer and brother Robert Blazer back then, with a fantastic market filled with fresh veggies and gourmet items, meats, cheeses, the works, and the broccoli, dripping ice and all, was always the first thing you saw when you walked in the door and then meandered your way around and up and down pre-planned "aisles".. . Harry and Robert split when Robert got into "EST" training for the employees, a sort of publicized brainwashing (if you Google, I'm sure you can read about the rift it caused), Robert opened his own market (Your Dekalb Farmers Market, an excellent grocery store in its own right) and Harry veered off on his own after a while and opened the first Harry's Farmer's Market in Alpharetta in '87.  The quality was not to be beaten, nor matched, anywhere in the area.  BEAUTIFUL produce, fresh, fresh, fresh, meats, cheeses, an in-house bakery operated by Harry's lovely girlfriend at the time (did they ever get married?).  . . I went to work for Harry there at the Alpharetta market, back in '88, and I have to say that he was, and most likely still is, a great guy.  Really caring, concerned about his employees, a true visionary with an eye for only the best.  When I later worked for him at a "Harry's in a Hurry", a gourmet convenience store concept that unfortunately tanked, he one day came in and pulled ALL our bagels, saying they were not fresh enough, sort of 'stale' due to a malfunction in the baking process, and though people complained all day, we told them the reason and they knew they were shopping at the right store.. . When Harry's business acumen proved not so great, and bankruptcy loomed, he sold out to Whole Foods Markets, with the proviso that they keep his name attached to a couple of the bigger markets, and he closed all the "Harry's in a Hurry" locations (a sadness on the level of the closing of the great Oxford Book Stores).  Thus, to my knowledge, the Alpharetta and Roswell Rd (Marietta) locations, for some odd reason, STILL have his name out front, though his "consulting" job with Whole Foods must surely have ended by now.  . . You can call those two stores Harry's locations, mainly because the name is still on the sign out front, but the Ponce location of Whole Foods Market has NEVER been a Harry's, so this blows my mind when I read/hear people saying they love the "Harry's on Ponce".  . . I knew Harry, and Whole Foods is no Harry's.. . That said (hey, I'm an old skool Atlantan, so this stuff has some meaning), I LOVE Whole Foods Markets, and the one on Ponce is spectacular.  Great produce section, plenty of organics, terrific supplements/herbs aisle, and some gourmet healthy organic type fast foods in the salad and hot bars.   Whole Foods Founder, John Mackey, has some great ideals and visions of his own, so you know you're shopping at a store with an "ideal" behind it, which is important to a lot of people, myself included.. . Take a full wallet, though, or a credit/debit card with a lot to back it, and you'll be pleased with what you bring home.  But please, don't call it a Harry's.  It's a Whole Foods.  Two totally different stories.. . Last I heard, Harry is recording jazz albums.
