ReviewID: QJ7Qcc4tKXJF8KmwPzuKzg
ReviewerID: 73iBHSmOomEbjB_vLih8HQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sticky Rice
Category: Thai
How about that? Another Thai joint for me to try. And on Western, hm. Went here 11/21 specifically since they had Northern Thai stuff on the menu, and that was sorta a new offering [though I stuck to my standard for evaluation purposes]. Gotta say, love the free parking in the street which is a little unusual for this neck of the woods. Decor was nice inside, bright colors, big/tall walls without a lot of stuff crammed onto the, and good spacing between tables means didn't feel squished.  . . Started with my standard Crab Rangoon ($4.25) and they were pretty good--a little more crabby than usual which made me almost thing they used real crab instead of the fake stuff--dunno. Not real big individually, but not too crisp either, which is the way I like them. Not quite Gumrai good, but better than most, especially for the price. Nong got the Northern Thai sausage ($2/ea.--maybe a skosh high, should bundle 3/$5), and I liked them enough to order two more...good, spicy, and ordered a thing of sticky rice ($1.25) to eat authentic. I got the ole' Pad Kee Mao Neua (beef) and it was decent--not the best I've had: too much residual oil, too much tomato, prik (pepper) and not enough basil. Good tasting surely, and good portion, especially for the price ($6.50). Panraya got the Thai Noodle Soup which she gives an 8/10, though she also got what appeared to be fried pork rinds added to the soup, even though not on the menu. I sampled it and actually found it a little bland, but I go to Pho joints for soup and am not quite smart of Thai soups [including the Tum Yum and Tum Kha varieties]. We also got a scoop of the Coconut Ice Cream ($2.00) which was delish--be really surprised if they didn't make their own, chunks of coconut and all. Cokes only $1, and they actually have Pepsi stuff too for brand snobs like me.  Another BYOB place.. . Service was pretty good, and for the size of the place--probably seats 50 on the top side, I was surprised they had about 5 wait staff. Pretty efficient actually and didn't have to wait for a table, though we got there about 430pm. Bathrooms clean, but a little chilly. No price differential for take out/delivery menu like another place I yelped earlier--standard delivery fees though. If we go back, next time I'm getting the kow soy (which I really liked in Chiang Mai or Lampang) and either their stuffed fried tofu app or the golden baskets.
