ReviewID: QJp8TTp6I8lGMYzViGf3RQ
ReviewerID: zRRZW1XsVD434URJOVOqaw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Aja Restaurant &amp; Bar
Category: Dim Sum
I went there drawn by the $15 Blandall u can eat Dim Sum.. . GOOD: $ 1 vodkas.. BAD: $1 Vodkas on Sunday!. MIS COMBO: $1.00 Vodkas On Sunday while being 5 plus miles away from my hood's $1 beer Noche. . . GOOD: Dim Sum.. BAD: $All U can Eat CACADim Sum that is comprised of only 4-5 menu items they chose.. MY BAD: All U can Eat Dim Sum after having eaten a fatass Steak for Late Lunch.. . GOOD: Couches and Chairs.. BAD: Wheels on Couches and esp. on Chairs.. BADDER: Wheels on Chairs in a bar serving Caiphirinas and $1. Vodkas.. . Outcome:. . I like Dim Sum, but the idea that they picked 4-5 to actually call ALL U CAN EAT is kind of lame. You do not get to experience the entire realm of the menu (for this I am thankful, as it was kind of shitty. My redheaded Ex made better AJIAN fooood), and this was the night of Patio opening, which didn't kind of happen, as the weather did not permit.. . I sat waiting on my friends for a good 20 minutes and the servers walked back and forth without offering to take my order, or even to bring me water. I guess they were under-staffed, even though there was a Patio Grand Opening. I know SHE SAW me cos I wore my signature Magenta Colored Top. I finally had the pleasure of some eye contact but I had already written a book via text by the time she got to me.. . (Note: Servers Shouls ALWAYS intro with their Fucking names, ok? How hard is  that? Also, Effin Smile, For Fudge's sake, fake it but at least smile). . I only had one or 2 drinks b/c I was not brought here by my Chauffeur this time. Ha. I had to drive, plus my office summoned me to a stupid 9:30 AM meeting. The nerve!! So I kept it conservative. . . Wheels on Chairs are a bad bad idea. I fell and it was PRE-Drinking. I was switching from th couch to the chair and the things slid away from unda me! Ok. Funny if you were watching. I laughed, cos I ROLL Like DAT!
