ReviewID: qjRdKcJVLtkhE-_o453Iag
ReviewerID: hoPA4iBItEUMWUH7bIqrmA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
What do you get when you take a black girl, an Indian girl, an Armenian Latina, a Vietnamese guy and a Chinese/Japanese dude and put them all together?  (Aside from feelings of fear in the hearts of those content in their homogeneous environments?  "Aaaaaabner, quick!  Grab the kids and sell the house, the brownies are coming!").  What you get is five hungry, burger fiends dying to try the place that's been on Yelp's homepage for weeks.  And if they are Yelpers, you also get 4 out of 5 of them pulling out their cameras so fast when the burgers arrive you'd think it was choreographed.  And when they notice the couple at the table next to them photo snapping their food too, the Vietnamese one excitedly says to the black one who's closest, "Ask them if they're yelpers!"  When the black one becomes bashful and refuses, the Vietnamese one can barely contain himself and inquires about the couple's possible online habits.  Alas, they're not yelpers, but they love their burgers.  . . Umami is more popular than Britney Spears with no panties on.  So many people waiting to get in we could have had a street party in the parking lot.  And the place is small.  Sewed up tighter than Kim Kardashian's jeans.  So this motley crew of burger fiends waited a good 35 minutes for a table.  I could smell the burger waves floating outside and I was almost in heat.. . I ordered the Umami burger - medium rare beef, portabello mushrooms, carmelized onions, cheese crisp - all on a bun so light it was heavenly.  I am not big on bloody beef, red juices running all down my face, fears of contracting some kind crazy bovine disease running through my head.  But, the burger was so good I think I may have hair on my chest now (sexy!).  It looked small when it arrived, but by the end of the meal, I was stuffed.  I also ordered the fries - triple cooked and of the steak variety.  Crispy and salty, but I did not care for the Umami ketchup.  It tasted like marinara sauce and I kept waiting for calamari to arrive as accompaniment.  . . Bring your own liquor!  That's right drunks.  It's BYOB at this joint.  You can bring wine if you want to be fancified and many patrons did.  I, however, opted for a more gritty drink - beer.  I'm eating a half-dead cow, I want something raw to wash it down.  Corkage fee is $5 (I think the beer opening is free).. . The staff was great, Umami manager acted as server, cashier and parking director, squeezing as many cars into the tiny parking lot as possible.  Our server was patient even when a very pushy ruby-faced woman interrupted him mid-order to talk to him about her friend he didn't know.  I'm glad he handled it well 'cause I was about to tell her what's up, burger-blocking heifer.  We waited 35 minutes (I actually waited almost an hour since my companions were late *ahem*) and we're hungry, don't be getting in the way!. . Ooh mami, I shall return.  I want to try to one of their 6 other kinds of burgers and I'd like to be able to make it to dessert this time.  Red velvet cakewich, here I come.
