ReviewID: QKDgQX3PzHgxTGv_flvFLQ
ReviewerID: 9fohjStVrGE15XpwYFix_A
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
MY PICK FOR MOST OVERRATED BREAKFAST IN LOS ANGELES!!!. . I know this place is very popular.  The wait is always long, my friends always talk about it.  I for one must say....F$k the griddle.  . . Now, I am sure plenty of people will disagree with me, and that is fine.  This is just MY opinion, I respect yours.. . First off the portions.  Now I know a lot of people go gah gah whenever a restaurant gives you ridiculously large portions.  "Oh you have to go to claim jumpers, they need a dolly and car jack just to serve you your food, isn't that awesome".  I like to be full sometimes, but this place is excessive.  I can not bring myself to possibly attempt to order pancakes from here.  . . You know in those old Total cereal commercials where they would explain how many bowls of the other brands cereal you would have to eat in order to match the value of Total and you would see a tower of bowls in front of the guy.  Imagine they took that tower of bowls and decided to put all that into two pancakes.  These things are HUGE.  It is like being asked to eat a pillowy man hole cover.  If they harden they are considered lethal weapons in 27 states I kid you not.. . Why does human kind need this.  I have never in my days seen one person even come close to finishing these.  Not even one pancake to be honest.  . . This upsets me for two reasons.. . 1) This is a waste of food.  I am not going to get into some depressing rant about the world and hunger and all that jazz, you know the story.  I think it is gluttonous.. . 2)  It doesn't even taste good.  Why the hell do I want 10 pounds of pancakes that don't taste good.  What type of deal is that.  . . The service has always been lousy when I have gone.  I am not going to get into specifics but I have little patience for lackadaisical incompetence on Sunday morning.  That being said, maybe I should or could blame myself for being impatient.  I am usually hungover and lacking a proper amount of sleep.  Regardless, if I am hungover I want to go someplace mellow with service that is attentive and everything happens in a timely matter.  I don't like waiting 40 mins for breakfast standing in the sun while I am hungover.  I am not going to do that for breakfast.. . On top of the long wait, there is all this tension outside as a crowd of people wait to be seated and eagearly wait for one of the servers to pop out and call their name.  You see the dissapointment in their eyes when a server comes out only to bring a cup of water.  God forbid someone gets called before you that showed up after you because the table seats 4 and you are only part of a group of 2.  I don't need to deal with this.  There is no reason to have to wait for food in Los Angeles, thats just how I feel.. . One time I had to go there for a birthday breakfast and they stuck us in a back room.  There weren't enough chairs, the restaurant had some of their trash on the table.  There was receipts and trash on the floor and the waiter barely ever came or when he did he would forget what we asked him for by the next time we saw him.  The chair I was sitting in was broken and was jabbing me in the back.  One of my worst restaurant experiences ever.. . That being said, the fact that I see such a long line of trendy people every time I go there just makes me think of how people will go here because it is hip regardless of the fact that there are 20 different places in LA that are better for breakfast with no wait.  Mc Donald's even being one of them.  . . And that right there sums it up.  When I would rather go to a Mc Donald's restaurant than eat at your establishment, you have failed me.
