ReviewID: QLXZuYMLmyMIFyp4LuVYQg
ReviewerID: gr6nR7nuo6qw_Srv2lSnPQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
Absolutely one of the worst places that I have been in a long time! (Average food, but TERRIBLE waiter! - NOT worth the price). . We HAD a reservation on a Sun pm and still had to wait  more than1 hour.. . The waiter was really pushy on higher priced items when we did not want ALL to do the "Crabfest", a $65 item that is ordered individually. Each of us (couples) wanted to mix it up and try the menu, but the waiter told us that he had to ask the kitchen to see whether we could have some ordering the "Crabfest" and others ordering something else off of the menu (his reason: the restaurant did not want people to share the "crab fest"?!!). So, who gives you the right to say that we ALL had to eat the same thing on the menu?!! Some in our group just did not want crab.. ). So, we ordered the sea urchin (which they told us that they sold the last one to someone else, THIRTY mins after we ordered it),  oysters, shrimp, and the $155 3-tier tray - most disappionting seafood that I ever had (maybe it was b/c of the bad taste in my mouth from the pushy waiter). The food was avg  at best (great shrimp, avg oysters with some really fresh and some not, and a so so lobster), but definitely not worth the wait. It just felt like a huge let-down.. I also had the $7 parfait (with dry old bread at the bottom) - honestly, I could not tell the difference between theirs and McDonalds'.... Any way, I think overall the experience was terrible since the food was average, but the prices were high. I don't mind paying for good food and service, but this was priced way too high for what you get in food and service. Also, with their slow service, you are guranteed to pay $8 for parking even with validation.. We ended the night by going to Japan town to kill our hunger with some noodles.. All said, I definitely would not recommend the Hungry Cat, b/c if you go, you would leave still hungry..and with a much lighter wallet, to boot.
