ReviewID: Qo_N7Bku11_Z4jV8gtJ5nA
ReviewerID: D33PEdBsyThkL1ih8ZuDow
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Rise-N-Dine
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
An upstart in Emory Village taking the place formerly held by the Cedar Tree, Rise N Dine offers a sparse, but together, complement of familiar breakfast items with a few surprises and lots of hope for future developments.. . (This visit took place on only day 2 that they were open! I was willing to give some breaks on service and kitchen timing--to a point--but one of the owners was there to smooth things over. I expect my 3 stars to rise on subsequent visits, when I get back to Atlanta). . Pleasantly dense yet still fluffy, sweet potato pancakes had just enough seasoning to evoke pumpkin pie while still staying nicely within the parameters of "breakfast". A kielbasa and onion omelet was packed with sausage flavor.  The thick slice of artisan whole wheat toast that came with it was an unexpected pleasure. The "Skinny" delivered what was promised: half a grapefruit and some yummy scrambled eggs.. . For the kids, they've got Green Eggs and Ham, yes, actual green eggs, which were received enthusiastically by my five year old, but not as enthusiastically as the Chocolate Chip Pancakes were by my three year old.. . Portions were somewhat small--reasonably so for the price--but for better or worse, diners (or at least this diner) have come to expect a bit more on the plate. Fortunately, the menu at this point is finite and can almost be used to mix and match to fit your appetite.. . When I look past the punny name, the not-completely-smooth-yet kitchen service and the still-developing personality of the place, I see several solid features give it an edge and hopefully will ensure its survival:. . 1) the food - . Enough of a twist to make you think about what you're eating without crossing any lines.. . 2) the coffee - . Fabulous stuff from Counter Culture Coffee takes aim at a hypercommercial neighbor. The drip was satisfying and my latte was transcendent, reason enough to stop by.. . 3) the location - . I'm hoping some of the early morning traffic from next door (a $B) will linger a little longer and discover what Rise n Dine has to offer. Right next to Emory, open at 6am, I'd use it as a place to cram for an exam or to prep for lectures.
