ReviewID: qoXa9XmAFjhTY3mV3ZdMYA
ReviewerID: S-jqoGmD06996i6ejTlVAw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Don't believe the hype.... . First, lets us discuss what is wrong with Kogi. Its all hype and bullshite. The food is good, ok most of the time, but good at best. The only reason why it is successful is because of all the hype it has generated. and because of it appealing to the "generation y" with all its tweeter updates and such. . . The lines are totally out of control long. You have to get there an hour ahead of time just so that you can wait 3 hours in line and be sure you will get food. The line is also a hype bullshite tool to get people interested. People see the long lines and their lemming mentality kicks in and they think "hey, if all these losers are in line for something, then it must be good, right?". There is no need for the long lines, it is just a marketing tool, like long lines to get into a club or bar. You wait in the long ass line and when you get into the club you find out its half empty. The manager of the club just wants there to be a long line so people will think the club is pumping, but its not, its lame and half empty. . . The food is ok, just ok most of the time. They are not re inventing the wheel here. They are just mixing staple korean foods with staple mexican foods, and they are not even executing them that well either. The beef and pork products have way too much fat in them as well. Dont get me wrong, i love a little fat in my meat. but i dont expect a mouth full of pork fat when i take a bite of my burrito. . . The last two things that bother me the most about Kogi is the $11 order limit. So, Kogi expects me to wait 3.5 or 4 hours in line, then they say i can only order two items? Total fucking bullshite. The other bullshite thing is the head chef/owner/master mind of Kogi, i think his name is Ray. I never see him doing anything when they are serving at a location. He is always out shaking hands, posing for pics, or texts and tweeting on his mobile. I never trust a chef that isnt working in his own kitchen. Ray, if you are reading this, get your hands dirty and get in the kitchen, maybe i wont have to wait 3 hours next time for my pork fat burrito. . . Now, what i love the most about Kogi are there sliders. They are just two little perfect slabs of heaven.
