ReviewID: qPSc6CE8IJPmSa4RNZNO_w
ReviewerID: nnXSwqVi16E4iOYzA72SbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: South City Kitchen Midtown
Category: Southern
San Francisco, where I currently reside, is a foodie's heaven. We have inventive cuisines, Michelin stars, and an ever-expanding roster of celebrity chefs. BUT what we do not have is good Southern cookin'. So on the rare occasion that I actually got to visit ATL (it was also the BF's first visit to the South), I wanted nothing but the best that my hometown had to offer.. . Recommendations for this place came from trustworthy sources and yelp, of course. We came for a week day lunch so it wasn't too busy. The atmosphere was friendly. There were lots of business suits and ladies who lunch types, but no one made me feel out of place even though I was just in jeans. . . And the food! The menu has a lot to choose from. Nothing especially inventive, but they have all the Southern comfort staples. We started off by receiving corn bread and biscuits. WIth a bit of honey &amp; lots of butter, they were just right thing to get the meal started. The cornbread was especially moist and held together well. The BF got the buttermilk chicken w/ green beans &amp; mashed potatoes. I went out on a limb and got the Carolina Chicken Bog. We also got a side of collard greens, which were cooked perfectly and not mouth-puckering sour or mushy like some SF places make them.. . The fried chicken, one of their specialties, got two thumbs up. Crispy on the outside, moist on the inside. Also not greasy. Highly recommend. My dish was good, but not great. It was similar to a Jambalaya, but with much less spice. I was looking for something with a bit more flavor, and this dish was bland. I requested hot sauce, but even that didn't really make a huge difference. Kind of a bummer, but there is always next time. . . Maybe it was the corn bread/biscuit that I consumed at the beginning of the meal, but I was pretty stuffed (and I still had 1/2 of my dish left over). They definitely don't skimp on the portions here. Given that I don't live in ATL, it'll be hard for me to come here as a regular. I will, however, make sure to come back on my future visits.
