ReviewID: qQ6iUpJx0gPbr5QOShORaw
ReviewerID: H14l4pgshHB2-U0EvGxCaA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
Anyone looking for one of the great steakhouses in Chicago has probably already heard of Primehouse.  But have you considered Primehouse for brunch???  Given the crowd (or lack thereof) I can tell most of you haven't, but definitely should.. . The "Brunch in a Box" specials at Primehouse are a great way to get a weekend day downtown started. Each "box" is a bento box filled with an array of small items all surrounding a main theme. This morning my wife went with the Eggs while I had the Shells. The Eggs box was perfect for someone looking for a typical egg brunch, but can't make up their mind.  The lobster omelet, eggs benedict, and kobe sausage and eggs in brioche were all spot on and live up to the usual Primehouse perfection. The Shells was just as outstanding, with 2 raw oysters, a crab pastry, angry shrimp and 2 scallops.  . . To accompany the boxes Primehouse offered small and large carafes of classic breakfast drinks. Today we went with a small carafe of the Classic Bloody Mary. Smooth throughout and consistently spiced, without going over the top (try the Wasabi if you want hot hot hot) they provided a wonderful accompaniment to the meal.  A small carafe served about 1.5 glasses each and was more than enough for us before noon.  . . We stuck around to finish our drink and get some espresso and tea, and my wife couldn't pass up the "fill-your-own" doughnut dessert.  Totally unnecessary, but still darn good.  The doughnuts (or really doughnut holes) were light and fluffy on the inside with a crispy sweet shell on the outside.  They would have been fine on their own, but the fillings, especially the vanilla, puts them in my top 5 for doughnuts in the city.  "Doughnuts at a steakhouse?" you say.  Who would have thought it... definitely not I. But I am so glad we gave them a try.. . Overall it was a bit more than we usually spend for brunch, but the variety and quality made it worthwhile.  This will be on my list of places to take the out-of-towners for brunch before a day of shopping or similar activities in the heart of the city.
