ReviewID: qqY52uBIO-MBVRd4LoyQcQ
ReviewerID: _cUtxCvCccwgNJzD5I0cDA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Manny&#39;s Coffee Shop &amp; Deli
Category: Delis
Here is your mission should you choose to accept it: . . Codename: Thanksgiving Expansion. Location: Manny's. . You know what I'm talking about, if you eat more the Wednesday before Thanksgiving, you'll increase your intake abilities and thus increase your overall joy of Thanksgiving! Ever notice how hungry you are on the Friday after? Yep, you feel me. It's a Thanksgiving sure thing, like a Lions' Loss! So let's beat Thanksgiving at it's own "game", and institute a Wednesday "Thanksgiving Expansion"! And I suggest we institute it at Manny's, a Chicago Institution.. . Manny's is a cafeteria-style deli, serving it up old school. I mean, it's literally like going back to the Third Grade! You take a tray and shuffle down the line past succulent white fish, tongue, corned beef sandwiches, matzo ball soups, beet and cucumber salads, jello squares...The selection can be daunting and in my case, I just asked the Beef Tongue guy where I could get a Chicken Salad sandwich, since I knew I had seen it once before. It's down in "Salads", not in the "Sandwich" area...check.. . My sandwich was piled so high it nearly came up to my chin. Same with my co-workers' corned beef sandwiches! This is where the Expansion comes into play. I ordered a cucumber salad simply to try to eat more healthy, it was delightful. It made the 50% Polish part of me sing with Old World delight! The chicken salad was a nice grind of chicken that you could tell wasn't ordered frozen. It was fabulous! But one downside to Manny's is that the prices are pretty high for cafeteria-deli items; so my co-workers and I go pretty infrequently. And then in my forgetfulness I tried to eat the whole sandwich. Talk about expansion...and then all I wanted to do was sleep through my afternoon meetings!. . I imagine many shady City deals have been transacted over lunch at Manny's. It's home to old school politicians and "Chicahgah" types, that like a good toothpick after their meal...or a cigar, or M&amp;Ms or that Violet gum that your grandmother bought. Yeah, Manny's has a candy counter with all of these items as  you walk out to pay your bill!. . "Thanksgiving Expansion" people! Let's do this thing.
