ReviewID: qr6f8H7DAElDNSTGB9mcnQ
ReviewerID: IOC3Iuu8t3hhtPMt9ibmpQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
It's been awhile since I've dined at a fancy, schmancy place.  I typically go to high end restaurants on very special occasions.  It was my mister's b-day, so we decided to check out Osteria Mozza.  It was raining, but serendipitously it stopped before we got to the restaurant.  I was shocked how crowded it was for a weeknight.  Thank goodness I made reservations.  We got seated right away.  The hostess was a little snooty, but based on previous Yelp reviews, I was already bracing myself for the pretentious attitude of the staff and it's Hollywood, 'tude is expected. . . The decor was modern, the wood was dark and masculine.  The place was dimly light.  Very classy and modern.  Our waitress was nice and very friendly, always had a smile and give suggestions when we asked her for recommendations.  They asked if we wanted presecco and we said yes.  One of the staff poured it out of a huge magnum, all the while, the manager stood behind. We felt very regal.  The presecco was really yummy. . . We looked at the menu and it was little daunting I wasn't sure what to order.  For app's we went for the Bufala Mozzarella with prosciutto di Parma. Oh my goodness, that was the best mozzarella I've ever eaten...so soft and creamy and it paired perfectly with the prosciutto.. . The waitress explained that the Primi would be the next dish that would come out and it was the pasta.  Basically, there different noodles with different sauces.  We selected Tagliatelle with oxtail ragu since the oxtail ragu seemed tasty.  The tagliatelle was a flat noodle wider and flatter than fettucini.  We split the dish, so the portion sized was prefect.  However, I was disappointed with the pasta.  I expected a lot more especially since this is a Mario Batali establishment. I wanted to be wowed and do my happy dance, but I just was not impressed.  Don't get me wrong, the pasta was tasty, but it was no Giacomo's in Boston.  I still haven't found pasta as good as back east.  . . For entree, my mister had the Grilled Whole Orata wrapped in radicchio with extra virgin olive oil.  It was moist and tender, but it just didn't have the wow factor.  I ordered the Porcini-Rubbed Rib Eye Bistecca, medium rare.  Wierd, I know.  This isn't a steakhouse, so why the heck did I order the Rib Eye?  I guess I haven't had steak in awhile and it was calling my name. I'm glad I listened to cravings because...DAMN, that was one of the the best steaks I've ever had.  The rub made this nice crust around the meat and it had a nice slightly sweet taste to it.  They provided me some olive oil and aged balsamic vinegar to enhance the steak, but it really didn't need it.  The flesh was so soft, it practically melted in my mouth.  It came with some potatoes that were nice and crispy. Finally, I was doing my happy dance. I could've eaten the whole thing it was so good, but I had to restrain myself and I had to save room for dessert. . . For dessert, I want to try something different so I ordered Rosemary Olive Oil Cakes, olive oil gelato &amp; rosemary brittle.  The cakes were bite sized and reminded me of a torta cake my mom makes.  The gelato was creamy and good and they put a little salt on top which was a nice accent. . . I almost forgot my leftovers.  They gave me a card, but I didn't know it was a claim check.  You pick up your wrapped up food at the front.  Pretty swanky, but they should've explained to me what that card was.   I would've been so pissed if I left without my steak. . . Osteria Mozza was a nice dining experience.  Our wait staff was nice, not very Hollywood at all. (The patrons on the other hand are another story.)  But, if it wasn't for the steak and mozzarella cheese, I would have given this place 3 stars because the pasta was pretty disappointing.  Would I go back?  Not sure, but I may give the Pizzeria a chance.
