ReviewID: qr_RmNdHWcww6iswCLp8PA
ReviewerID: MIzbh7XbMOhnhwwmESRLoA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Mmmm, the griddle. If you have any respect for pancakes or french toast at all, you owe it to yourself as a hungry, food-fiending human being to go to this place. But, don't come here and form any opinions about the place before you try one of their spectacular pancakes or french toast items. And, believe me, they have a lot to choose from, and each one just sounds more crazy and decadent than the previous one. I don't even really like peanut butter-y foods, especially for breakfast (besides the occasional recess puff cereal bowls), but the Peanut Bubba French Toast was amazing, no joke. The Golden Ticket was crazyy good, too, even though I am not a big fan of walnuts in my food! Just be prepared for a really, really sweet meal. And, when I say sweet, I am not talking about the surfer-dude-totally-wicked-rad kind of sweet, I am talking about they-must-be-hiding-some-oompa-loompas-in-the-back -with-huge-vats-of-sugar-and-syrup-goodness kind of sweet, know what I'm saying?. . But the BEST thing about this place, besides their delicious food, has to be the portions they serve it in. Don't think you can walk in here and finish a whole plate, or even half your plate.  You definitely get your money's worth; heck, I think my leftover pancakes lasted me an entire week (maybe, maybe not). So, don't throw a little hissy fit when you see that you have to dish down $10 for some pancakes and toast for breakfast because it's actually more like putting down an investment for food for the next few days.. .   I decided to hold back on the extra star because I tried their omelettes, specifically the one filled with your choice of chili, and it didn't really blow me away or anything. Their sandwiches are pretty good, but not life-changing either.  Really, your best bet with this place is to stick to the 2 pages they devote to purely pancakes and french toast. Trust me, you won't be disappointed (or even breakfast-less for that matter for a while).
