ReviewID: QRp0XOU31Ewc6uy0vxw5CA
ReviewerID: PSflctuopnjaIWm-P_o7YQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
First of all, let me just say that I'll contradict many of the yelpers here, but this was my personal experience (yeah, this won't end well).. . I made reservations on a Tuesday to get a table two days later at 5:30 pm with absolutely no trouble. Apparently Thursdays at 5:30 is a good time (but probably not anymore now that I've announced it online).. . Let's start at the beginning and proceed in the order the food was brought out: . . 1. The chopped salad had too much red lettuce which made it too bitter. It could have been balanced out with more sweet or citrus to make it more bearable. Me= Disappointed. . 2. The meatballs were soft, flavorful and delicious. Me= Hopeful again. . 3. The pizza with clams came out. I'm usually not a fan of pizza, but I love how the dough here is thin and chewy, tasting a lot like naan. Which is why I don't understand why they soaked it in so much olive oil it actually made a pool on the dish 0.0. Me= Slightly grossed out. . 4. Someone brought us a SECOND pizza we didn't order. It turns out the waiter thought we wanted the salami pizza when we wanted the sliced meat appetizer. He asked if we still wanted it (yes) and said it won't take that long (uh huh). Me= Apprehensive. . 5. AFTER we finished our pizza + some time, we finally asked for our sliced meat. It came out, but by now we had no salad to eat it with like we had planned. Of course, the salami (fionnochiona to be exact). was salty so we ate it with the super hard bread sticks out of desperation. So I take a big gulp of iced tea to swallow it down. It tasted like soap and was room temperature from being refilled to many times from a pitcher with no ice. Me= Unhappy. . 6. We ordered the budino to salvage the situation. It was so creamy, satisfying, and well-balanced. That fresh whipped cream and sea salt really made it above par. Me= Dopamine high. . The budino almost made it worth the trip, but considering the service and hit-and-miss menu, I would not return. I like the casual, cozy atmosphere. Also I don't drink much and didn't order wine and was glad they weren't pushy about it or expect you to order it like some places do. Overall though, the service was slow and neglectful and considering how many choices there are in Socal, I'm moving on.
