ReviewID: qRS7e2LzfZaJS72BbVTCMw
ReviewerID: OG5sgOwv9sxiw6966_tOFg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
I think people who have rated this restaurant low probably have their expectations in the wrong place. This isn't a great "burger joint" this is like a high-brow, delicacy version of a burger. I think you need to approach it the same way... like a wine tasting. . . This is definitely a gourmet burger. The 'point' of it (hence the name, Umami) is to taste it slowly and savor the combination of flavors -- and in that aspect, it takes the cake. Everything about the flavor mixing is absolutely spot-on. It's rich, it's bold, it's 'fresh', it's inventive: it's delicious!. . I have eaten here several times and never been disappointed. In fact, I have said that the first bite will make you cry. It's delicious and wonderful... so wonderful in fact, that after your first bite you start to mourn the fact that it will come to an end eventually. It truly is a sad moment!. . I prefer this location over the others, personally. It's small and intimate (which I enjoy) and the wait staff is all very friendly and funny and the food is very consistent. I have tried every burger on the 'regular' menu, but there are new additions (both in burgers, sides, drinks, and desserts) nearly weekly, so there are probably some I haven't tasted yet. I like that the menu is so simple and that things change frequently... I've gotten to sample some very unsual and delicious things that I might not have otherwise thought to pair with a burger. . . My favorite thing is the house-made ingredients. I enjoy finding out what the "pickles of the day" are and the ever-changing french fry assortment. The house-made American Cheese is fantastic, but the piece de resistance is the house-made garlic aoili. It's included as a topping on some of the burgers, but also can be requested as a side for the fries. DON'T MISS IT. I don't know how it is so delicious, but it IS. . . My husband would not eat mayo (or anything like it) for 33 years until he tried this garlic aoili. True story.
