ReviewID: QSIw7Cpkb7DO57Y9_REAzw
ReviewerID: iiMLf0F4XGeJuJJNcQPaeQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
I wish I could say it was one of the best meals of my life, but I would be lying. The bf took me to Yamashiro last year for my birthday. It wasn't like I had unrealistic expectations for the place. I went in knowing we'd be paying a steep price for mediocre food. But I figured, we're going for the view and the service! It'll still be great!. . Boy was I wrong! The bf had made a reservation way in advance. When we got there, we still had to wait 20 minutes for a table. When they finally sat us, it turned out they had reserved for us a tiny little round table they were using to hold napkins, table cloths, and chopsticks. Why did they think it'd be okay to seat anyone there?? We were sitting for another 10 minutes until our server finally showed up and asked if we wanted water. Yeah, we've been sitting here for 10 minutes, it'd be nice to get some water if it's not too much to ask. We also asked if we could switch to the table next to us, which was empty and was actually meant to seat 2 people, not a little table for linens and plates. All he could say was, "You'll have to ask the hostess." After he disappeared for another 10 minutes (still no water!), we said SCREW THIS and just moved over to the empty table.. . As mentioned before, the food was less than spectacular. Fine, whatevers. I knew that to be the case. Came time for dessert, the bf asked the server if he could put a candle on the plate since it was my birthday. But he didn't care, another 20 minutes went by and we got our dessert with no candle! It's not that I was mad about the candle. Forget the fact that we were first seated at the crappiest table alive. Never mind that he ignored us the whole night and took over 20 minutes just to get us water. It's just that it was one tiny little request and he couldn't expend just a little effort to accommodate us. I mean, does dining at Yamashiro mean paying an outrageous amount of money for bad food and horrible service?. . We were both very disappointed with Yamashiro. I really hoped it would be as amazing as the way other reviewers described it. But it really wasn't. And worse, it was an incredible waste of money.. . So for those looking for a great meal at Yamashiro, be warned! Maybe you'll luck out and get a really great server who will be attentive and kind. Or you'll be unlucky like me and end up having a terrible time at a very high price.
