ReviewID: QTHYFPDb5aA0LSAAXxRKDw
ReviewerID: a2QyhyGu0NeP0BdhKIXW6g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
When the cat's away the mice will play... so my colleagues and I ventured from Pasadena to LA for a field trip and some grub at the historic Langer's Deli.  I have heard about this place before, and my foodie friend insisted we had to eat here.. . I was not let down at all.  Well, for the most part.. . Friend and I split the #19 and #88 (corned beef, swiss, saurkraut on grilled rye) and man - that was a great combo!  The corned beef and pastrami were hands down the best I had ever had - of both.  The meat actually looked like meat and was perfectly seasoned, not the gristly nasty salty heart-attack crap you find other places.  Servings were large enough to satisfy my appetite but still small enough to fit my mouth around.. . Shocker - I liked the corned beef more.  I think it was because it's warm and the bread is grilled so it stays crisp and doesn't get soggy.  And although the #19 is their famous item, and I think the Russian dressing and coleslaw are nice creamy compliments to the pastrami, I feel the delicious flavor of the meat was overwhelmed by the toppings.  Eating a few pieces of the meat that fell out of the sandwich made me appreciate the smokey and somehow delicate flavor of the pastrami more than when it was actually in the sandwich.  The corned beef however, was perfectly balanced with the vinegary saurkraut and the creamy cheese.  Yummmm.. . I tried the borscht - it's crap.  It is just cold pickled beets in a bowl with a giant serving of sour cream on the side.  You call that borscht?!?!?!  Well my Ukrainian heritage thinks otherwise.  Buuuut I love beets so I ate it anyway, yum.  The matzo ball soup looked good too.. . Fries were crispy, rootbeer was delicious, the atmosphere was pretty chill, we got street parking right across the street, and our server was awesome.  I think the price is ALMOST worth it because seriously the meat was so good.  Minus a star for bad borscht, scary location (no wonder they close early), and no left turns meaning it took forever to get back to the office.  Oh and the minus a star is also for the strange pictures of kids on the walls that just seem random and odd.. . SOOOOO delicious, you try, you like!
