ReviewID: quI9RWRoVmrHN4tNOS26-w
ReviewerID: klu-U8aXHU2tK0Zgrc7YNA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
This is one of the restaurant that has been under my "bookmarks" for the longest time because of its 500+ reviews! . . I went on a Tuesday night but wow...it was crowded =) There are very limited seating at Father's Office so everyone just kind of stands around which is nice in a way - casual, relaxing, and friendly. There are no hostess or waiters, you pretty much just stand around until someone leaves to seat yourselves. The room was dark with minimum music playing in the background, very cool and lay-back socializing hot spot. . . Wow and the beer, I wonder how many times I'll have to come in order to try everything to decide what I like LOL There are just too many to choose from! Since I'm not a beer expert or a brewing master (I like to drink it tho!), I pretty much just did the eni meeni mini mo and picked. But don't worry, if that's too risky for you, just ask the bartenders. Lots of plus points for the bartenders, they are all really friendly and helpful! . . Okay so our food comes, mmm... yes, agree with all other yelpers, sweet potato fries, YUMMY! (Remember NOT to ask for ketchup, there are no ketchup in the restaurant, they serve their fries with a creamy tartar sauce-ish condiment, VERY GOOD THO!) Everything was pretty good (not great). Overall, I give the restaurant 3 stars because it is a little bit over priced (drinks tho, not the food). Beers are around $10 a glass and wine is about $12-13 per glass, yah, so a couple of rounds for two, you're talking about $50 at least (just on drinks).. . I had high expectations for Father's Office because of all the reviews on Yelp (don't get me wrong, it's a good place, there's just nothing I would crave during any given moment). I wonder if I'd have had a better experience if it wasn't for yelp LOL Has yelp starting to un-do my search and experiences for great food instead of helping? haha... nah, next! I'm onto the next great search on yelp.
