ReviewID: Qvekd48Ij5rUtdi_8eNrPw
ReviewerID: vGVOnoS083rY9U5NdQnLBg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
So finally get to try Craft, yay......  . Came in a cold Monday night, walked in a place filled with people in their business attire.  We greeted the hostess because apparently Mz. Thing just ain't gonna do that, no smile, no nothing, COLD. . Since we arrived early we sat the bar, on one end by the door, cold, cold, cold with the door open and the wind kept blowing in. We asked if we can have the door closed, she answered that as long as we keep one door open that's fine, mmm, where is the service and hospitality?. The staff at the bar is nice, tho there's only one guy at a very busy bar.. Soon we were seated for our dinner, the wait staff is very nice, warm, friendly, informative, without being overtly so, kudos to Oskar. He brought an extra wine glass for me to try my dinner date's wine, a  very nice touch.. Dinner was greeted by an amuse: filling of lobster salad in a tiny profiteroles, the best part of this dish is the crunch from whatever pickled vegetables that was in there.  . Starter: Lamb Tongue, Pork Belly, and Wild Arugula with Parmesan. The Lamb Tongue was sliced to thin that the flavor of the tongue lost somewhere in there. Paired that with a very strong sweet sauce +smoke mushroom + huckleberry, can't taste the tongue. Pork Belly was cooked nicely but nothing spectacular, I've had this at some Asian restaurant. Arugula salad was actually delicious, crisp, fresh, bitter flavor of that Arugula with a very soft coating of Parmesan and hints of Lemon w/ two paper thin lemon slices.. Entree we had the Halibut w/Sea urchin sauce and the New York strip steak. Halibut  was not cooked on the inside, so that part was disappointing, flavor is ok, nothing new. New York Strip, had this coz of recommendation from Irene Virbila, mmm mine was dry and had a big piece of gristle that I had to spit out because it just keep cycling in my mouth, that little bone marrow on the side, had better, I think they forgot to garnish it with a bit of chive (pictures that I've seen had those). Side dishes were good, the mix mushroom and Shisito peppers.. Dessert: Start with Amuse of Coconut sorbet with Kiwi, very sweet. Olive Oil gelato, Fig tart with Fig and Port gelato, and cheese tasting. Olive Oil gelato at Mozza is so much better, when I had it I thought of "Olive Oil." This one at Craft, I took a tasting and I thought " sugar, Olive Oil." Fig tart, well, I don't like em, too sweet for me. At the end given petit fours, Nougat was really, really chewy, brittle was really, really hard,  Chocolate covered marshmallow is ok, Macarons, i enjoy macarons.. At the end of the meal I do not think about coming back here.
