ReviewID: qVf3b_WRdMSOrUMdlaxh9g
ReviewerID: 0CW9kcYLLdGf9NGG2qR75g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Weird I haven't written a review yet, as this is one of my default places to go to. Can't remember everything I've tried over the hundreds of times I've been here, but here goes:. . YUMS. : Burger - obviously. I usually like my meat bloody rare, but here I opt for med-rare, cuz it still comes out practically mooing. With sweet potato fries. . : Pork belly - get in MY belly. Truly, you can never go wrong with pork belly. . : Oysters - the Kumamotos or Kushis - whatever they happen to have is always sweet, fresh, and briney  . : Bone marrow - a little small, but tasty. Served with cilantro, red onions, capers and toasted bread  - make sure to get a bit of each in each bite, otherwise you'll think it's an oily mess. The saltiness of the capers, the sharpness of the onion, and bitterness of the greens really enhance the marrow flavor.. : Bacon wrapped shrimp - super jumbo and succulent. : 7/2 - Soft Shell Crab - Great White beer-battered and fried, with a spicy Thai flavored sauce, atop a bed of corn. YUMMY. : Cocktails - Manhattan - mmmmm deliciously smooth. . UMS. : Cod (appetizer) spread with toasted bread - thought it was too salty, couldn't really have more than one piece. . Really, everything is worth trying at FO.. . TIP. For God's sake - PLEASE know what you want when you go up to order. There are limited lines, and a limitless amount of people. Let's keep it rolling folks. If you want a beer recommendation from the tender, at least have a general idea of what you want - amber, ale, wheaty, fruity - so that the rest of us behind you don't have to listen to you say "ummmm" for 15 minutes as the tender goes through each possible description. HITACHINO WHITE ALE is a good place to start. If you're with a chick who isn't totally into beer, get her a LINDEMANS PECHE. . . And being a frequent patron, I know to go either really early or really late to avoid the masses. Everyone else who complains about waiting for a table - suck it up, grab a beer, and converse with your fellow man. . . CHEERS
