ReviewID: qwxEyoK_xZj4hXYiOc897A
ReviewerID: zM9HDpqXStLy0H__Z-D7SA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Quoc Huong Banh Mi Fast Food
Category: Vietnamese
I only wish I lived next door. Then I would eat it every other day.. . The first thing that strikes you is how cheap everything is. Pho starts at $5.50 a bowl. Sandwiches start at $2. The spring rolls are $3.25.. . The next shock is the generous portions when your order comes to the table 5 to 10 minutes later. You don't expect much for the low prices, but it's a pleasant surprise.. . The best part is when you taste the food. And wonder how it's possible  for food to be this cheap, this fast, and this delicious.. . The pho is good, and a sufficient amount of bean sprouts are provided. The sandwich is AMAZING. I've never had banh mi before, but from other reviews and my own tastebuds' experience, I'm venturing to say that I won't find an equivalent anytime soon. These sandwiches are obviously extremely popular as the woman who makes them behind a small counter is constantly busy. We ordered the special combination for $2.50 because we had no idea which kind was best. The baguette was wonderfully crispy and fresh, and the meat, pate, and flavored mayo were so yummy. I can't get over how good the sandwich is. I'll probably return every time I'm in Atlanta. The spring rolls are good, 3 large rolls with 4 shrimp wrapped in each, served with peanut sauce. The texture is great, crunchy and soft. The spring rolls are cool, light, and refreshing; the pho is warm, filling but not rich, and comforting; and the sandwich is rich, tasty, and not too healthy but absolutely delicious.. . We happened to go when business was slow, so the place was not crowded at all. But from what my mother said, the place gets packed at peak meal times with many Vietnamese, the true sign for authenticity and value.. . Highly recommended.. . Note: The other Vietnamese restaurant almost next door has similar pho (offered in different sizes) and is larger, but not nearly as many locals eat there, and prices and food are not as good.
