ReviewID: Qx46tCzMtNdSd3XU3Ve5Cw
ReviewerID: H6BV42Sr_KsW6fN5Fh05RA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
So I went to Fred 62s last night at around 2am.  . . Let me start off by saying, its a great place to go to for a late night diner place, sure beats Denny's.  . . The selection on its menu is numerous.  From typical pancakes and eggs to Burgers, dogs, sandwiches, pastas, fish and chips, steak, Japanese Udon and Soba, and mexican food.  . . I had one of their "towers", another name for a tall stacked sandwich.  I had "The Watch Tower" and it was very very.. well bad.  The tuna was extremely dry and I felt the components of the tower didn't go together well at all.  . . My friend had an omelet with hash browns which were pretty good, their hash browns had a buttery taste to it so it was good.  Another friend of mine got the BBQ Beef sandwich, which was just.. okay.  . For the appetizer, we had the Cali Calimari, and when it came we were a bit disappointed.  The portion was very small for an $8.00 appetizer.  It was about the size of a 5 inch diameter small bowl, with some calimari.  The "special sauces" was just Sriracha Sauce (confirmed by the waitress), and a sauce that was kind of tasteless.  . The dessert that we had though was the only highlight of the meal.  We ordered Bossa Nova Waffle Sundae, which was a waffle with some kind of a sweet cream condensed milk sauce, and then vanilla ice cream on top with whipped cream.  The waffle was very delicious, and went well with the sundae.   . . However, other than the dessert, the taste and quality of the food was nothing to wow about.  . Neither was the price. Most of its entrees are at the above $10 range but I felt the taste of the food didn't deserve the price it commanded.  I definitely felt that the place doesnt have a good Price/Value ratio.  However, I would visit it again if I were craving American food late night again.   Next time I would probably try a burger though.   . . -3 stars for the crappy sandwich I got and the P/V ratio.  . +1 for open late night, the 50's diner atmosphere, and diverse selection of food.
