ReviewID: qx4dSXZHY7rtYzov7V2fRQ
ReviewerID: 2KQLYdBvm6P3TQzxM0B4IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
i came to bottega louie on saturday night to celebrate a friend's birthday.  we were a group of eight, and the restaurant was gracious enough to accommodate us with a reservation for 8pm, despite their general policy of no reservations.  it was fantastic not having to wait for a table - we were seated right on time!. . this place was bustling!  it's a huge space, but it was jam-packed with both servers and waitstaff.  the interior is very attractive - basically a clean white space with understated elegance.  (and even more attractive than the space are some of the servers and managers...  hot damn - these guys looked like runway models!)  this place is LOUD - so be prepared to speak up if you want your dining companions to be able to hear you...  it may not be your first choice if you want an intimate dinner for two.. . the menu is made up of small plates, entrees, pasta, pizzas, sandwiches, salads, and appetizers...  really there is something for everyone.  we had a vegetarian and vegan with us, and they were able to enjoy several of the vegetable small plates.  i ordered the penne with shrimp and broccoli rabe.  it was delicious!  there was a very generous portion of shrimp in my dish...  i kept trying to pawn them off on my friends.  the bday boy had the pasta bolognese - it, too, was a generous portion and tasty.  the rest of the table ordered a variety of dishes - ravioli, chicken with artichokes, bruschetta with mozzarella and prosciutto, and the burratta with cherry tomatoes.  we all ate very well that night... awesome food!  the wine list is also very extensive, and there are a number of very good bottles at reasonable prices.  . . for dessert, we ordered the bday boy the apple tart with vanilla gelato and an assortment of gelatos and sorbets from bulgarini gelateria in altadena.  the apple tart was fantastic - crisp and light pastry, naturally sweet apples, and vanilla-y smooth gelato.  the other gelatos and sorbets were also very delicious and refreshing.. . service was warm and attentive...  and HOT!   (oh yeah, i already mentioned that...)  the bday boy still got the majority of our table's attention, although we ladies would get temporarily distracted by the eye candy.  bottega louie definitely warrants a return visit from me...  good food and hot waitstaff - it doesn't get much better than this place!
