ReviewID: QY05M_7cA-K0m1oWuG99tg
ReviewerID: HouSK2lA9yYDR6PeUo2__Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
Food so fresh it'll make you wanna slap ya momma!. . Ok, please don't do that, domestic abuse is not cute.  But this place is!  Came here for a romantic dinner for my 22nd birthday and was not only surprised by the freshness of the food, but also the overly casual decor.  But let's start with the good: the fooooood!. . Food was so good it made me realize I don't like veal... Now, this may sound like backwards thinking but let me explain.  Like a lot of you I'm used to Veal being pounded thin, breaded, and smothered in some kind of sauce.  The 'veal' taste typically masked behind the flavor of capers and some sauce accompanying the scallopini.  Not here.  This veal was a giant chop of untainted, fresh meat.  Not something I was expecting but went with it.  It was so fresh that there was just about no meaty taste.. it was just.. fresh.  Don't know how else to describe but A+++ ingredients.  As expected from a place where Wolfgang Puck personally visits every table during their meal.. . I also enjoyed an appetizer of tuna sashimi and dessert of some blueberry ice cream thing.  Both were ridiculously good.  The tuna rivaled some of the upscale sushi places I've visited.  The blueberry dish was great because they brought it out with a little candle and "Happy Birthday Leviticus!" written in syrup.  So so so nice.. . Now the weird side of spago.  While the food is good, I feel the restaurant lacks a definable personality.  I mean, it's in Beverly Hills and is pricey so you expect a certain atmosphere.  Not the case here.  The music choice was.. interesting.  A mix of 80s and 90s hits which gave it a casual atmosphere.  However, it's hard to REALLY believe the place is casual when you're staring at champagne options of 1600 dollar Krug.  Idk.. SBE has really influenced nice restaurants in LA to cater towards the trendy type of crowd.  Not necessarily bad, but STK has a stricter dress code than this place.  I think Spago should adopt it.. . Whatever though I got to sit next to Judge Judy and Samuel L. Jackson (at the same table wtf?!) so I was happy :-)
