ReviewID: QY7tBpGw5QdlPKuvknC5zw
ReviewerID: HgbQqUyMAp_Q7I-ZlkyfWw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
If you do not mind about your health, and you do not mind butter, oh dear lordy is this place for you.. . I had to drive to Los Angeles during game 5 of the NBA Championships, Lakers ended up losing and I needed to enjoy something for my two hour drive back to San DIego. I remembered the Roscoes in Altadena off of Lake Ave and decided to stop off there.. . Walked in, got seated really quick, ended up getting like a 1/4 chicken with waffles. Very friendly obese lady came by, and when I say obese, if she some how got to the top of the Eiffel tower by power crane or super jumbo helicopter, she would put Paris in darkness at high noon. And she was the one that was probably the smallest of the bunch there.. . I love the fact that they put this mass of stuff that looks like butter, tastes like butter, but is probably straight hardened grease fromt he griddle on top of your perfectly browned waffles. We are talking a good solid amount as well. I think if you actually use all of the butter like substance, you will just immediately die right after you pay your bill from heart failure.. . I understand why they give you both, I always thought, Chicken AND Waffles, I mean really.. well it is given to you in this manner because the fried chicken comes out at almost volcano temperature, to a point that it eat starts melting through the plate they put it on. You are supposedly to eat the waffles as your fried chicken gets down to a standard temperature, which apparently is just slightly above scalding the inside of your mouth.. . After eating everything, except for half of the butter substance, I paid my tab and walked out. Full and happy, then for the next two hours on my way to San Diego I worried about having a heart attack that evening. When I awoke the following morning to get ready for work, I knew that I had been tested and my heart had survived, GO ROSCOE'S!
