ReviewID: QYyYKH9fbSbv_7LscwE7BA
ReviewerID: yQFTM_FZuqFNLuIehgS5tg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kevin Rathbun Steak
Category: Steakhouses
If you want the best steakhouse experience in Atlanta, go to Bones. . . I dallied in Rathbun's Steak for a while, but grew weary of the "just put a cute face at the front" substitute for good service. You can go five yrs w/o going to Bone's and they'll make you feel like they just saw you yesterday, while we went to Rathbun's Steak six times in a year (and also spent a PRETTY penny on wine, mind you) and each time the hostess acted like she was bagging our groceries.. . Also, a true fine dining steakhouse would NEVER pull the classless amateur BS of making you sit at the bar if only 3 out of 4 of your party had arrived--especially if you were a regular and had spent the past year pumping the place full of money. This is utterly unforgivable. . . That said, the first several times we went the steaks were marvelous. The zucchini piccata is also delicious, as were most sides I had. However, the service and atmosphere fall far short of what they should be for the price. It's loud and open (it's in a remodeled warehouse) and feels sort of like a dark, glitzed-up Longhorn. . . The last time we went we were made to wait at the bar (despite having a reservation) while my parents arrived to meet us. (BIIIIIG strike one). The service was spotty at best, and when the steaks arrived, all four of them--not exaggerating--were so marbled as to be nearly inedible. (Steeerike two). We were shocked and crestfallen. However, none of us are the complaining, send-it-back type, so we just mentioned to the server (when she asked) that the steaks were very disappointing. She was extremely condescending and implied that we just didn't know what we were talking about.. . She walked away. No getting the chef, no attempt to rectify things--nothing. (Swing and a miss--strike three!). They would be well-advised to get a system that tracks customers so that people who regularly frequent the place are treated better than that. But it seems that they truly don't even care... and that's deplorable for what they charge and what they bill themselves as.. . Thank you Rathbun's Steak for making me appreciate Bone's again after all these years!
