ReviewID: qz7UzTVzxOdxw2O7OUctIg
ReviewerID: ZVMo9yHr0rse-CMlqKepbw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
My 2nd time going there (yes, I'm a bit selfish, but sometimes the first experience is so delectable, that you just HAVE to go one more time!). You're already getting a nice feeling when you walk in front those giant wings they call "doors". The decor is dark and velvety, and since I made a reservation for three, I was seated within five minutes.. I'm sure people know the deal when you're seated: You're allowed to go to their salad bar, and once you're satisfied with your greens, the waiters can serve you your cuts of meat. I said "screw it" to the salad bar, I came for the artery-clogging goodness!. While waiters pass by with their cuts of meat, you're offered 4 different appetizers. My 2 favorites are the plantains and garlic mashed potatoes. (Sometimes, simplicity can be best.). And now, the meats. They have around 15 different cuts and varieties, but since I lost track, I only remember trying half of them (for a reason).. My personal favorite cut when I went there, also being my recommendation to everyone, is getting a cut of filet mignon cooked at Medium. MAN! The first and third time was done perfectly. I recall the second time being a little dry, but hey, it's all you can eat, just move on to another cut, and try again later.. That said, you MAY come across a moment where you have a cut that's does not meet your preferences, but you're going to be there for a good hour or two to eat your money's worth, so try as much as you can. Oddly enough, the bacon-wrapped filets were incredible (now doesn't THAT sound healthy), while their sausages had TOO much "snap" to it. That was my opinion, but the experience on that one was just enough to make me try it once.. . Enjoy an excellent nice there. Get a table that's NOT at the edge of the restaurant, enjoy some beverages native to Brazil (anyone know where I can buy Guarana Autenticas in Los Angeles They're delicious!), and, if you're a carnivore like me, EAT TO YOUR HEART'S CONTENT. Well, that comment might be a little awkward to shout at the face of red meat, but I hope you know where I'm going with this.
