ReviewID: QZwdMVpm7eIL2Uwpz7YRVQ
ReviewerID: NsqDhj79N8x5NamFCRLAsA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
$5 for coke/soda, no refill.. . Okay, just had to throw it out there. That was my one (large) gripe with this place. I've heard about it for so long, but never happened to be in the area and it's too far to make it a single purpose trip for me to go there, but finally, I had a reason. There are over 700 reviews of this place, and 40 reviews on the first page. I didn't need to be sold to come here, I just wanted to check out what the last 20 people said - get some recommendations for which pizza to pick since they all sounded delicious. No where was I warned that a 0.2 liter bottle of coke would cost me $5. What is 0.2l? It's 6.7 ounces which is barely half of a regular can. It only pisses me off b/c between my boyfriend and I, we ordered the Prosciutto di Parma, Goat cheese, leeks, scallions, garlic &amp; bacon pizza (which were both delicious and $15 a piece), we spent another $15 on soda (3 bottles). That's a WHOLE PIE! So sad. I would've much rather had water or a glass of wine, come on. Why is it $5? See below.... . *REWIND* We sat at the bar because I confused out reservation with 2:45 instead of 2:30. We found that out when we called to say we'd be late, oops. When we arrived, the place was packed but they managed to accommodate us first at the bar. +1 for that. So why $5 for coke...because they import it from Belgium. The bartender said, "they just don't make coke like this here. But don't get the coke lite, it's nothing like Diet Coke, it's worse." Another customer at the bar also asked their server about the coke (although she was drinking wine, like a smart woman) and his response was "we sell the imported stuff so we can mark is up $4." Great, thanks, thanks for ruining what could have been a great experience.. . The restaurant is cramped and small. I feel like if we hadn't sat at the bar and known exactly what we wanted, service would've been slow (and it's not the kind of place you feel like you can relax and chill out while you wait.). . Btw, don't valet ($8.50 day and $10 night), the whole street is 2 hour parking from 8-6pm and you can park even longer after 6pm (but there's nothing to see, so I doubt you'd stay longer than 2 hours anyway.) Another tip, make your reservation way in advanced if you want to come here. They take reservations up to a month in advanced and . http://OpenTable.com.  makes it very convenient.. . Lastly, go to Delanecy's instead. It's not as froo froo and much more enjoyable. ^_^
