ReviewID: r19WR_OOa_NwtzV_kr4Yag
ReviewerID: OLsivAKzZHZ8g5IyzRYM-w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Two Urban Licks
Category: Bars
Maybe I was expecting too much? I returned after much anticipation, with two friends who never dined here before. You know how it is when you bring someone to a place you haven't shut up about in a couple months... they were supposed to have been blown away. . . Well, the bread and basalmic/chili oil was delic. The purple rain cocktail was amazing (I squeezed my lime this time and it made all the difference), the appetizers were yummy, and the dessert was fabulous. The only thing is, our entrees--all of them--were mediocre. . . Let me start from the beginning: the tuna tartar, which I had been craving since my last visit, was just as awesome. Unfortunately, I had to share it with three other people so only got a single piece. The salmon chips were decent, but I would not order them again. My friends seemed to enjoy those more than I did. We also got a cheese plate, which was interesting but only one cheese and the pineapple jelly were worth the expense.. . The entrees were underwhelming at best. My mahi mahi was underseasoned but the rice upon which it sat was overly salty and tasted akin to boxed spanish rice, only with a little bit of lobster stock drizzled on top. The swiss chard in the rice was good but not stellar. The only great thing on my plate was the two pieces of shrimp... too bad only two pieces. . . Two of my friends ordered a steak, which I thought was tough and blah. The other girl got duck. It was def the best entree, although I thought a little overcooked (to Two's credit, she ordered it medium well... don't ask me why!). The flavor was great in the duck as were the sweet potatoes it came with. . . The dessert was really tasty--nutella and chocolate bread pudding with white russian ice cream. Delic!!! We also got a peach cobbler and the pistachio ice cream sandwiches. The bread pudding was the winner, although the ice cream sandwiches were tasty as well. Their homemade ice creams were quite excellent.. . All in all, I was disappointed with the entrees. If I return, which is doubtful anytime soon, I will likely just get drinks, apps, and dessert and skip the entrees. The service was great and it's always great to see the view and the kitchen with the rotisserie.
