ReviewID: r1S1CB9J7C4eN01KRRsq5A
ReviewerID: 8dWVRK9v6TrhD-63TTEoIw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
2 SALTY &amp; DRY W/NO FLAVOR!. . Walking in... we mentioned that we had reservations. Checking in our coats, we were then escorted to sit in a booth. The waitress came by and offered us the menu, list of wine bottles, and list of liquor.. . My husband ordered the mojito and for myself a nice cool Cabernet Sauvignon wine (any kind from Napa please). For an appetizer, I got the spicy salad (very wasabi like, yet delicious), my husband got the jumbo 3 piece tiger shrimp cocktail (which came with the house maid... very very spicy horseradish wasabi sauce and regular cocktail sauce). Amazing!. . For our ontray... I ordered the 12 oz. Bone in Filet Mignon, more tender. On the other hand, my husband ordered the regular 12 oz. Filet Mignon. . . As side dishes; we ordered: Garlic Mashed Potatoes, French Fries, Sweet Snap Peas, Macaroni &amp; Cheese and Sweet Corn Puray. (FANTASTIC FLAVOR!). . Very excited... after ordering another wine and mojito... our food came. . . The waitress served us the sides we ordered, in our ontray of Filet Mignon's. Cutting the FIlet was very tender and moist, but when I took one bite... it was VERY VERY SALTY! What happened? I asked my husband if his was okay... and he to replied that it was too salty. . . While I was emptying our sides back onto the plates; to ask the waitress why it was so salty... the General Manager "Gregory" passed by asking how we were doing. My husband replied, "The meat is too salty." Shocked he looked... notifying us that it was probably from the (SPECIAL SPREAD)... he then immediately brought his employees by our table to take back the two plates of Filet Mignon. Telling us that he was going to "RE MAKE" a new Filet Mignon ontray for the both of us. (since they usually don't do that, he mentioned).. . In doing that, he then said that he was going to take back all the sides and remake everything FRESH.  So... when our Filet Mignon's come out... everything would have been as new as possible. . . He mentioned... while we were waiting for our meal... that he was going to comp. us for all the appetizers, drinks and deserts we had previously ordered. By the way, he also brought my husband and I the same drinks we had ordered and another plate of shrimp cocktail as appetizer. (we were very thankful for him doing so). . Keeping us updated... he noted that our meal was going to be ready within 15 minutes. Finally when our meal was ready, I took a bite into the Filet and it seemed to be quite dry with no flavor. So, I asked for A1 sauce. (didn't hit the spot; as I wished it did). Trying to make the best of it, I kept eating the sides we had ordered.. . Since it was my Birthday, we finished the evening by ordering their popular cake... that came with one scoop of ice cream on top and house made special wiped cream; on the side. (honestly, it wasn't the best)... wished I'd ordered a different desert (more like chocolate cake). Oh' well, it was on the house anyways.. . Thanks to the General Manager "Gregory" I may come back, since I was comped over $100.00+... but if you really want a FANTASTIC Filet Mignon, I'd prefer you to go to Yard House. Not such a fancy place like this, but you get your moneys worth 100%.. . Save your $45.00+ for a 12oz. Bone in Filet Mignon and pay half with FLAVOR and Tenderness at Yard House. You'll believe me, when you eat it.. . After all that, even being comped $100+... we still paid a heavy price for our Dry Steak with No Flavor, plus sides. Around $210.00, yup really pricey.. . C+. 3 Stars
