ReviewID: R1wvT9VJp7_p8f-t7xYP-Q
ReviewerID: u9hdNPa78jdpMA5NkymOwA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
I LOVE Bossa Nova. I've been a loyal patron for about 4-5 years now. Got introduced by a friend and loved it ever since.  Now, there's a couple things you should keep in mind for the best experience possible. DON'T GO DURING THE AFTER-CLUB RUSH HOUR! This is when all the hungry fat asses ('scuse my language, but you know it's true) herd over and make a mess of the whole front area. They've even had to add a bouncer on these nights! Don't let this deter you from enjoying their awesome food though. If you go before midnight on a weekend you'll be fine, and anytime earlier is usually alright too. I reccomend sitting outside in that perimeter area in the front that wraps around. This way you get a little more privacy than if you sat at those tables inside that are really placed a little close for comfort. . . I think they made some changes in their management b/c I noticed service has definitely improved since the early days. The busboys are awesome at refilling your water and bringing that to-die-for foccacia. This is an awesome spot when you're having a splurge day and can't think of what's open late night. I LOVE how they are open late and you can order a beer with your meal all the way up to around 1:45am. . . Some of my fave items are: . -Chicken Brochette (i think that's what it is?) It's bacon wrapped chicken lightly fried, atop a gorgonzola sauce that's out of this world. . -Steak Salad. -Seafood Salad. (The salads portions are ENORMOUS so do yourself a favor-- get the dressing on the side and use a separate plate, so you can bring your leftovers home without it getting soggy!). -Seabass Dinner. -The mixed veggies are AMAZING as well, I love that they use Bell Pepper RINGS, corn, broccoli, spinach and red onions all sauteed deliciously together. You can get steamed as well. . -Plantains are great. -Shrimp Pizza . . Honestly, everything there is awesome- I've never been disappointed! . . Yay for Bossas!
