ReviewID: R4xY7O-0-wfKddDpOO5IZg
ReviewerID: xSV3Grv8Fymv07w3qpAY9Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Canter&#39;s Delicatessen
Category: Bakeries
Many years ago, I was visiting friends in Santa Monica.  After a few long nights that inevitably turned into early mornings, I was beginning to feel under the weather.  I mentioned this to my friend who proclaimed that I needed a bowl of matzo ball soup.  Not one to argue about a good bowl of soup or its restorative powers, I agreed to this proposition and off we went to this venerable L.A. deli.. . Gruff waitresses, old school booths with table side phone jacks and a cool stained glass ceiling made me think that I stepped back in time when we entered the dining area.  This place has been open since the mid 20s and it has an extensive menu for breakfast, lunch or dinner and anytime in between 24 hours a day!  They close only for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.  We have visited during the night though when they are cleaning the kitchen and grill but you'll be informed by your server once you sit down.  The menu is just a little more limited unless you're willing to wait.. . Back to my fond memory... my first meal here was a bowl of Mishmosh with matzo ball, kreplach, rice and noodles.  I was urged to add the chicken and the carrots to further round out the flavour and I did.  Over ten bucks for a bowl of soup?  Okay.  It was going to make me feel better right?  Okay... go big or go home, right?  I added a cherry phosphate (ended up having two before we left) and we noshed on free kosher pickles until our food arrived.  . . My grumpy waitress gave my friend his blintzes which looked absolutely wonderful.  She then returned to place an overflowing bowl of beautifully shimmering chicken broth in front of me and its aroma immediately filled my nostrils.  There was only one matzo ball but what a matzo it was!  The damned thing was the size of a frakking baseball!  The kreplach (meat-filled dumplings) were hand-formed and there was plenty of rice, noodles, fat slices of carrots and shredded chicken.  From the first bite into the gorgeously fat matzo to the last slurp of the broth, I was pleased.  If you are lucky, they will bring you bagel chips from the day old bagels.  Take care though, sometimes a cinnamon raisin slice will work its way in and that doesn't taste too good dipped in chicken stock.  If you are unfortunate and they are out, tough.  They are just out.  They'll bring you bread and butter for a small charge but it's just not the same.  The bagel chips are perfect for dipping!. . Since that fateful night, I've had quite a few breakfasts here and too many late night meals to count.  I can extol the virtues of their pastrami on rye and sing the praises of their Monte Cristos with strawberry jam.  Yes the corn and the fruit cocktail are from a can but they serve squares of gelatin and kick-ass apple strudel!  And seriously?  Is that a SMALL chef's salad?  Look at all the meats... the cheeses... and wow!  There's enough lettuce to choke a goat!  . . Why do I keep coming back in this city with so many dining choices?  I might flirt with other menu options but my heart belongs to that hearty bowl of mishmosh with carrots and chicken.  One cherry phosphate to start and keep 'em coming!. . Quick notes:  I'm unsure if this has changed but their toilets are upstairs.  I don't know how they accommodate those who cannot use stairs so I marked "no" for Wheelchair Accessible.  Street parking is sometimes available but you'd do better to park in the adjoining lot.  On their busier nights, they validate with a minimum purchase.  I can't remember what the minimum is but if you can't make it with your food tab, just stop by the bakery before leaving and grab some black + white cookies, rugelach or those little marzipan cookies that are like crack.  You won't be disappointed!
