ReviewID: R4z6qkWSh7EVtEKTYVVsLg
ReviewerID: 9j3EILvGpHgoOy70rIP4XA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
When I found out Jonathan G.'s surprise birthday dinner was going to be held at Comme Ca, I immediately looked it up on Yelp to see how the reviews were, and the $$$ price range, coupled with an average rating of 3.5 stars after over 100 reviews wasn't very reassuring to me.  I don't mind splurging on food, but I have to be assured ahead of time that the food is worth the splurge.  However, this dinner was about celebrating Jonathan G. and I knew that at the very least, I would be in excellent company, so I said I'd go (with very low expectations on being able to hear my dining companions or even enjoying my food).. . The boy and I showed up 30 minutes early for dinner.  Even though we live not very far away, we never know how long the drive will be with the traffic, and neither of us wanted to be the jerks who ruin the surprise by showing up at the same time as the celebrant.  We headed to the bar and were greeted by a friendly bartender named Tim, who went on to describe the elaborate set up of house-made mixers (ginger puree, anyone?) in front of him.  The boy and I both ordered cocktails, and I was quite pleased with the East Side Cocktail, which was extremely refreshing.  There's a running joke between him and I that whenever we order cocktails, he always ends up with the girlier-looking drink, and the Rumble that he ordered was no exception, with what looked like a snow ball on top, and some crushed blackberries.  After I stopped laughing enough at him that I could take a sip without choking, I had to admit that it was pretty yummy.  I was also pleasantly surprised to see Tim breaking the ice by hand behind the bar - a nice change from the bagged ice I normally get at most other places.. . By the way, I wish I got the guy's name, but the boy ended up chitchatting with a guy behind the bar who saw us looking longingly at the oysters.  After answering the boy's questions on what kind of oysters they were, the guy kindly sent over 2 each of 2 different kinds of oysters our way - completely gratis.  We certainly weren't expecting that!. . Once our group was seated for dinner, we settled on a selection of 5 cheeses, which were pretty good.  I wish I could go into more detail than that, but I'm not much of a cheese person (but I'm definitely a meat person, a pasta person, an Italian beef person, a Portuguese sausage/eggs/rice person . . .  oh, the list goes on and on, but cheese isn't really something I crave).. . After a long, long, LONG while, our server came by to take the orders for our mains.  Did I say a long while?  Yes.  I think we would have all been more annoyed with the wait if we weren't all so busy talking to each other.  I ordered the coq au vin, and let me just say, bacon has the same effect on me as bells do to Pavlov's dogs.  I never did get my knife replaced after the cheese course, but it didn't matter because the chicken was so tender that I just used my fork.  Delicious.. . The boy, at my suggestion, ordered the paleron of beef bourguignon (I couldn't decide between that or the chicken).  Holy cow (vache sacrée?) I wish I had ordered that instead!  So tender that I didn't need a knife for this one either, and so flavorful . . .  I had two bites off his plate, but I noticed he wasn't really offering me any more, so I left the boy alone to savor his dish.  I'll definitely order that next time.. . I really don't remember what we had for dessert because I was still thinking about how good the beef was.  And you know me, I would have been more than happy to have a paleron of beef for dessert.  . . Who needs ice cream and cake when you can have a big tender delicious slab of meat, hmm?  Not me!
