ReviewID: R5ILQfwY_lfFIrWTBl9r-g
ReviewerID: cBxB6C_yQpgcDDLLCIyogQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Cafe
Category: Vietnamese
I love the Pho Cafe.  Though it was really hard to find the first time I went (get a sign, guys!), by now I've been there probably 20x or more and can probably find it blindfolded.   It's a place I can always count on to satisfy my pho, egg roll or spring roll cravings (since that's what I usually order at any Vietnamese restaurant).  I often go there and just order a plate of the egg rolls (cha gio) and spring rolls (goi cuon).  You get 3 egg rolls with a plate of always fresh lettuce, mint leaves, cucumber, those sliced up carrot and daikon stuff and shiso!  This is the only place I know that serves shiso with their egg rolls.  I actually don't care for the shiso so I never use it when I wrap the egg rolls, but I thought I'd mention it for those who might care.  The abundant fresh veggies mean a lot to me because it counts for at least half of the enjoyment and I notice that a lot of other Vietnamese restaurants fail to deliver in that regard.  The summer spring rolls (goi cuon) are really yummy, too...besides the shrimp and vermicelli noodles, they put pieces of soft tasty beef in there.  You get 2 spring rolls in one order. . Finally, the pho tai....it's served within minutes of your order.  After I order, I leave for the bathroom (btw, they have really nice minty, lemongrass smelling soap in there) and  when I come back the food is all there! That's because they've got huge vats of the broth cooking all the time.  I like the broth, though I know some people don't care for the fact that it tends to be cloudy or gray-brown rather than clear.  The broth is fine for me and the meat is always tender and tasty, unlike other places I've had which are sometimes tough and chewy.  The other thing that's great, that almost makes me want to hug the waiter, is when he sets down that nice plate full of fresh bean sprouts, basil, jalapenos, huge slices of lime and lemongrass (which is another unique aspect of the Pho Cafe...I know the bean sprouts and basil are standard fare for pho, but I don't know too many places that have fresh lemongrass).  Always fresh.  And when I ask for an extra cup of cilantro, I get my extra cup of cilantro (none of this, "sorry we ran out"  or "we don't serve cilantro with our pho"...what?!  Isn't that illegal?)  . I know I've got to venture out an try other things on their menu, but so far they've never let me down on these three of my favorite items: Pho tai, Cha gio and Goi cuon.
