ReviewID: r6WFs3bsNPjtK9XJvO6Hyg
ReviewerID: yG002rouE9uVYJWpPHcC9g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
If I ever fulfill my aspiration of being one of those fabulously obligation-free, stay-at-home types (i.e., "screenwriter," "graphic designer," or any sort of profession blanketed with quotes and a suffix of writer or designer) who wear Poindexter glasses for their sheer irony and drag around a Jack Russel Terrier/Labrador/Golden Retriever wherever they go, LaMill would definitely be my hipsterrific stomping grounds. Until then, I don't know which it is-- that I'm not worthy of such a venerable venue for java imbibement, or that these places generally make my stomach curl somewhat-- but in some ways I'd rather be getting unlimited pours of the straight-up black stuff by some lady named Flo at the rest stop coffee house.. . The folks at this mud shack have the chill-yet-warm schtick down to a science: space age-y gadgets designed to maximize your coffee or tea experience which is punctuated by chic, mirrored high-end antique junkyard-esque finds. All of it is dizzyingly cacophonous yet so conceptually harmonious, strangely. The experience of drinking coffee turns into an architectural endeavor here, as the customer sets their personal foundations for drinking (which beans, vessel, etc.) and then sets about embellishing to his taste, whether it be with the tiny spouted creamer jugs of cream or non-fat milk and/or the organically-formed sugar.. rocks that fancifully adorn the plate. Too much fuss to deal with, especially before one gets a chance to get some caffeine into one's system.. . I feel like LA Mill only too willingly embraces the culture of expertise that we have become, only to suck the primal joy that one gets from sipping on a heavy, fragrant cup of coffee. What was once poetry now becomes a scientific art of sorts, one that you have to pay quite a bit for. The coffee, of course, is delicious, but amidst all of the beautiful clutter that occupies the space of LA Mill, one gets an eerie feeling of profound emptiness. Though I did enjoy the experience, I felt somewhat gutted.. . Mostly because of the marvelously eclectic decor, I would think about going back. But perhaps next time I'll only opt for coffee-- LA Mill's nibbles, much like their operating concept, are somewhat swathed in vapid pretension; thought-provoking on paper but there's definitely something missing.
