ReviewID: r7_1M1kaBZDaaq2LuXvJzA
ReviewerID: i5IzRJLwLU9GfZYCFJEbTA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
Came here recently as I was in LA for Memorial Day Weekend and it was suggested by a friend that we visit this place. It was said to be delicious and worth it. The food was good but service wasn't up to par that night. Mind you it was Saturday night.. . We arrived around 9pm and for me personally, I try not to eat after 8pm. What can you do tho when ya travel in a group of friends? We had a party of 10 and we were told the wait would be about 20-30 minutes. BOY was the waitress wrong, it was about an hour or so before we got seated. I mean I know its LA and wait times are a given, but at least be a little more accurate with the wait time. Plus, smaller groups who kept coming got seated before us which made me really annoyed. So if your coming in a big group, beware! a 20-30 minute wait could really mean an hour to hour and a half because it was seriously a really long wait.. . As for the service, the waiters were not very attentive. Since we were seated outdoors, it was a tad chilly at night. We simply asked for one of the heat lamps to be turned on. It literally took us 6/7 attempts to ask before they turned any on. And when they DID turn on the heat lamps, they turned on three and literally our group was dying of the three heat lamps when we simply asked for one. As for water, three of our table mates did not get a glass until they were almost done with their food. We ASKED for water and we asked if we could we get three more glasses. It was terrible. We also asked for more cheesy bread balls which they ALSO forgot about. There was not enough in the basket for our group and they played it off as if we had to wait 20 minutes for fresh ones when I saw the table next door get a basket of cheesy bread balls. Service was just terrible.. . As for the food, it was okay. It wasn't terrible but it wasn't WOW in my mouth delicious. Portions were VERY generous and pricing was also fantastic. I personally had ordered the flat iron steak and requested the fried plantain chips. Again, meat was cooked right, generous portions of rice, beans, and fried plantains.. . Overall, I give Bossa Nova 2 stars. Why so low? The service was just terrible here. I am just disappointed. The food was decent and portions were generous, but the service just killed it. I would have rated a 3.5 if service was better but it wasn't.
