ReviewID: r7Cfd2Ef8Sruq3HBpZ5Xtw
ReviewerID: ZB8aGsAgbeX3LiSlQ8dm5Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sun In My Belly
Category: Caterers
Sun in my Belly is a great breakfast, brunch, lunch, coffee, anything location. Imagine an elegant classic american brunch cafe infused and mashed into a european bistro, both in the decor and the food. The menu is full of excellent southern classics made elegant without losing any of the down-home goodness. I mean it. This is what happens when you take a european neighborhood cafe and drop it deep in an Atlanta neighborhood like Kirkwood. Sun in my Belly is literally hidden on the other side of the tracks. (At least from my house.). . Since I moved to Atlanta a few months ago, I've had an on again off again craving for some shrimp &amp; grits. Sure they offer the plate at other places, such as Flying Biscuit and Six Feet Under, but for some reason, I held back and didn't order the dish at those spots. I saw it on the menu at Sun in my Belly and I knew what I was getting that morning. Their menu has it printed as shrimp and grits served with sausage + parmesan crouton. Oh, it's so much better than those printed words would have you believe.. . The grits themselves are great. Different in consistency and texture than most places I've tried here in Atlanta. The grits are a little grittier and they're not as wet as most places.  These are the grits I would want the uninitiated to eat. Don't feed them grits that are anywhere close to reminiscent of cream of wheat or any other ground up grain. Serve them the grits at Sun in my Belly. Oh. The shrimp? They're large, succulent and the seasoning floats off the shrimp and melds with the grits stretching the flavor throughout the entire meal. Where some people might give you uneven quality by having good shrimp, and just so-so grits, Sun in my Belly seems to go all out.. . The scrambled egg pressed panini served with hook cheddar + bacon on Brioche, served with mashed potatoes - while obviously the panini is going to be good, they downplay the quality of their 'mashed potatoes'. These are not simply mashed potatoes. These potatoes are seasoned and cooked with in a way that rivals those at Ria's Bluebird. This is good stuff.. . The service is timely, appropriate, knowledgeable and accomodating. They have a full case of cupcakes and other pastries, including such creative fare such as gummi worms on cupcakes made to look like a piece of turf. The space is an old harware store and there is ample seating. A european neighborhood cafe smack in the middle of Atlanta, within view of MARTA train tracks. This restaurant is done so well that much like Mi Barrio will transport you to a mexican cantina, when you eat at Sun in my Belly you can easily imagine that you're having breakfast on the other side of the atlantic.
