ReviewID: R9a2V8-nxzWXTW9fQBRMDQ
ReviewerID: faK-VaDldjRT0IR0xgHM1g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: BondSt
Category: Japanese
BondSt feels like a bad first date with a beautiful girl. As you enter the nondescript townhouse on a quiet Soho block, you're energized by the possibilities for the evening. Then, the conversation starts - and the night gets progressively weirder. You hope that it's just Turrets. But maybe BondSt thinks that, despite your buying dinner, she's better than you. Maybe ten years ago - not today.. . The meal certainly had it's fair share of highlghts. The Uni Sushi was fantastic - crunchy, thick seaweed enveloped a creamy, sweet, and generous helping of Sea Urchin. The Sushi Omakase (8 assorted pieces for $40) was a winner both in price point (the pieces ordered seperately may have resulted in a doubly expensive tab) and in quality. Raw Shrimp was juicy and meaty; Sea Eel, unlike the preparation at so many other resataurants, wasn't drowned in BBQ sauce, and permitted us to enjoy a sweet and smokey natural flavor. a large portion of Sea Bass Tempura was delicately fried, with batter that complemented, rather than overpowered, the fish itself. Sports Bottles of the Yuzu Vinegrette and Chipotle Aioli accompanying the Spicy and Crispy Shrimp could sell prolifically. . . Then there were the miscues. So very many of them. A server who disappeared for large windows of time without method or madness. 30+ minutes before our order was taken (and only then, when we forced it upon her). 20 minutes before we were asked for drinks; indifference when asked for an opinion on the sake list; an attempted bottle sale some 2x more expensive than the one we had originally ordered, but that was no longer in stock ("We're redo-ing the list, sorry"); dessert menus that "needed to be printed out" prior to our being able to order any sweets. Appetizers varied wildly in quality - I found "Lions for Lambs" more interesting than our Scallop Carpaccio (literally, a single, flavorless scallop sliced paper-thin with some "dipping foam"); the Mushi could have been ordered from a local restaurant at half the price.. . My meal at BondSt wasn't bad - quite oppositely, I found the food to be of generally high quality and the experience largely enjoyable. It was just disappointing, especially given the price point. . . Maybe if she loses the attitude, I'll give her another chance.
