ReviewID: r_3CXduGouXbTIlzn3jqyg
ReviewerID: PgAAN80-jEcSBlC3a2Q--g
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Gino&#39;s East
Category: Pizza
This location blows.. . Gino's is normally my second favorite pizza place in Chicago (proceeded by Lou Malnati's), but this location never makes me want to have Gino's pizza ever again.. . My cousin was in from HOT-lanta, and we met up with a couple of our other cousins to give the out-of-towner an excellent Chicago pizza experience, but it was a complete utter disappointment from start to finish.. . When we walked in, we told the hostess that there were 4 people in our party - then she told us to have a seat in the waiting area.  Then I asked how long the wait was, and with a total look of annoyance that I was asking her this ridiculous question, she said, "a couple of minutes."  . . After 10 minutes or so, we were brought upstairs to a completely empty room and were sat in a booth. . . We ordered our pizza immediately because deep dish takes a while.. Our server was absolutely inexperienced and super awkward.  . . We ordered buffalo wings as an app - it came with 7 tiny, lukewarm, super salty wings on a bed or soggy fries - $7.95 - what a rip-off!!!. . Finally, the pizza was ready, but our terrible server tilted our pizza as he was carrying it, so the sausage patty, toppings, cheese, and sauce all slid over to one side, making our pizza extremely gross and unappetizing.  Then he tempted to serve the slices, and nearly flipped all of the slices and completely tore each slice apart.  C'mon now - I could serve pizza better than him!!!. . But our experience gets worse - the pizza tasted icky.  Not like any other Gino's pizza I've tasted in various locations - 4 others, to be exact.  The crust was soggy, bland, and flavorless.  What happened to the butter crust?!  The sauce was also bland and flavorless.  What a HUGE disappointment.  And to add to the mess - their pizza costs $9.30 MORE THAN ANY OTHER GINO'S!!!  That's a frickin 42% mark-up!!!  What a rip-off.. . This location completely feeds off of tourists, and I would not recommend this location to my worst enemy.  Terrible experience, and terrible pizza.  They have a sign, "Independently owned and operated" - WOW - that is NOT a good thing.  For now, I'll stick with Lou Malnati's until I can get over this trauma.
