ReviewID: R_dwW7wKScPDD2m8eXtv0w
ReviewerID: i0Y5iqC6xRVxHYea1K1ykw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
First impression: Bad location but good visibility. Why would this restaurant be in such a bo-ho-chic part of town? A friend and I decided to eat somewhere nice after attending a private art exhibit. As we drove along Melrose, I saw the signage and said "hey! let's go here! i've heard good things about this place!" Parking is pretty dicey unless you're willing to pony up senseless money for valet. We walked in and felt so intimidated and excited that I said to the hosts "We don't have reservations, can you seat two?" They nodded in a semi-British fashion and we were escorted to the bar where the other sad-saps without reservations are put. To get a table, you need reservations. This place is SO loud we could barely talk. Behind the bar is where some of the cold dishes are made and you can look down at the staff working on their culinary masterpieces. The kitchen is neatly tucked away in back without line of sight inside it. The menu is haute-micro-cuisine italian at it's best or worst, you decide. Everything is explained in detail and the ingredient combinations are unexpected. Unfortunately, it's all WAY overpriced. We thought we could share the Ravioli with Eggplant Ragu but on asking a neighbor were told to get at least two items to avoid starving. My friend ordered an Egg-Ravioli (thingy). Service is very slow. After 15 min we snagged our waiter and had to ask for bread; we each got one roll measuring about 1.75" x 1." Then we were each given a single "bouche 'musant" which is French for 'mouth happy maker.' Our mouths were not happy AT ALL. It was a 4mm thick slice of white skinny baguette bread with some shrivelled rosemary leaves and a tiny amount of tomato sauce and I think mozzarella. Yeah, totally unmemorable. The ravioli with eggplant rague was basically 6 or 7 pieces of nickel to quarter-sized ravioli with a dab of ricotta cheese with 4 or 5 razor thin slices of Italian eggplant (the skinny kind) and a tablespoon of marinara sauce. We both stared at it in horror because of the price-tag it came with. I waited 'til my friend's egg-ravioli thing showed up. It was one, that's right, ONE square ravioli, 1.75" x 1.75", with some drizzled brown sugar and inside was a raw egg yolk that disgustingly 'gave birth' as she cut into it leaving a stinky runny egg yolk mess all around the rest of the ravioli. We both smiled lamely, fuming inside at what this place calls food. We ate super slowly thinking we could fool ourselves into feeling full. WRONG. Our neighbor meanwhile was ordering item after item after item after item after item in 10 minute intervals. Maybe the waiters knew him because he was never left unattended. He ordered a lot of alcohol to go with each dish. We knew this is how to order from the menu as it's clearly classified in tiers as to first course, second course, etc. What kept us from doing that was the exhorbitant pricing and the lack of vegetarian menu options beyond the first course. The two of us left with a bill that we didn't expect but can say we tried it and it's NOT what it's cracked up to be. Just pretentious micro-cuisine/sparrow food. Oh, and it's WAY salty. The desert menu is very disappointing so we asked our neighbor, to his mortification, where would be a good place to go and that worked out okay. JUST okay. Don't fall for the hype of this place! Go elsewhere.
