ReviewID: r_ZRCWJ6xsUoqXtKdpHbKQ
ReviewerID: stlSeNQ-sjAYcXBFzXv3gQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
After months and months of hearing about all the hype I finally got it together and went out on a mission to try this mystical unicorn known as Kogi. We chose their stop in Little Tokyo(right near Daikokuya) on a Thursday night at 7:30pm so I was expecting a long line but much to my surprise there was not one at all! What a relief although even if there would have been a wait, the Kogi provided DJ was providing tunes at a loud enough level to keep people dancing for miles. We waited for only about 5 minutes to place our order and the whole time the delicious smells of grilling meats overwhelmed my senses.. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Seeing as this was my first time sampling Kogi I wanted to try as many menu items as I could. That being said my partner in crime and I went ahead and ordered 3 spare rib tacos, 1 spicy pork taco, 1 chicken taco, Kimchi Quesadilla, Kogi sliders, Kogi Hot Dog and a couple of grape drinks to wash it all down with.. . My order. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Short Rib Tacos. The short rib tacos were fantastic. Meat was delicate and well seasoned. The flavor is both sweet and savory. A quick squeeze of fresh lime and a bit or siracha for a little kick and you are set! These tacos are delicious.. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Spicy Pork Taco &amp; Chicken Taco. The Spicy pork and chicken tacos were definitely not stand outs for me. The chicken taco completely lacked flavor and was overpowered by the lettuce/dressing blend tat it was paired with. The spicy pork was good but for me personally it was not spicy at all and in comparison to the short rib was no match.. . Kimchi Quesadilla. Kimchi and melted cheese? Hmmmm. Sounds interesting right? It's actually really good. The amount of kimchi in comparison to the amount of cheese is good. It does not overpower in terms of flavor and goes rather nicely with the sesame sauce they finish it off with.. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Kogi Sliders. The Kogi sliders were really good. 2 perfectly soft, spongy little slider buns filled with short rib and the same delicious lettuce mixture that goes along with the tacos.. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Kogi Hot Dog. Surprisingly (or maybe not so surprisingly) my favorite dish . The hot dog was grilled really well with slight charing and the bun tasted exactly like the slider bun except it was nicely grilled as well. I can not stress how good this was and how well all of the flavors complimented each other.. . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . Overall I really liked the whole Kogi experience. The food was really good and it was a fun little mission to go on. You get to look for and find the truck, chit chat with friendly folks, listen to 90's hip hop and finish it all off with some delicious food. I can't wait to go have another Kogi adventure and try a burrito or some more of the specialty items. There WILL be updates in the near future I'm sure.
