ReviewID: RafvDBcCozwsOZPBh0NksQ
ReviewerID: uOwQ2NEQfNVaUVFyAW2Q_g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: STEEL Restaurant &amp; Lounge
Category: Asian Fusion
The first two instances I went to Steel was for the college mixers and I have to admit, it was a fun affair with plush leather couches and a beautiful modern Asian-inspired decor. The waterfall that encompasses almost the first half of the restaurant is gorgeous. Overall the decor is warm, dark, and minimalistic with darling details- a very trendy and hip place to be.. . My group of friends went out for their happy hour, which is an affair that consists of buying an appetizer or drink or combination of the two (I'd do a combination, support Steel so they can continue doing this!). . Arriving around 6:00 pm, the place was packed and people were happy- surely a good sign of the food. Unfortunately, that meant no spots for my group of friends, but luckily they accommodated us. Our server (Michi or Michiko) was so sweet, and very informative. I was also struck by the stellar service when I overheard the server to the table next to us- you will love them.. . Our entire table ordered the Mangotini, a seductive drink with a fresh and juicy mango slice, and I ordered the calamari as well, which had an interesting light batter encasing. The two sauces that came with it were sweet and spicy, and I am a fan of the Sichuan "mala" pepper (hailing from Chengdu myself) in the spicy sauce. Though the portions were small, the appetizer was only $5.. . When we were brought out the complimentary sushi, we were wowed - they first brought out spicy tuna rolls (not chopped), California rolls (pretty standard fare), then amped up the level by bringing out impressive shrimp tempura rolls and a pineapple, ham (unsure?), and cream cheese roll that was pure innovation- thought invoking, surprising, and refreshing at the same time. The shrimp tempura and pineapple rolls were the table favorites, so make sure you practice your chopsticks skills before coming! . . We all left Steel happy and energized, a high vibe to end off the stressful week.. . The second time we came back was for lunch today during the Tax Day promotion, where bento boxes were only $10.40 (I assume a nod to the tax 1040 form). Bento boxes are Japanese lunch boxes with several items served in a compartmentalized fashion, usually with entree and side dishes. Steel's take on the traditional bento boxes include your entree, a Vietnamese egg roll or mango crabmeat spring roll, California roll, a salad that includes onions, cucumbers, and other mixed greens with a Thai Basil &amp; Miso Vinaigrette, as well as brown or steamed rice.. . My friends tried the sea salt chicken, which was of good texture and tastes (like the calamari in concept and sauces too), the lemongrass chicken which was good, and the sushi bento box. I tried my friend's Vietnamese egg roll, and it held a spiced meat flavor that I thought was all right, and my other friend gave me her salmon and tuna nigiri pieces which I thought were above Ru San's in terms of quality and freshness, but certainly not as high up as Urasawa, Masa's, or even Hayakawa.. . I tried the Vietnamese "shaken" beef, and I was completely in love. The sauce was delicious, the beef's texture was so perfect it -melted- in my mouth. . . The crabmeat mango spring roll? Wow. Even though it is imitation crab meat, the combination of mango enhanced the sweetness of the crab and the mint leaf took me by surprise, but it went extremely well on the palate. Then I tried the ensemble with the spicy peanut siracha sauce and the sweet and spice of the siracha sauce with peanuts for texture gave way to a very creative and healthy mango roll. . . There was a lot of food to be finished, and by the end we were stuffed. My friends split a chocolate lava cake, which was delicious and I really liked how they did not serve the vanilla bean ice cream half melted.. . Overall, I have not been disappointed by this culinary experience so far and you would not want to miss out on this experience either.. . The restaurant can be pricey during dinner, but you don't have to go to Steal when you can go to Steel during lunch or promotions.
