ReviewID: RAmBq8cSHsC-K_qwzv4Qug
ReviewerID: aMBhcAa5RYrFLETFbJsbiQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
I am really torn on how to review this restaurant - pretty good food but horrible "promo" experience (my review keeps getting moved to a different board even though it is not just for the "promo" but for the restaurant itself).  . . I made a reservation for 2 for the "promo".  We were all set to order the tuna tartare, farm egg ravioli, barramundi, and sea scallops.  However, when we showed up the menu was different than I remembered.  I thought that I had made the mistake and looked at another restaurant's menu, but no.  I came home and checked the menu posted on "the promo's" own website and it was different.  Our server never even mentioned it.  I read on another yelp reviewer's post that the change was because they misread the promotion and thought it was for $35.  Well, we weren't even offered the option to upgrade any of our dishes.  . . So we ended up ordering a bottle of champagne, 2 coconut lemongrass soups, 1 eggplant, 1 skate, 1 panna cotta, and one chocolate dome.  Then, we each paid $5 extra to get 2 oysters each.  . . Overall, the food was good.  The coconut lemongrass soup was so tasty, the skate was really great.  However, the eggplant dish was a disappointment.  It was nothing special, muddy flavors, and there was a lot of fried food on my plate, which I really didn't like, at all.  It said it was supposed to come with grilled garlic scapes, but I never saw any.  All I saw were big clumps of green been and other unidentified tempura.  And, I could hardly taste the eggplant.  Also, the oysters were a waste of $10 (2 orders).  They were the tiniest oysters I've ever seen in my life.   They were about the size of a sour patch kid.  And one of my oysters was unbelievably tiny even in relation to the three other oysters. It was a little bit of a let down.  They tasted great, but were underwhelming because you hardly had an opportunity to taste them.  . . Our server was very nice and informative.  But, upon learning that he never even mentioned or explained the menu change, I am pissed!  When I read the menu, I was really disappointed but thought it was my mistake.  No, it was Spring's mistake.  You are a business, try reading and confirming details before you participate in a promotion!  No one mentioned the change when they called to confirm my reservation (even though I mentioned that we would be participating in the "the promo" promotion), when we showed up, or when they gave us the changed menu.  . . How disappointing from what would otherwise be a great place to eat..   And, it is only a couple blocks from where I live.  I think the restaurant should have conducted themselves in a more professional manner, maybe told me about the menu change and explained themselves for the dramatic changes to their "promo" menu.  I don't think I will be going back to Spring based on how they handled this.
