ReviewID: RaozcWRRPiDRyOLYhEMfOA
ReviewerID: HXjk1RVfLMPeZxitnk1Auw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Feast
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I used to like Feast, their food was good.  But now the service is so far beyond terrible that I can't imagine eating there.  The last time I was there we waited 10 minutes for a server.  When I finally asked the nearest waitress to tell our server we were ready she said, "I am your server (glare).  I'm very busy."  She had refilled the coffee of everyone in our section twice, and I sincerely thought she wasn't our server because she had never identified herself.  I asked then if she could take our order, and she said, "I can't do that now, I'm getting coffee."  This was not coffee for me, as no one brought us coffee cups.. . After another 10 minutes, I went to the hostess to ask for a new table.  The hostess did not apologize for the inconvenience.  We were seated at a table that was dripping with water.  The waiter took another five minutes to come to us.  It was as if we hadn't already been in the restaurant for 15 minutes and we had to move to the back of the line for having the temerity to change tables.  After another 5 minutes we finally received a cup of coffee for me and a drink for my friend and our orders were taken.. . After a 15 minute wait for Eggs Benedict and potatoes, I went to the manager.  She told me that they were really busy.  I said it really wouldn't have taken any longer to apologize for the wait than it would have taken to say "I'm really busy."  She said I really should have come to her earlier (which I thought was odd, because at this point 2 waiters and the hostess knew there was an issue, so I don't understand why she didn't come to me and I had to find her to address this).  There was another 10 minute wait.  No food.  No "sorry for the trouble, have a free drink."  The best we got was seeing the manager talking to the original server by their station, but whether that was to correct her behavior, or simply to commiserate about us, I have no idea.  In any case, I said I had really waited long enough, I had appointments and had to go.  The manager said, "I apologize. (glare)"  And that was that.  . . At least she didn't run out into the street to demand that we pay for the one cup of coffee I drank (no one came back to offer a refill) or my friend's watered-down drink.  . . To be fair, the guys busing the tables were running like lightening.  Anyone who did get served, must have received their food piping hot, direct from the kitchen.  It is possible that the atrocious service is a brunch thing.. . So, I didn't get any food.  From what I remember the last time I was there, the food might have been good.  After that long a wait, I feel comfortable giving the restaurant one star, even without tasting the food.
