ReviewID: RaSRdT-JNOREONc3qGJ4Bw
ReviewerID: n0Fuxfx1esXP_iWaMFCz9g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wilde Bar &amp; Restaurant
Category: Pubs
Wilde's is a sophisticated Irish themed restaurant in East Lakeview.  I used to go on a regular basis when I lived in the neighborhood.  I enjoy a good Irish pub and so the first thing that attracted me to Wilde's is that they had a properly served Guinness and carried Redbreast Whiskey.  . . Wilde's is one of the few places that East Lakeview comes together as a whole.  It is gay friendly, there's a reason it is named Oscar Wilde's in the first place.  Many of the staff are GLTB.  But, I felt very comfortable in Wilde's as a straight man because the entire community finds its way into Wilde's and the restaurant is not "claimed" by one group or another.  The families and older couples come for the food, the professionals come on dates and the younger folks come to drink at the end of the evening.  Wilde's is very good about transforming itself throughout the evening so that at times it feels like a restaurant and at other times a bar.. . The food is very good.  Not pub food, it is quality restaurant food.  The portions are large like many restaurants.  As such, you will pay traditional (non fancy) restaurant prices.  Dinner for two with a drink is easily 40 dollars.  . . My complaint about the food is the removal of the corned beef from the menu as a regular item recently.  The corned beef, which was served hot with a sweet glaze and also was presented as a sandwich item, is no longer a regular item but is a special on Mondays.  I must say this is very disappointing because corned beef seems to be a staple for an Irish themed location.  When in Rome.  There are other items, including Sheppard's Pie, but to me the removal of the corned beef seems nonsensical.  Why don't you remove the Guinness tap while you are at it?  Cut something other than corned beef.  There is also the wine and beer selection that one would expect in an established restaurant / bar location.  . . There is also a library area with a fireplace, chairs and tables.  You can both eat and drink back there and it makes a cozy place and also a nice date or friend catching up spot.. . I have to say that Wilde's does get some of the younger and crazier Lincoln Park / Lakeview crowd in it and some of the yuppies from the neighborhood especially later in the evening but usually the older crowd is already home asleep.
