ReviewID: RAx1BCsFNLxm07xfUDg_Vw
ReviewerID: -HPqE6zhMCArad_-4gyRIQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
For 3 years I've heard the hype built around this place and after years of turning around b/c of frustrating lines I couldn't be bothered with, I finally caught it during a lull and sat down with my girlfriend.... needless to say I was very excited.... I love breakfast!!! . . First off the "too hot for his own good" manager rudely pointed to our seats while not even making eye contact and then topped by basically throwing two menus at me. Our waitress whom was very pushy yet not prompt seemed like she was in outer space and distracted by the other staff members. It seemed like actors and actress auditioning to play rolls as waiters and waitress on a WB pilot. Very tiresome:( . . Then the kitchen staff was very obnoxious considering there proximity to the dinning area. this is all restaurant management 101.... THEN there was the food, absolutely the most absurd portions of food rivaling the Saddle Ranch.. . I ordered Huevos Rancheros and considering the kitchen looked and sounded like they were of latin decent I figured it was a good choice. NOPE! plate presentation was gross!!!!! I m never a picky eater but I found it hard to even start eating it on sight alone. It was basically molten bean, raw egg, tortilla, and literally a half way melted block of cheese, smothered in some kind of broth to simulate enchelada sauce which was basically 1 part water 1 part ketchup. SOUP in other words...  I ORDER HUEVO RANCHERO SOUP!!!!!   Meanwhile my GF is contending with her 80 egg omelet which she could even put a dent into. . . There is more then the bill.... very expensive, some how between both of us I managed to drop about 50 dollars including the 10 percent tip I dropped.  BWT the Cactus Cooler they call fresh OJ was 5 dollars pop plus tax... . . NEVER AGAIN, this place reminds me of a middle school cafeteria.... Do not waste the time standing line go to AROMA down the street for breakfast, its the same price but the service is a bit better and the food is great.
