ReviewID: Rb6CkEdMjzG0umjXpHnzGA
ReviewerID: zLvMd40YpYzTr9jElmZmqw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
I really liked Alcove for its super dog friendly atmosphere and nice selection of bakery and entree items on their menu.  You don't see too many places in LA that offers both and as a person that takes their dog everywhere with them, it's a great option to have available.  Without it though, I'd be tempted to subtract a star  In its current state, it's worth the drive to visit once, but I'm not going to kill myself to get here.. . The patio is probably the best dog friendly patio I've been too.  Of course I haven't come close to trying them all, but I'm very impressed.  You can stop by at the For Pets Only store a couple doors down to get your dog a chew toy so he/she won't be bored watching you enjoy your food.  And you will enjoy it.  I had the lobster omelet (with marble rye!) which was great and my wife had the crabcake sandwich which was very good.  Fries were also very good.  . . Only one major beef I have is regarding their iced coffee policy.  This is becoming more and more of a problem at about every cafe I go to where they have a policy to not give free refills on iced coffee.  I've been told it's bc they specially formulate the mix in a pitcher to account for the ice/water/coffee ratio and to make sure they stay in sync and not watered down. I can understand why they don't offer free refills bc of the "difficulty" it takes to concoct this elusive mixture (and I'm being serious albeit sarcastic), but I usually am offered a free refill of regular hot coffee poured over a cup of ice since regular coffee qualifies for free refills.  Not at Alcove.  75 cents!  Yes I'm a cheapo, especially when it comes to coffee.  I ask if they can just pour regular coffee over ice.  "Only in a mug" they say.  OK, well then can you just pour some in a mug and then I can just pour that in my cup of ice?  "Only if you ordered a regular coffee" was their reply.  So that's what I will have to do next time.  Order a regular cup of coffee and then ask for a cup of ice.   The coffee isn't even that good.. . I'm echoing a lot of the negatives in Fara A.'s review.  Completely agree about their red velvet cupcake and would also echo the same sentiments of their coconut cherry cupcake too.  The frosting was good, but tasted too similar, which makes me think they just spread the same on all their cupcakes.  The cake was good, but nothing special.  Unlike Puka Dog, when I asked for a dog bowl, they said they didn't have any, but gave us a to go container to fill up.  After some reflection, I think it's bc neither Angus or I are as cute.  =  )  Prices are a bit high considering you can go to a full service restaurant and pay the same.  But the food is pretty good so I don't mind as much, and I've already said my piece about the dog friendliness.. . Price: $15 for most entree menu items. Food: Very Good entree - Mediocre cupcakes. Service: OK (Order at the counter - they were friendly until I asked about the iced coffee refill.  Then they were simply matter of fact.). Ambiance: Very Good (great place for breakfast, brunch, or lunch, but you may have have to sit next to some loud obnoxious people). Location: OK (there's a parking lot in the back and metered street parking)
