ReviewID: Rc_tj-C00uvt8__A73yEZA
ReviewerID: oaYm-xPfTjRmzSKQ0N8C3g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
Came here the other day for a nice business lunch, and it was one of the nicest business lunches I had for a while.. . FOOD: If you are a cheese connoisseur, this place is a MUST.  I don't particularly care for cheese by itself (unless it's pepper jack) but goodness the burrata here is HEAVENLY.  Oh my.  It doesn't look like much - actually it looks pretty gross when you first see it, just a big white blobby thing in oil.  But trust me, the oil (it's extra virgin olive oil) is very light, and though the texture of the cheese might throw you a bit at first, its fresh, clean, slightly salty taste just melts in your mouth and is just...can I say it again... HEAVENLY.  I never thought I'd appreciate cheese so much until I came here.  A very, very close second is the fresh mozzarella.  It's almost like the burrata cheese, but in a more solid, slightly sharper tasting (but still very mild) form.  My lactose intolerant tummy was screaming bloody murder at this point, but for a taste of cheese like this - WORTH IT!!!  Other stuff.... polenta with mushrooms was good, but truth be told I barely remember it after that cheese.  It's a good thing I don't live closer to this place or else it would really test my attempts at being vegan for the month!. . AMBIENCE: Very nicely, and appropriately, set in Downtown Culver City, right off of Culver Blvd and Cardiff.  Truly it's places like this that totally raise my respect for Culver City, which I used to think as boring and non-descript.  We ate out on the patio and on a nice day, you really can't ask for a better lunch.  Service was nice enough, but to tell the truth, I was so enraptured by the cheese and being outside, away from work on a nice sunny day that I could care less about how much I was waited on.  Just bring me a hammock and I'm officially on vacation!  One downside DOES need to be mentioned though - the place can be hard to find if you're driving.  It's sandwiched between the Tender Greens and some art gallery off Culver Blvd without any really visible signage.  Best to park in the Cardiff lot first and walk there.  Also, this is perhaps a personal peeve, but the name...really??!! Ford's FILLING Station?  Sounds like a cheap lecherous pub rather than a very nice restaurant with VERY nice cheese.  But I guess, even if it WAS a cheap pub with cheap lecherous men (and women, too, I guess), so long as that cheese was there... I'd be in!. . PRICES: Oooh I'm bad.  Lunch was on my business partners so I didn't pay attention.  The restaurant does seem somewhat shee-shee (but with a super nice outdoor eating area) so my guess is that you'd be looking to spend $25 for lunch, perhaps $30 for dinner, but you'd leave absolutely stuffed with the best cheese on earth.  Great value?  Perhaps not.  Great experience worth paying for at least once?  For the last time, for that cheese, YES.. . PARKING: Parking at the lot off Cardiff is free for the first two hours.  It's worth doing that rather than fighting with metered street parking, and the restaurant is walking distance from there.
