ReviewID: rCj-YvugViKJmE9IMed1hg
ReviewerID: U7zWHgx-k_JclFUNE2GaFQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I ordered in and picked up my order, it was quick and easy. Parking was a lil harsh but other then that it went smoothly. . . It smells great as soon as you walk in the place, you know it's going to be mouth watering! . . We ordered: . . 2 lb shrimp with 6 pc sausage and 4 corns. 1 lb king crab legs (which was like 2 legs). 1 lobster (big lobster!!). 2 cajun fries . . total was $105. WOW! i was shocked, it was the lobster that was half of that price and the rest of the food added up to the rest. . . The food was good, i can't say it was THE BEST but it was really good. The french fries were really good but second to the seafood for sure, its more like an afterthought. . . We made a mistake and ordered all the seafood with the same seasoning, SHE-BANG. So all of it started to taste the same after awhile. For a $45 dollar lobster it was over cooked and chewy, i actually enjoyed the shrimp better. The shrimp was the best for the money. Next time I would get only shrimp and maybe crab only because i love it so much (here or anywhere)! I just had to TRY the lobster, probably unless someone else gets it , i won't ever pay for it again. . . The SHE-BANG  seasoning mild was actually spicy for me, i'm not a huge spicy fan so even mild was too spicy. My lips and mouth were tingling half way through the meal and made it difficult for me to get through the rest. There was SOO much garlic and the sauce was RED at the bottom of the bag i'm guessing from the cajun mild sauce. . . Next time I would not get all the seafood the same sauce, i would change up the seasonins because it all tasted the same after a while, it would have been good to have variety, but as a newbie that was my bad. . . I suggest try the shrimp for sure and get some corn, and crab if you like crab. THe SHE-BANG was good but spicy, so no kids allowed there... . . one last thing, had I been waiting for a table on a saturday night around 7pm the wait was an hour and 45 mins. in my mind NOT worth it. It was great to pick it up and make a mess at home with rice! lol they don't serve rice and have signs saying you cannot bring any in! So i highly suggest just phoning in the order it takes 10 mins and then stroll right by all the suckers waiting in line and take it home to enjoy!!
