ReviewID: Rd3eoXu4G0hWS6KC-4el-w
ReviewerID: L-5NjRMaE5KClXYJk8HVcA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
alright batali fans, your wait is over. while its mainly a nancy silverton joint, executive chef mat molina trained in batalis kitchen at del posto. overall, the dishes use superb ingredients. i know this is day two, so the place was mobbed during our 9pm reservations. the place is not without flaws, but these are to be expected within the first week and even month of operation.. . started with the arancini alla bolognese (not on web .pdf menu), which are essentially deep fried risotto balls filled with meat and cheese in a bright tasting bolognese.(8 dollars). . next we had the egg, guanciale, radicchio and bagna cauda pizza (12 bux). (wanted to get the lardo until my dining partner found out what it was) the pizza was slightly unevenly cooked with one corner of the pizza excessively charred (im a fan of char), they attempted to scrape off some of the burn but no matter, the texture of the dough was really amazing. i've always been a fan of new york style gas oven slice pizza, and never really liked the lombardi coal oven stuff, but this pizza was really awesome. its not for the waif set, as the pizza was positively bursting with juice. not sure if it was straight olive oil or if it was the bagna cauda. i saw the waiter go back and forth a couple times with our pizza but even with slight post plating steam the pizza came out with a good crunch, except for the very middle. a larger pizza would lose bite integrity with steam exposure, so im happy with the sizing.. . we ended with the piatti del giorno for wednesday which was a sole involtini with capers, parsley and lemon on a bed of boutique watercress. not sure what they are called, but the leaves were quite wide and modern looking while the stems were a little tough but overall had a nice, if a bit strong, bitter taste (im really just nitpicking). overall, the main problem was that the fish was overcooked. not horrendously so, but i anticipated that this might be a problem as the fillets were about 3/8" thick. the mediterranean flavors were bright and clear, and for 17 bucks i was pretty satisfied.. . we were allowed to break a quartino into two tastes as we had already had a couple glasses of wine prior to eating. (12 bux). . we were pretty full by this point as we're not gigantic eaters and opted to skip dessert. im coming back in six days with four people so we'll be rocking a lot of the rest of the menu as well as desserts. cant wait.... . this rockets way up with angelini osteria as my favorite italian joints in town.
