ReviewID: re-_u8YDOw9EUbFxBrT6IA
ReviewerID: TVavohqq3PKK3P_xhsnGyg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
I realize I risk a backlash from the folks who rate Sola otherwise, but...after what I'd categorize as a "nice" dining experience at Sola, I can't say that I'm in a rush to go back.. . After reviewing such rave reviews, a friend of mine and I had looked forward to trying a couple of starters in particular -- the truffle parmesan fries and the kalua potstickers.  The potstickers were very good, although as I ate them I wished that the pork itself had more flavor -- I found myself trying to scrape every last drop of the  mango kumquat salsa and cilantro oil off the plate.  I'd recommend them, but again...wish the potsticker itself had more going on.  As for the truffle parmesan fries...well, they were...just fries.  As I ate them, I couldn't help but think that there really wasn't much there and that I would have appreciated them more had I had a hot dog or burger to accompany them. Of the other sides and appetizers, I'd skip them.. . My friend had the beef tenderloin special and I had the scallops with wild mushroom/leek risotto.  Scallops had the slightest flavor of wasabi, complementing the clear Asian influence in the rest of the dish.  Good, but not spectacular.  My friend liked her beef but again...good but not something to rave about.. . The highlight of the meal had to have been dessert, where we split the blueberry lemongrass creme brulee.  A different spin on something traditional, we didn't leave any of it behind.  Delicious. . . What I loved about this place was the decor -- a true modern/minimalist ambiance creates a welcoming atmosphere as you enter.  It's in a quiet part of Lakeview, which also makes it attractive.  That said, while Sola didn't do anything "wrong," it just didn't dazzle me to a point where I'd include it on my list of places to send friends nor the list of places I'm in a hurry to get back to.  With all the places in Chicago to visit, Sola, while admittedly good, just doesn't make the shortlist.
