ReviewID: RevXVB0wsMRFbpbPNVUNcA
ReviewerID: y0X8bWVVP6bzlIVEZovfjg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
I'm in love with Comme Ca. That's all there is to it.. . The modern French brasserie concept is certainly not a unique one, but chef David Myers does it really well. Everything from the food to the interior design is understated, simple and well-executed.. . The dining room is clean and bright, all white, red and black. The grey-white walls are lined with white leather banquettes, and adorned with a variety of framed mirrors of all shapes and sizes. Bright white plastic chairs are seated around each table and a wide dark wood bookcase stretches across the right-hand wall, displaying various glasses and dinnerware. The tall windows near the front entrance let in a ton of light during the day and look out onto Melrose Ave.. . I first tried Comme Ca for brunch with my roommate when we lived in West Hollywood. It quickly became one of my favorite brunch spots, when I saw the egg-driven brunch menu. When I wake up in the morning, I don't want pancakes. I don't want waffles. I don't want cereal or oatmeal or toast. I WANT EGGS. So bravo to Comme Ca for giving egg-frenzied brunchers like me a place to call home. . . Recommended brunch option: the croque madame. Croque madame, to me, is the breakfast food of the gods. Ham? Gruyere? Buttery toasty bread? Yeah, you got it. That would be good enough on it's own but add a fried egg on top of it and it takes it to a whole new level. Consider this my ode to the croque madame. Needless to say, I've had quite a few croques madame in my day, and though the one at Comme Ca may not take the prize for Best Croque Madame Ever (that would go to Daniel Boulud's new restaurant in NY's East Village DBGB), it does easily win the Best Croque Madame in LA category. . . When my parents came out from the east coast for a visit last year, Comme Ca was where I immediately took them for dinner and we were not disappointed in the least. I can't even think of anything negative about this meal. It was just one good thing after another. We started with the beef marrow &amp; oxtail jam since my dad is a beef marrow junkie. I know something is good when my dad sits quietly and just mumbles "mmmmmMMMMMM." So... that's that.. . My parents split the special of the day: the roasted chicken for two. Just as my dad's measure of a good Italian restaurant is how well they do a simple plate of spaghetti and meatballs, my mom's measure of a good French restaurant is how well they roast a chicken. I ordered the steak frites, which was a really thick slab of beef served with a mountain of pommes frites. Even though this was already plenty of food, we decided to order the haricots verts with lardons and the macaroni and cheese as well. Everything was phenomenal.. . Another plus : this place has a cheese bar! Swooooonnn.. . Comme Ca used to have little pastries and sweet bites from Boule on its dessert menu, but with the closing of Boule, these items are obviously now absent from the menu. That's really the only down side I can think of.... and it may not even be a negative. I haven't tried Comme Ca's desserts but I have a feeling (based on the rest of the menu) that the desserts are strong enough to stand on their own without the Boule supplements.
