ReviewID: RFA_Uiq1RZW700vWnNqkEw
ReviewerID: 6r4SmwegABoWT-4-3KsvyQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Hate to say it, but... Fraiche lives up to the hype... No question.... . Went solo for a Sunday night bite, following a cross country flight home from holiday travel. Couldn't have had a better experience.. . Atmosphere - a nice combination of cozy and lively. 7-8 tables inside, with fairly substantial outside seating (which was tent covered to ward off the "brutal" LA winter). The bar was decked with dark wood and steel in an interesting angular configuration. It was dimly lit, some might say romantic... but I was by myself, so I refuse to apply that term. It gave off that nice "evening out" feel of low soft light, and yet was light enough that I was able to read a magazine (nerd alert, I know) in between chatting with the bartender..... . Crowd - young and fun, with a decent bit of "family time" mixed in. Around 10PM, a couple regulars rolled in for a night cap.... clearly, they knew the wait staff and they added a nice, lively energy to compliment the classic, homey feel of the Sunday evening.... . Service - Alyssa, the bartender, was great. She was engaging, bright (a rarity in LA), proactive, but not pushy attentive... knew when to pour another glass of wine, and when to pour a glass of water. She politely advised against my initial wine selection... "that one is good, but I think you'll love this one"... and she was right... excellent suggestion. Clearly, the owner/manager is very selective in their hiring.      . . Food - top notch. Started with the Beef Tartare.... it was a solid balance of clean and crispness... almost ceviche like... but with the authentic taste of beef.... really good. Followed it with the Pork Chop entree. Deep flavor and very tender. The potato chive puree and vegetables were a nice compliment... and I don't know what "violet mustard" is, but I do know that I now want it every time I eat a pork chop... outstanding. Both dishes were served with style, but not so much that the plate becomes a work of art rather than a meal. . . Price - not really cheap, but well within reason given the excellent food and overall experience. Right price point for a legitimate night out. . . Fraiche is definitely worth it. Good date spot, and perfect for a night with friends (or solo) eating at the bar.
