ReviewID: RfffRMkP6sXbwrsitKBmCg
ReviewerID: RLJX96Lar9UoZ3xsPAidlw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Yes, I did. I admit to have said that DTF is over hyped. I still think it's over hyped, but I also never said that it isn't good. But this place isn't as good as the xiao lung bao houses in Shanghai or the DTF in Shanghai. But... there will always be comparisons and this DTF location is really as good as it gets here as far as I know. Green field vs. Fogo De Chao. Cool Haus vs. Diddy Riese. 888 vs. Elite. Well, some of those comparison are obviously lopsided, but it brings to my point that it's hard to compete with DTF on it's good day. . . Prior to my previous two times I've visited this xiao lung bao establishment, it wasn't all that memorable. I would settle with Dumpling Master, which is still great for it's price and not having to wait 45 minutes IMO. However, after visiting the DTF in Shanghai, I would occasionally long for the thinly, perfectly rolled xiao lung bao skin with the juicy pork that melts in your mouth or the crab xiao lung bao, in which DTF SH has it good especially during crab season there in Fall season.. . My recent visit (just past this weekend) really earned them a 5 star because I can't think of any other place that has better xiao lung bao. If you know, pass me the info. As of now, I really don't know which place can produce a thinner skin with a juicier pork. Would you great Shanghainese restaurants please stand up? How bout that Shanghai rice cake they got? Or the daam daam mien (noodle with peanut sauce; I'm sorry if you're alergic, but that's not my problem.. yet)? All were served piping hot this past Sunday. It was superb to top it off with the black sesame bun for dessert at the end.. . I can't wait to come back here again. For those who wants dim sum, this is not the place to go. This place is for those who wants good Shanghainese food, delicately wrapped pork soup dumpling. And please, vinegar and ginger only.
