ReviewID: rFmFpDn7NH_HZeq_KdknKw
ReviewerID: mteJOlja359dj7XYQnKzCg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Add test case for checking addresses with only 1 or 2 digits.. . I've been coming to this place since I was in high school, and believe me folks, that was a whiii - iile ago.  So for one thing, it has withstood the test of time :)  Personally speaking, I like to come here for special occasions, because it has a somewhat fancy but not over-the-top feel to it.  . . As the name states, this place is most well-known for...surprise surprise, Prime Rib.  The meat is brought table-side and hand carved, so they come in a variety of sizes, from the measly little California Cut, to the giant Beef Bowl Cut (served to Rose bowl teams in the past), or even have it w/ Lobster tail.... . Get any cut you want, though I'd go w/ the Lawry's, which will satisfy even the healthiest of appetites, esp with the bread, the salad, and the sides, should you choose to order one, and I would strongly recommend to do that; order a side, and then one more...I did say this place is most well-known for it's prime rib, but probably just as well-known for the awesome Creamed Corn and Creamed Spinach sides.  I absolutely love these sides, and if you didn't know already, I'm not even the biggest, "side" person.  In fact, I try to take an order of the sides to go whenever I go.  Sides are $6 each, but definitely worth it.. . Definitely a unique experience to eat here, one which I never tire of.  From the way they make their "spinning salad" to bringing the meat right at your table while they cut it, to the general ambiance and feel, it's awesome.  And I keep mentioning it, but you are paying for everything here.  Look at about $40 per person minmum here when your final bill comes through. . . Service - always great...and yes, you are paying for it, so eat it up...literally.  The serving staff are always friendly and very attentive to your every need(again, because you are paying for it), but it's not pretentious in anyway.  . . Parking - $6 for valet, and there isn't really any self parking around, save for..actually, I'm not even sure if you CAN park on La Cienega.  If you're looking to park elsewhere, be prepared to walk at least a few blocks from the surrounding neighborhood.  Probably the only ding, but hey, if you're gonna go spend $40-50 per person on your meal, I think the $6 is a throw-away.. . All in all, two thumbs and big toes up! . . @ Christine Y - I had Mrs Sargeant the last time I was there!
