ReviewID: rgpKhphVRmXFsRb6HQ0wQg
ReviewerID: sBbkuNv_Vwy5MU0hypL1bw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
My wife and I got married a few days ago, and wanted to celebrate with a nice dinner. Tru is about as perfect a place for this sort of thing as one could ever hope for.. . We walked in, and the hostess told my wife that she looked pretty. The table was pulled out for her, and they asked her if it was set at a comfortable distance. They give you an option of black or white napkin. The wait for drinks was basically zero. I'm not a wine expert by any stretch, so I asked the sommelier to suggest a glass; her suggestion was very good and relatively inexpensive.. . Breads offered were all very good. The Sea Salt Brioche was fabulous. Salted and unsalted butter from Vermont were placed on the table in blue and clear dishes. I really could've eaten the salted butter with a spoon.. . Prix Fixe. Hawaiian blue prawns in creole sauce and jalapeno oil, with grits and miniature buttermilk biscuit was the winner of my wife's very good beet salad with granny smith apples and trio of mousses (including goat cheese mousse; I've forgotten the other two).. . Main courses were a terrific duck breast roulade with swiss chard, wild rice, mushroom custard, and a stuffed brussels sprout for me; braised short rib w/ unagi (eel) and miso emulsion for her. Both outstanding.. . I had the chocolate bar and wattleseed ice cream with malted caramel and caramel mousse -- incredible. My wife ordered the grape sorbet w/ nutella chocolate, manchego cheese, and basil. The sorbet was phenomenal -- overwhelming flavor when put in your mouth, but somehow didn't overpower the other flavors on the plate.. . Service was impeccable every step of the way. The servers were coordinated, and there was very little wait between courses; any wait at all was alleviated by several memorable amuse-bouche. The exploding mint truffle mentioned by the previous review was a really nice and exciting way to end the meal.. . As we walked out, the host handed us two rhubarb muffins "for your coffee tomorrow morning." . . Felt 100 percent justified in spending the $350. A great special-occasion restaurant.
