ReviewID: rIRgJU5bCTWopiaggDy5PQ
ReviewerID: biZ0fIcZp7B-KBJ3EGcX7Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Moody&#39;s Pub
Category: Pubs
The exterior of this building reminds me of a church.  The interior is dungeonesque.  We came in here to have a few beers to celebrate a friends birthday.  The experience was middle of the road.  . . Upon entering, I became very disoriented.  We came in from the bright sunshine of a spring afternoon, and were greeted with a very dim (that's really an understatement) interior.  There are no overhead fixtures, just a few wall sconces with dimmed bulbs and candles flickering away on the tables.  I had to squint, and only because someone was waving at us, could I detect that was our party. . . No sooner did we sit down, we were greeted by a member of the waitstaff.  We settled on a pitcher of the Berghoff Dark (one of my personal favorites.)  It was brought to us promptly.  Since we had dinner plans for later, we did not partake in the burgers so many rave about.  And after sitting inside for about an hour, I don't think I would have been able to eat.  The ventilation system is nearly non-existent, and the only smell was of frying burgers.  All good for the first five minutes, not so for the rest.  I could have cut the smoke filtering the room with a knife.  . . About halfway through the our pitcher of beer, I needed to locate the restroom.  I found it, but really wished I would have brought my night-vision goggles.  The bathroom was clean, but like the whole building, old.  The bathrooms are well lit, and on the way back to our table, I found myself bumping into every table on the way.  They pretty much pack em' in like sardines.  I did catch a glimpse of the beer garden (it was getting a little chilly once the sun went down) and it looked like a nice spot to sit and enjoy the burgers and beer.  . . Will I go back?  Maybe if I find myself nearby this summer, and have a burger and brew in the garden.  As of now, I've still got bruises on my legs from my journey to the bathroom there.
