ReviewID: RkiUf-AAVgYRcMEa3e-5mQ
ReviewerID: hUsqkZTLutJNrShq6mKx5g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Aaaaah Cut.  The cadillac of steak joints in L.A., supposedly, no? The dwelling place of "Kobe" beef.  Or this "American Wagyu" stuff.  . . I went there as a celebratory thing. Nothing special. Just graduation from law school. (Ok, to be honest, I had quite a few celebratory meals, but this was the first one).  . . Our reservation was for 5:30 pm or so, but they wouldn't seat us until our entire party of 4 was here. We all arrived separately, the last of whom showed up at 7!!  But props to Cut for holding our table for us.  From everything I'd heard and from what the hostess told me, they "just don't hold reservations, really."  Shiiiiiz, they held it for us! So a gold star to them just for doing that. . . After we were seated, the first thing I took note of was our immediate surroundings.  The ambiance definitely left something to be desired.  I understand that it's not going for the old school mahogany old boys' club feel of say Mastro's or Ruth Chris', but the environment almost seemed a bit too casual. Super high ceilings and spacey walkways gave it almost a cafe-like vibe.  So, it's definitely not cozy or romantic.  . . Food. Aaaah, the food. The most important thing.  . The appetizers were extremely disappointing.  The ox-tail soup was probably the worst offender of my tongue.  As bland as you can get with no redeeming quality other than to fill the stomach up a bit.  We ordered 3 other appetizers but I've already dismissed them from my mind.  You get the point.  . As for steak, I ordered the American Wagyu.  Excellent.  Great steak.  Very well cooked and seasoned.  What else can I say? . . Service.  Great.  Very attentive and friendly.  But, they walked around a bit too much around us, so it felt like we were eating amidst some sort of hustle and bustle.  I think this also added to the cafe-like vibe I alluded to above.  If I had repeatedly stuck my leg out throughout the 3 hours I was there, I would have tripped about 27 people. . . Anyway, as always, the key question is: would I go back?  Yes, I think so, if I specifically wanted Wagyu or if I wanted to try their "Kobe" beef, and if I was feeling rather generous towards myself. I'd take care not to order any appetizers or sides, even, that's for sure.  Besides that, I'd much prefer Mastro's.
