ReviewID: RMASVMFSg9yw5IE8MC6EiA
ReviewerID: CC8PZ5qfH8Ebs2j2dkNOIg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Holeman &amp; Finch Public House
Category: American (New)
Grabbed a few plates and a drink at Holeman &amp; Finch last night. First, let me say that the space is very cool. I really like how you can see into the kitchen when you enter, and I love the hanging cured meats. (This place is not vegan/vegetarian friendly.) There are two options for seating. The speak easy section (kinda first come first serve with a large family style table in the center) and the bar section which can get loud. Since it was Monday, and not as crowded, we opted for the bar and grabbed a table.. . I started with a signature cocktail. I apologize, I can't remember the name, and it isn't on the menu online, but it was the top one on the menu there, and was suggested by the server. It also had pernod, which I wasn't sure I would like, but the licorice flavor was subtle, and actually worked really well with the drink.. . As for the food, we ordered the gentleman's relish with toast, the carbonara with pancetta, and the skirt steak with potatoes. The portions were very small, so you may need to order several to fill up. The skirt steak was cooked rare, but was still fairly tough. It was served with a tasty chimichurri sauce, but unfortunately was sitting in a bowl of grease. The potatoes in the dish were also coated in grease. It was a bit unappealing. The gentleman's toast was crunchy and buttery. Score! The relish was delicious, but is probably not for everyone. The server said you either love it or hate it. I loved it. It was made with anchovies, salt, pepper, butter, and vinegar. Lastly, and probably my favorite of all the dishes we had was the carbonara. It was served with an over-easy egg that we stirred into the dish adding additional  richness to an already intense flavor. The saltiness of the pancetta kicked up the flavor as well, and the noodles were thicker which I really liked. . . All in all after the three dishes and drinks, the meal was about $45 which is totally affordable. We weren't stuffed, but were satisfied. The food was ok. It's definitely bar food, and extremely fatty and greasy, which I'm not crazy about, but overall the flavor was good. I wasn't totally blown away, but I will definitely come back for Round 2 to taste more dishes and drinks. . . Final thoughts: cool space. greasy/fatty food. awesome drinks.
