ReviewID: RMIeUGSUpYig5q5Pko_eMg
ReviewerID: mzGn1m7bwmMV0n9_2RK-jQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Words cannot describe the disgust and loathing I feel toward the food served at Lawry's Prime Rib.  LA Meat institution or not, some things are just better left alone.. . As a former vegetarian, it's enough that I was convinced to come and eat here.  It's another thing entirely, that I deluded myself into thinking I could handle a Prime Rib Dinner.  Because let's face it folks, there's really nothing else here worth ordering.  Seafood?  Really!?  At a prime rib place that has a whopping 7 items on the menu (5 of which are progressively larger cuts of Prime Rib).  Anyway, against my better judgment I opted for the English Cut of Prime Rib (8oz, thinly cut).. . Let's pause here for a second and talk about the portion sizes.  Even the smallest cut of the Prime Rib Dinner (California Cut) is served with enough food to feed a family.  Imagine my shock when our server told me about how the average person orders a full Lawry's cut ($37.00), which is HUGE, and eats the WHOLE THING along with all of their sides.  Texans and Oklahoma-ans would be impressed.. . Sick sick sick.. . The first part of the meal was the salad.  Everyone talks about the magic spinning salad bowl with dressing poured from on high.  Cool stuff.  Wait.  No.  It's only cool if the salad actually tastes good.  The dressing on the salad tasted like the cheap thousand island dressing you might enjoy at fine dining establishments like McDonald's and Wendy's.  To me, the salad was inedible (aka: -not- incredible).. . Next, the magic silver cart that could easily fit 3 corpses (more if they were hacked into pieces or ground up).  This guy in a chef's hat rolls up to our table and slashes up big slabs of meat all around.  My cut of meat suddenly looks like a whole lot of food.  My mind wanders to exactly what the biggest cut looks like.  Probably 5 pounds of meat.   Ugh.. . But wait, our server then heaps like a gallon of creamed spinach , mashed potatoes w/gravy , and creamed corn RIGHT ON TOP OF MY MEAT!  WTF.  Yep.  That's right.  We're talking elementary school cafeteria style.  And that's about how good my food tasted.  I scraped my meat clean, took a couple of bites, and that was it.  I guess at the end of the day it's my fault for thinking that prime rib was a reasonable dinner choice, but dayam if I ever go back there.. . Two redeeming qualities:. Service: Top Notch.  Our server, Mrs. Sargent, was fantastic, funy, helpful, friendly, and even brought us a doggy bag of bones after our meal to bring home to the pup.. Bread: Their fresh bread was delicious.  Albeit unnecessary considering how much other food appeared at the table.
