ReviewID: RN1aYenJGfldmr5othp_ng
ReviewerID: Ewpl3KFu__mdsvNox6v8UQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Crust
Category: Pizza
Gotta say I was reluctant to go, but very happy I did.. . Even a reformed New Yorker like I am still misses some things from home like real thin-crust pizza and real bagels, and are forever searching for local proxies for same.  On that note, NY Bagel &amp; Bialy and Santullo's offer reasonable options in both categories.. . But I digress.  Back to Crust.. . I'm all for sustainable this and locally-grown that and pesticide reduction and the lot, but sometimes people push all that business way over the big line labeled "Pretentious."  I also love cool restaurants in Wicker Park, Bucktown, etc., but add a one-syllable name like "Mod" or "Toast" or "Schwa" or "Zip" or "Up," maybe throw in a black mock turtleneck, and we all know the risks.. . So when my wife suggested we go with friends to an organic pizza joint named "Crust" I feared the worst.  But when she asked "have I ever steered you wrong?" I realized that "let me think about it" was the wrong answer for obvious marital reasons and bit the bullet.. . Anyway, I'm digressing again.  The restaurant.. . Hostess said 30-minute wait for a table, which turned into an hour.  Then she gave us 'tude.  Not a good start.  Fortunately that was the only hiccup.. . Food was delicious.  Salads were so fresh the lettuce was practically still mooing.  Service was prompt and our server (Connie?) was an absolute delight.  One very small kitchen oversight was corrected quickly and with a sincere smile.  I had a glass of Rhone red that was very nice and great with the pizza.. . The pizza: Dough was indeed a perfect balance of chewy and crispy, as others here have mentioned.  Toppings and cheese were also super-fresh and perfectly balanced.  One pizza, which had shrimp and cilantro and some other stuff, was a great mix of flavors.. . I admit there were pretentious undertones here and there, such as the list of house-infused vodkas which are probably perfectly tasty but were a little too artsy sounding for their own good.  And an important technical note: Crust is not New York-style pizza, but New Yorkers will still approve.. . The only two dessert options offered weren't compelling, but we didn't expect much in that department and we were happily full of pizza and salad, so it didn't matter.. . Prices were very reasonable, especially given the quality of the food, which made it easy to try lots of different things at once.. . A great musician once said "All we are saying, is give pizza a chance."  Go to Crust and do that.. . And yes, fine, my wife was right.
