ReviewID: rN8wsHvqRNvJNYGY1hesBg
ReviewerID: HbXx5_Io6Qs_1_LtuCHl9A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
First time at this restaurant with friends that "LOVE IT"... here's my experience.... . Took 10-15 minutes to get seated (even though we had reservations). But that was OK, because it gave us a chance to enjoy some drinks in the bar area &amp; OOOoohhh &amp; Aaahhh over the inground aquarium. I ordered the Beverly Martini, which was GREAT!! I am not a martini fan.. but this was excellent! Side note.. the music in the bar area is ridiculous and appears to have a personality crisis. It went from "screeching type" world music to 1990's Sublime! Very odd... . . Anyways... we were seated in a tiny table upstairs and then "reseated" 5 minutes later, to accommodate a larger group that needed our table. This was fine, because we got a bigger table and had only ordered our water. . . We waited about 5-10 more minutes, at our new table, before our waiter came back. This was a TAD annoying.... So when he finally arrived, we just ordered everything at once! We didn't want to risk not seeing him again for 10 minutes. . . My husband ordered the sampler platter (little did he know it was $54)... it was delivered with 4 different appetizers and 3 dipping sauces. The dish was just dropped off at our table with no explanation and left us guessing what was inside the deep fried roll and the wonton! Finally we asked a passing waiter and he explained "what was what" &amp; "what to dip what into!" ... Hmmmphh! They should've been explained to begin with!!  (being the vegetarian of the group, I didn't actually try any of the apps, but I was told it was good...but very overpriced). Also ordered the shrimp toast.. which again (I was told) was very good. . . Another round of drinks... We order 3 MaiTai's, 1 Beverly martini and a Shirley temple. 5-10 minutes later our drinks arrive (minus the Shirley temple). Apparently they had to go find more grenadine?? The MaiTai's were VERY good however. . . Onto dinner..... . Our friends say the garlic noodles are "orgasmic" ... but my husband and I think that they're just "good".  Maybe it was the hype... maybe they were JUST GOOD. (not great, not bad.. just good. Which still in itself.. is good!  =) . . My husband ordered the cracked crab without the shell (which is a bit more expensive, but worth it). He said it was a lot of crab and very tasty with the spices.  Mixing the crab with the garlic noodles were delicious.. . I ordered 1 of 5 vegetarian options the "Ragout Eggplant" .. which was basically a big pot of vegetable stew. I am not a fan of eggplant... but it was excellent and I am beginning to think I like eggplant!! As a side note.. I think this could be easily ordered &amp; shared amongst the table! Just to get your daily vegetable intake. It was very tasty and everyone enjoyed the veggies I shared with them!!! Also... I mixed my noodles in the veggie sauce, &amp; the noodles were even better than before! . . Here's my biggest gripe...  along the same lines of the other service "issues".... I asked for some wine recommendations or a sommelier and our waiter referred me to the "wine expert" (his words, not mine!!) So after 5-10 minutes the guy finally came over and recommended a "very sweet white wine".. sounds good to me!! But when the wine arrived it was the EXACT OPPOSITE! Have you ever had a bitter, sour white wine??? That's what I got. Yuck!! After a few sips I flagged the "wine expert" down and told him I didn't like it. He just stared at me.. like "what do you expect me to do?" .. I then told him I wanted it taken off the bill. He said "OK" and still stood there. It was very odd and made me uncomfortable. . . Onto Desserts.. . We ordered 3 to share... 1. Banana Fritter - good, but not excellent.. it's just the run of the mill deep fried banana with ice cream.. 2. Pineapple Bread Pudding - again.. good, but not excellent. It tasted like a pineapple upside down cake. 3. Crème Brule... What a joke! I should've asked for this off the bill as well. WTF! It was mushy and flavorless, not to mention the shell was non existent! Yes it was black on top, but there was no crunchy'ness and the overall dish was just poor. . . OH... and there is an issue with the restroom. There is 1 line for 3 toilets (1 man, 1 woman and 1 unisex). Everyone who went to them said it was odd and the line was long. There's also a busboy directing where people were to go.  The whole bathroom concept was pretty dumb, considering the restaurant was large and accommodated a lot of people. I felt pretty bad for our pregnant friend having to wait in line for 5 minutes for a toilet. Completely ridiculous!. . WRAP-UP.... Our bill (after tip) came to (about) $400 for 4 people. A little overpriced, especially thinking I've had a better meal &amp; experience  at NOBU for less. But, in the end..we all enjoyed our drinks, appetizers &amp; dinner. The desserts were under whelming and I HIGHLY recommend you to SKIP them! The service was not the best &amp; the "wine expert" is a joke.
