ReviewID: RNycbpsAkYh2cy27GoW-1g
ReviewerID: egYwrFDfbnV91ioNUZ8TAA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Xe Tang -- Tank Noodle Restaurant
Category: Vietnamese
My newly acquired/discovered addiction to PHO (replacing good old Chicken Soup as a cure-all) has proven to be quite challenging. . . Seeking the best/ultimate PHO I have received generous advice and insights from Dee W., Yin L., Jack P., Max Power B, Henry S, Tammy Q and Mistey N (plus a little help from Chowhound - sorry - I don't mean to sound like a traitor!) - and the results are so conflicting that I am going to follow Yin L.'s advice - and just try them ALL and come to my own conclusions!*. . *(Note: not only is this a very subjective matter - my experience tells me that the one thing you can count on is INCONSISTENCY!). . Anyway, starting with Tank Noodle (we've been there twice now) and the two experiences were, well, inconsistent.. . Both times - the food was pretty good and the service was pretty okay (especially the 2nd time - when it was not at all crowded...). . Like Jack P. - we chose the Broadway entrance - which I think means you will get seated a lot faster. But when seated by that door - you will feel the glare of those waiting in line, mentally (and physically) WILLING you to hurry up and  get outta there!. . The Pho itself is flavorful and refreshing (thanks to that platter of fresh herbs, hot pepper slices, mung bean sprouts and lime wedges,). . When crowded, the service lags and the atmosphere/ambience is less than desirable. So just tune it all out a focus on your dining companion - even if you can't hear a word being said...). . The Spring Rolls were good too - even if they look a little too much like a phallus in a condom... But they were very accommodating when we mentioned that my husband is dealthy allergic to shrimp so PLEASE no shrimp in the broth or spring rolls.... The Bubble Tea was pretty good too. . . (Since the only other Argyle "pho place" we've tried yet is Pho Xe Lua - which I will review in a moment - and is Dee W.'s current favorite) - we have/had little to go on.). . We will follow Yin L's advice and try to try them all - we will keep you posted. But I certainly would not hesitate to go back to Tank - it IS reliable - if  not necessarily "the best..." It is best to go on a weekday - or an off hour if you want good service and a leisurely meal.. . (Aside: I always order extra noodles and extra meat  ($1 each) - which comes in a HUGE bowl - which means I can take home enough leftover soup to provide lunch for several days...)  Now on to Pho Xe Lua...
