ReviewID: ROI0DyiAxWaatCP_9VmbMQ
ReviewerID: LM7ocH2zSW5e7LqCfGdjKA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yard House
Category: Bars
Recently came here on a Weds night and it was about two hours before happy hour at 10pm so my date and I decided just chill there til then! lOl For a Weds night, it was pretty crowded! The place was literally packed solid! They gave us a buzzer and said it'll be a 5-10 min wait so we decided to wait at the bar, but there were NO seats left! =[ . So we went back to the front and waited and after about 3 minutes we got buzzed and was seated at a booth towards the back. Whatevers...  Our server was a blonde chick that was okay but seemed FAKE! She looked like she didn't enjoy her job and she hardly smile when we say thank you or whatever.. If she did, it seemed forced. . I ordered the HAWAIIAN SUNSET martini and the date got some beer... of course. lOl but then on my second round, he SOMEHOW convinced me to have my first beer so I gave in and he ordered me some girly beer! It was fruity and light. Which I like. hahahah!! He ordered a stronger one for himself. Then after just talking endlessly for a while, we ended up ordering the SPINACH CHEESE DIP and the pita like chips were good but the dip was sorta dry and luke warm after a minute.. it was okay I guess. I didn't want anymore drinks and just ate while he got his third round of beer.. lOl. The one good thing about sitting towards the back of the restaurant was being close to the restrooms because I kept needing to use it 3xs! I digest my liquor fast.. lOl The restrooms are really nice.. I just love the atmosphere up in this place! It's like a freakin' club/lounge/sports bar. During happy hour, they dim the lights down more and its pretty cool. I do enjoy watching all the games on the TV that was at every angle! =P Next time, I'm going to try and score a place at the bar!. . Also, I did have a chance to experience the place during lunch hour couple weeks back and I just have to say the SUMMER SALAD is the bombb!! (so is the clam chowder.. lOl)  . . =]
