ReviewID: roUMEcU6T6Q0lryN2geA3Q
ReviewerID: Vjj_3CF0_Nwtj3XW7r3XWg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
Chicken Rice is to the streets of Singapore, what tacos are to LA. It's the street food of a nation with some of the best food in the world. Anothony Bourdain stopped in Singapore last year for his show No Reservations, and talked about the Chicken Rice as if it was God's gift to the streets of Singapore. So, I just had to try it. But where would one get Hainanese Chicken Rice? In the Chinese mecca of LA of course, the San Gabriel Valley.. . We headed out to Alhambra after doing a little research on the old iPhone Yelp app. Savoy Kitchen looked like the place to go. So we headed out on the 60, just 15 min or so outside of downtown. Not very far to travel considering Singapore is 8,774 miles from Los Angeles.. . This seemingly easy dish to prepare isn't as subtle as you think. The Chicken is boiled is garlic and ginger, then cooled to room temperature. The rice is cooked in the stock from the boiled meat, the chicken is then chopped and plated with the rice, and served with a garlic and ginger puree, a spicy red chili sauce, and a little soy. How you dress your dish with the condiments is a national debate, and this being my first time, I just pour everything over the rice.. . The flavor combination is pure bliss. The tangy ginger working with the the kick of the red chili and salty soy sauce. I take a bite of chicken, then right behind it gobble down some of the delicious rice. It's as wonderful as Bourdain says it is.. . They've got a bizarre menu of Chinese inspired pastas and pizzas at Savoy Kitchen, but unfortunately didn't try anything else off the menu. Things like Conch and Noodle Soup, Ox Tail Stew, seafood pastas, and several different kind of pizzas.. . As I sat there and ate my dish, I started thinking of how I could recreate this at home. I found what seems to be a close recipe, but something tells me my attempt would fall short of the original made by someone with years of experience. So for now, my new love lives in Alhambra, and I will return with reinforcements soon.
