ReviewID: rpRKYb1bjm2DvH0ARmiG0g
ReviewerID: O0aXKx-Xlc0kxiqWgyBngA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Market
Category: American (New)
Ouch this place surely did not get great reviews by others. I'd give Market a strong 4 stars. It's what I expected, very trendy and everyone wanted to be seen and heard (especially this one woman who didn't use her indoor voice, this lady definitely needed more hugs as a child). Anyhow my friend and I had intentions to just get drinks, so as we walked in past the overly cheesy meaty bouncers we walked to the hostess stand, where the girl asked if we had reservations, we didn't. She asked how long we'd be there because she wanted to seat us somewhere where a party was coming at 9:30. Which was fine it was about 5pm so we had plenty of time to drink and relax before the other people would come. I thought the way she said it was somewhat standoffish and rude, but it was a good thing that she asked because whoever had reservations wouldn't be left waiting like I've read in previous posts. . . My friend and I had two drinks each and they were all good, tried something different each time. Drinks ranged from like $8-12, regular Chicago prices nothing jaw dropping!! We also got to looking at the menu and they have this Alfredo pizza that really stood out so we gave it a try. I absolutely loved it and so did my friend. I recommend it!!. . The dumbest thing I noticed the ENTIRE time I was there (besides the loud lady), there was a guy sitting alone at a 4 top table who'd been there for awhile (not the bad part yet), anyhow he noticed it getting busy so he asked if he could move to the bar to free up his table and the hostess rudely said WHY. The guy was doing her a favor by trying to free up a table. Eventually she let in, but she was a little rude to him. . . My final thought (how Jerry Springerish) is try Market out, BUT know what you're getting yourself into. Go dressed nicely/trendy, make reservations and expect a lot to be going on. This is the place where women go in hope to meet an athlete, and men go hoping to meet all the women dressed up who don't meet an athlete. There were some families there with kids, but something about this place doesn't seem kid appropriate. . . Oh almost forgot one last huge pet peeve,  when wait staff all gathers in one spot in the back or in a corner and talks like they have nothing to do. If they truly have nothing to do go hide in the back. Gather in the back so people don't see you goofing off, it reflects poorly on the establishment!
