ReviewID: rq2yrKCD1dKCLhgqIyT8hQ
ReviewerID: rULp41rSyiWWl2Kj_Iarxg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pho Cafe
Category: Vietnamese
Pho for hipsters.. . I've been on a Pho kick and felt like venturing out of my home area to try somewhere new. This place seemed to have great reviews so off I went on my Sunday afternoon.. . First of all, you need to know that this place is so hipster it doesn't have a sign. It's in a white building and make sure to look at the street address in order to spot it. Once we were there, we had to wait for about 15 min. Not bad. Small restaurant so I would warn you that you may have to wait, especially if your party is larger than 2.. . The server was really nice. Typical service, I would say. Food came out really fast. We ordered the fried spring rolls appetizer, I got the filet steak Pho and my friend ordered the meatballs Pho. I also got an iced Vietnamese coffee.. . Spring rolls came out fast... but it was a HUGE plate of basically "salad" or just chunks of veggies and only 3 spring rolls. Really? 3? For that price (near 10 bucks)? Not so impressed. Yes, they were pretty tasty but I've had better and it was just so expensive for such a small plate. Not good for sharing between even 2 hungry people.. . Next, the Pho. The most important part of the meal! My friend said his Pho was good, but the broth was sort of bland. My broth was great but to be honest, I've had better. Also, if I do get meat in my Pho, I like it more thinly sliced which it traditionally is. The meat here wasn't that great and it was too thick for my liking. A little hard to eat. I do have to say that the quality of the noodles was great. The portion of the Pho for the price (around 8 bucks) was decent.. . Finally, the iced coffee was ok but not impressive. It wasn't sweet enough and I don't know, just didn't taste as fresh as I've had it in the past.. . I don't know how this place gets such great ratings to be honest. I've just had so much better. I guess if you live around this area there might not be other Pho places nearby? I would understand if that was the case, but do yourself a favor and check out some other places in the city. You might like the little differences I mentioned.. . Btw, it's cash only. And don't hit your head on the giant bubble glass lights!
