ReviewID: RQ3Rp5EnoGYDhxCT9r9IYg
ReviewerID: IQirwOzLEcFjWDXf9Jq6Bg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
Pros: Food, desserts, service, The James Hotel. Cons: Steak was good but not the best I've had, pricey (although I'd still have tried it regardless). . . I stayed at The James Hotel last weekend and figured I'd try out David Burke's since it was in the hotel and it was Chicago Restaurant Week. . . We went for lunch, the place was smaller than I'd expected, but not crowded and we were seated quickly.  Our server (Ron) was super nice and really took the time to explain the menu.  He also was nice enough to give us some great recommendations for what to do in the area and nightlife.  I love good service--I can cook my own food, I'm paying for service when I go out--so it was much appreciated.. . Of what we ordered, these were the GOOD:. - Kobe beef sashimi on a Himalayan salt block w/ mushroom chips and truffle mayo.  (Flavor combinations were great, but also really fun plating with the giant pink brick of rock salt. See photos.). - Family-style sides: Asparagus &amp; shallots, creamed spinach, pan roasted mushrooms, basil whipped potatoes. (I ordered a steak, which came with the sides served family style. Yum, well-cooked. Creamed spinach was heavy, but that's what it's supposed to be.). - Pan roasted Alaskan king salmon w/ anchovy butter, asparagus and shallots.. - THE DESSERTS: Slice of Prime (chocolate mousse and cake) w/ fudge s'mores ice cream AND White chocolate cheesecake w/ lemon cream and raspberry sherbet. (I'm not a huge fan of sweets, but these were great and creative flavors. The sherbet and the ice cream were fantastic.). . And the JUST OK:. - Petite filet, 6oz (It was fine, but not amazing.  I've had much better, so I guess since this is a Primehouse, it's a little disappointing.  I ordered it cooked medium, but it was a little too well-done.  I guess it's relative.  Also, it's a small cut.). . Overall, I'd say, if you haven't been, you should go.  I'm definitely biased bc I stayed at the hotel and loved the service.
