ReviewID: rQwZwtNs1OGM3i9NEFv-rQ
ReviewerID: 7MTNM_Rwlc4up5PF180rDQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chef Liu
Category: Chinese
Ambiance:  Located in a trailer of sorts in a shopping complex, Chef Liu's is a hole-in-the-wall more than most.  For Asians, you'll know this place as located right across from Ranch 99, the Chinese grocery store.  Inside, this place is as crappy as the health code will probably allow.  The tables and chairs are probably shipped straight from an outlet furniture store from China, if China had outlet furniture stores.  After every customer leaves, they clean the table with Windex or some other blue colored water.. . Food:  The food is probably what keeps most people coming back to Chef Liu's.  First, the menu with the pictures is very, very helpful when you are ordering the food.  When it comes to the food, Chef Liu's has food straight from China/Taiwan.  They have freshly made soymilk.  They have you tiao/twist crueller, which is a fried dough of sorts that Chinese like to eat as part of breakfast.  I believe the chefs in the back actually make these instead of purchasing the premade you tiao and just refrying them in a giant vat of oil (like some restaurants in the Chinatown food court).  They also have buns of various sorts, whether it's pan-fried or steamed, the buns are quite delicious.  From their menu, I also enjoy their vegetarian dish of celery, woodear mushrooms, peanut, tofu, and carrot.  It's only $2.95 and served cold, but quite delicious with your you tiao and soymilk.  This place also serves lamb kabobs, which I haven't seen being served at any other restaurant.  Sometimes, Chef Liu's have a special menu of sorts written in Chinese.  I'm not sure why many Chinese restaurants like to do this (maybe not to freak out Americans with weird menu items), but you should ask what the specials are.  I've had their "Zhu Pi Dun," which can be translated into Pork Jelly.  It's very unique and tasty.. . Service:  The service at Chef Liu's is actually quite good in comparison to many chinese restaurants.  There may be a long wait on weekends.
