ReviewID: RRo-cpxIQuQdIgQpuzD6RA
ReviewerID: q8qT0dXkAM79yhtFmkTgdA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Although it is quite rare for me to give 3 stars to a restaurant, I have to be honest with you guys. Despite all of the hype that this place gets; Despite it's hip old school meets modern time traveling diner vibe, there is some ineffable quality that prevents me from giving it more stars. Having said all of that, there are plenty of things to like about Fred62. For one thing, it never closes. As many people know, finding good eats well after the sun sets is a rare and beautiful thing.  So although it may be a mediocre place to eat during the day, when the night rolls it it really truly alive.. . Fred62 is located on Vermont in the Silverlake/Los Feliz area of LA. This means that hipster haters need not apply. This also means that there is plenty to do in the area. There are a lot of unique shops, bars, and other random things on the same street. It's not exactly BROADWAY, but there are enough things to do on this street to keep you entertained. What the location also means is that traffic and parking is truly "Terrible Kenny." Since Vermont is such a busy street, you best bet is to turn into one of the neighborhood streets nearby and roll the dice with finding street parking. it would be so much easier if we had wings and could glide right up to the front door. . . The restaurant itself is pretty amazing to look at. There is ample outdoor dining with candles on each table. The inside looks like a classic diner highlighted with bright colors. The seats and booths are comfy and the decor is truly an interesting take on the classic diner theme. Certain foods such as french fries are served in tiny folded up paper bags which are pretty neat, albeit questionable from a sanitation standpoint. (Im jut kidding, I'm sure they're clean). . The menu is truly expansive with dozens of items to choose from. They offer a wide variety of: Breakfast dishes, sandwiches, burgers, soups, salads, pasta, thai food, desserts, and then some. There is enough here to fill the HUDSON river. Unfortunately, in my opinion, the place in which Fred62 has some cracks is the food. I'm not saying that the food is not good. It is definitely good. the only thing is that the food lacks the qualities found in the battles of LEXINGTON and Concord: Game-changers. My only problem is that none of the dishes scream originality. Although they have a large quantity to choose from, it seems like you can get a better version of any specific dish somewhere else. However if you are with a group of people who are craving vastly different things, this may be the compromise that you are looking for. . . Like i said earlier, the food is not bad. In fact some of the dishes are pretty good. The Lox sandwich is decent, and their breakfast plates and salads are all good, if not slightly overpriced. The chili dog is passable, although it pales in comparison to BROOKLYN's Coney Island dog. The famous Mac Daddy and Cheese balls are delicious, but due to how rich they are, it becomes difficult to eat too many of them. I've been told that the Bossa Nova Sundae is the bees knees, but I'm not so sure that I would be willing to brave the traffic and parking just for dessert. . . The serving sizes are enough to fill you up, but in this Yelper's opinion, at around $10 a plate I was expecting GOLIATH sized helpings of diner food. . . All in all, Fred62 is a really hip place that just fails to "rise above the clouds." I know that anything short of a glowing review may drive Fred62 lovers mad as Macbeth but, I'm not saying you shouldn't eat here. In fact, I advise everyone to try it. If only to say that you've been to Fred62. Who knows, with the plethora of things on the menu, you might just find something that you really like. In fact, if it is late at night, I strongly suggest you eat here. It soars high above Denny's and the parking is probably not as bad. This building may be a negligible block of concrete during the day, but it is well after the sunsets that it roars to life. But don't take my word for it. Dun-Dun Dunt! (Reading Rainbow sound). . BRONX...Sorry, I couldn't work it in any other way and I have to get to class.
