ReviewID: rRSz7ktP86JKPKxf0ehlzA
ReviewerID: zPih8nfhzmY2QYjidNSV1w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Buttermilk Channel
Category: American (New)
Went here for brunch on a Sunday, after reading reviews on Yelp and getting a very enthusiastic recommendation from my roommate. . . I guess this place doesn't really need any more enthusiastic reviews - you get the idea, it's really really good! Will just add some points of interest and personal experiences.. . We got there at 1, they put our names on the list and took my number so we could wander off and do some shopping. Called about 20 mins later, earlier than expected. They are super-professional about seating, so it makes waiting in line relatively painless. By 1:30, the line was crazy, but I got the impression that if we'd gotten there a bit earlier, we wouldn't have had a problem. . . Food: I had the pecan pie french toast, and it's as good as it sounds! My friend had scrambled eggs w/ hot sausage etc. (or something) - she was slightly underwhelmed. We got sides of cheese waffle (what an amazing invention! Do try - I don't know how they get them so cheesy!) and apple cider donuts (also pretty tasty, though not rant-worthy).. . (One of the) best part(s): Free coffee/tea AND a choice of mimosa, juice, sparkling wine and something else included  - let me repeat that - FREE MIMOSA! That takes it from being an averagely priced brunch place (most items c. $10) to being an amazing deal, at least in my books. . . They also have this incredible Bloody Mary menu which had me drooling at the descriptions (they also looked really tasty and big) but which were a bit too pricey for me to justify ($8-10 each).. . Note: by the time we got there, they had run out of pork chops, so if you want your Sunday morning pork fix, get there early.. . Note 2: There seems to be a couple of noise complaints in other reviews, but we sat in the back and had absolutely no problem hearing each other. Maybe it just depends on your co-diners and whether they've managed the art of the inside voice.
