ReviewID: rS0pfDRcwaD9BYwq7wQM5A
ReviewerID: 2ZCSvamNDmeGuHOD2pau-w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
This is a very fancy casual place - yes, what an oxymoron. Driving by, I thought it was an upscale, fancy restaurant with waiters that look at you snootily if you show up in flip-flops and jeans. As I walked in and gawked at the open white cafeteria-like spaces imagining what colors and decorations I can use to fill it up, I realize (not with dismay but with little-girl giddiness) that it is really a casual cafe in disguise.. . At the entrances, there is a to-go counter at one end with grab-to-go skinny sandwiches, dessert, drinks, yogurts, and fresh fruit (yay healthy!) and a bakery at the other end with windowcases filled with colorful, mouth-drooling desserts. They also sell fancy olive oils, spaghetti sauces, and the like. Mind you the prices are not fancy, but combined with the atmosphere, you'd think everything is worth that price. There is also someone walking around the waiting crowds giving out free food samples.. . I came here on a Sunday at around noon. They were still on the brunch menu which was a bit disappointing but it was alright. We got the Breakfast Los Angeles, NY Egg Sandwich, and the Smoked Salmon Benedict. The portions may look deceivingly small for the price you're paying, but trust me, they are quite filling. The Breakfast LA felt really light, fluffy, and healthy, while the NY Egg Sandwich felt a bit more heavy because of the bacon. And the Smoked Salmon Benedict came with some surprises like the little scoop of cavier on top and the adequate amount of salmon. Coffee was really, really savory, probably one of the best I've ever had. According to my friend, they provide you with free sparkling water upon request. Also according to my friend, all the staff were lookers (yes they were). Oh and service was courteous. They took a long time getting to us in the beginning, checking up on us in the middle, and getting the check at the end, but it was a super busy place so it was understandable. One thing I really like is the openness of the place - open bar area, open space, open kitchen. It would be a great place to come not only to eat meals, but perhaps for a get-together over coffee and some dessert as well.
