ReviewID: RsTtiezlj4bWdcN7Wq3aYA
ReviewerID: IVVq7wDIyr4kcKLi4xzQHg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Just to preface, I won't grade based on ambience, lighting, scene, etc.  There are grumpy old men that don't like loud places or standing...ever, trying too hard scenesters who paid $100 for a shirt that tries to look like it's from goodwill, and all sorts of people in between that won't agree on how a place should look or who it should cater to.  Yes, the line here is irritating.  Yes, there's not enough seating because this place is insanely busy.  Yes, there's loud music.  That aside, I'm going to review wurstkuche based solely on what goes in my mouth, whether it's dick shaped meat, potatoes cooked in fat, or water-logged yeast poop.  . . Just to set the scene, Wurstkuche is a 'gastropub' style restaurant located in the Artist's District of Downtown LA.  They specialize and serve only sausage sandwiches (hot dogs), fries, and beers.  Oh, the beer, the delicious, delicious beer.  Their menu is broken up into 3 sections, "Classic," "Gourmet," and "Exotic."  I've had two of the sausages here, both from the 'Exotics' section of the menu.  Frankly (get it?), if you came to downtown and waited in the 30 minute line for a fucking bratwurst that you could've gotten elsewhere, stop reading, because it's clearly not about the food.  . . Ok, so, I've had the duck and bacon with jalapeno sausage (DB), and also the rabbit, veal and pork with white wine sausage (RVP).  The two of them are obviously quite different, and really accentuate how much variety there is in the sausage kingdom.  The DB was intensely smokey, and the jalapenos add a nice touch of heat.  It wasn't very spicy, just enough to tell you that the jalapenos are there and enough for you to take notice that the pepper flavor works quite nicely with the earthy intensity of the meat.  On the other hand, the RVP sausage was nuanced, with mellower, more subtle flavors.  It had a savory aroma to it that can easily be overpowered by the other flavors in the meal.  This paired with some of the homemade mustard available gives you a really nice set of complimentary flavors.  Both of these sausages had casing that had the right amount of snap, and both were grilled almost to perfection.  The bun they sat on was mostly ok, not really sure if I was paying much attention to it.. . The fries here are quite good.  They Belgian style double dipped fries.  Nice and crispy on the outside, they have wonderful texture that contrasts well with the softer textures of the sausages.  There's a myriad of dipping sauces to choose from also.  The pesto mayo and curry ketchup are quite good.  I haven't really tried the others, so I can't comment on them.. . Beer.  They have Delirium Nocturnum, Chimay and Old Raspy on tap.  Not much more needs to be said.. . My primary complaint about the food is that the caramelized onions weren't actually caramelized.  They were barely sweated.  I understand that they're super busy, and the slow process of caramelizing large batches of onions is time consuming.  However, don't advertise caramelized onions on the menu, call them sauteed onions.  It's a fairly minor complaint though, and I still very much enjoyed my meals here.  They really should rename this place Bestkuche (HARHAR).
