ReviewID: RT48_-qUjQgetdQOK-_8aw
ReviewerID: NhvLNR5acxMFw-01uszCUg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Manny&#39;s Coffee Shop &amp; Deli
Category: Delis
This is a good place, but THERE IS BETTER CORNED BEEF IN THE CITY.  It's at Perry's deli, and anybody that tells you different MIGHT have a dead tongue.  There are also much larger and Cheaper sandwiches at Perry's.  In fact, my entire review is tainted by the fact that I have eaten at Perry's. . This place is indeed all the things that people say it is, but I'd say it's enjoyable in the way that going to the Billy Goat Tavern is enjoyable.  Not anything mindblowing from a food standpoint, but one of those Chicago things you need to do at least once.  It's very cool inside and very old-school.  Lots of businessmen and Safety workers, and I even say the State comptroller Dan Hynes there the day I was there.  The place is a cafeteria-style Jewish Deli with several sassy servers slinging plates of the specials and the standbys.  I was there for one thing: The corned beef.  I ordered 2 sandwiches.  One for me with Thousand Island and cheese, one plain to go for a coworker.  I also ordered a bag of Harry Carray's chips (AVOID THESE) and a Coke zero (Indeed nice touch having fountain coke zero).  The total? $29.. The sandwich I got did not have the dressing on it.  I don't think they do that and the sanwich cutter didn't want to spend time explaining that to me, so he just looked down the line for another guest (I was the end of the line). The sandwich was very lean.  Very lean and very dry, and the mustard on the table wasn't cutting it as a lubricant.. My verdict is three stars in light of Perrys on the following factors:. 1) Perry's deli has the best corned beef in the city.  It's jucier and more flavorful.  While a deli, Perry's has several more and more interesting Sandwich choices than Manny's.. 2) Perry's deli, for a Sandwich and a drink is under $10.  At Manny's a corned beef with cheese is $10.50.. 3) For that price, the sandwiches at Perry's are much larger.  I could not have chips at Perry's.  There's already too much food. . 4) Manny's is a considerable distance from the loop.  Perry's is in the loop.. There it is.  A very Perry-centric review, but that's my gold standard at lunch and of corned beef, and I was lured to Manny's by the promise of the "Best Corned Beef in the City".. One final note, there's a Manny's at Midway that I had eaten at before and thought that it couldn't be as good as the real restaurant.  However, I'm here to tell you it's the same.
