ReviewID: RTUu0mttwmuFai1wTccJHA
ReviewerID: _nnH4brnz8i28T7ub_fZoA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
I should start this review by qualifying it a bit. I am pretty much biased towards breakfast spots in general. I like breakfast, I like the foods that comprise breakfasts; I guess you could generally consider me a "fan" of breakfast. With that being said, it's hard for me to be moved strongly in one direction or another--after all, an omelet's an omelet and pancakes are pancakes. So I was neither blown away by Toast or repulsed. However, a lot of the food on their menu scared me a little. Like I would like to one day try their stuffed French Toast, but honestly it sounds like dessert and not breakfast, so I will probably never actually eat it. . . Side note:  I don't know why everyone says that the people who come here look like wannabe actors and models. Maybe because yesterday was Easter Sunday, but everyone there looked like normal people, or perhaps at worst, like Mid-City hipsters--hipster-lite.. . Anyway, despite looking very busy, my roommate and I were pretty much seated straight away. The hostess looked like she was trying to pull off a fairy nymph look, headband and all. It was a cute look, don't get me wrong, I was just confused because she looked like she was headed for the beach, which maybe she was, after her shift was over.. . Again, anyway, having already eaten a real breakfast earlier in the morning, I decided to go with a chocolate croissant and a bowl of fresh fruit. My roommate, awash in memories from her recent trip to France, ordered some kind of omelet and a basket of sweet potato fries. The croissant was just alright. I felt like I could have bought something similar at Peet's or (gasp) Costco. But the fruit bowl was great, with mango and blackberries, I at least felt like I was counter-acting the negative effects of the croissant. Plus the sweet potato fries were tasty and the waitress was really friendly.. . Sorry, I'd say more, but I don't know what else to say! It's good!
