ReviewID: rUFHh0n9jN-ebsSvnQl7Ww
ReviewerID: WrYq_Xs84Q7zm_pbn192Dw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
CHICO, you da man!!!!. . Came here very hungry with fellow yelpers furious, dan, kolbe. Chico said, no menus!!! Aight!! Bring it!!!. freaking good food!!!! Combination flavors of deep south America and traditional Mexican. Too much to write about and ask Chico to serve you up. You won't be disappointed!!!. . Thanks Chico!!!. . Revised 10-15. Okay so after a small food coma set in (I wrote this review as I was sitting at the booth with my handy dandy iPhone and just finished eating enough to feed godzilla) I realized what kind of cheesy review I wrote so I need to redeem myself to my fellow Yelpers so here goes....... . Upon entering this small family restaurant the first thing I notice is the home decor.....everything about this place says "Home Cooking"...... Upon being seated by the host Sir Chico, as I mentioned before he said no menus, I have a special treat for you all......we were already licking our chops as the food kept rolling in.... first was a sampler plate  had fried bananas (not overcooked or soggy! amazing!) and a vegetable that was similar to sweet potato but color was that of a regular potato...sweet on flavor like a sweet potato.... Then came some chips and salsa and the salsa was good with guacamole!.  Some baked bread with cheese and ham and another with beans and cheese (sorta like a pita but with a Latin touch). Insanely good!!!. Then came the ala carte items....butterfly cut shrimp with garlic and butter.....good gawd this was good....stewed shredded pork with their house sauce.....heavenly.....and my favorite, the soup...For those that love traditional hispanic soup (Albondigas/Pozole), this is it. Large veggies, (cabbage, carrots, corn on the cob, and big ol chunks of stewed meat makes this meal perfect.... flavor was good enough to make me drool and stare at it like it was my girlfriend...... We were also served up a plate each of El Salvadorian rice, black beans and regular refried beans. Black beans were fantastic!!. As we got our tab for the whole feed-the-fuj, we were stunned with the tab....$60!!! WTF??? We needed to pay more but Chico insisted upon us leaving it the way it is.....Food loves people. People love food. Yelpers love food. We love Yelpers. What more can I say......
