ReviewID: rvb-0p_XBwRLEp7fUHQdqQ
ReviewerID: jrNdRmfQJrZQfHd4h0dbTw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
Man, I really don't like this part of town, but Comme Ça came highly recommended by numerous people I know, so I ended up taking my husband there for his birthday. For some freak reason, we ended up finding street parking and were able to skip the $10 valet (woohoo!). Upon our arrival, the staff was very attentive and really nice. Any sort of intimidation that fancy WEHO scene gave instantly disappeared. They gave us a choice of three tables for our reservation. We chose to sit in the rear section because it was a lot quieter back there (Yeah, yelling over dinner isn't rad). Our table was set up brasserie-style; facing the entire restaurant. I love people watching, so the view was interesting. Its always fun to see how 'the other half' live. (It was REALLY dark back there! Extra candles may be needed for menu reading).. . There were a couple of Maitre d's buzzing around, tons of runners and our very attentive waitron. He was very enthusiastic with all of our choices (actor?), and humored us as we giggled over our choices. Every time anyone would get up, a bus person would pick up the person's napkin and fold it neatly next to their place setting. This type of service is neat because it reminds me of all the old school restaurant staff in Europe. I'm so not used to it that it almost makes me uneasy. How have we come from classy Euro-style service?! After a couple minutes, we settled in and let the staff take care of us. Another thing I noted was that dining for an extended time is not frowned upon here. No quick turnover "hurry-hurry" feelings at all.... . We tried the Moule Frites and the Marrow with Oxtail jam. The mussels were served in a pretty large portion - easily split between two people. They were a little more 'oceany' than expected, but yummy despite that. Good  broth for dippin' the fries into. However, the marrow was awesome. Next time I'll request extra crostini. It didn't take us long to plow through this updated version of peasant food! The oxtail spread was excellent as well. I didn't realize how decedent this stuff was until I started to feel full before the main course had even arrived!. . Our mains consisted of a braised crunchy pork special and the traditional Coq au Vin. Both were cooked to perfection that melted to the touch of a fork. I was surprised by the large portions off all our dishes. I was slowly slipping into food coma... or was it the specialty drinks?. . The drinks are spicy and fun, but not really worth the $14 price tag. I don't care how fancy a restaurant or bar is: paying nearly 20-bucks for a short drink is retarded. Great concoctions - but next time I'll stick to drinking the house Rosé and spending dough on the grub. . . To top off the meal, we finished with the chocolate pudding brioche: YUM. A nice bitter-sweet cocoa and powdered sugar with a scoop of vanilla ice cream sent us on our merry way. With tax and tip, our bill came to about $185. This is not every day dining - though I think a large chunk of the bill was spent on booze.. . Overall, a pleasant experience topped with nice sized portions of mod French style cooking. I can't wait to go back for more marrow and desert!
