ReviewID: RVexOL0ydzt2AlbJo7c0Tw
ReviewerID: zGBpg4CRQn72YK0WRTrabA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
Completely underwhelmed and unimpressed. I went for my brother's bday dinner and checked out the reviews on yelp before we went. I was a bit hesitant because of a few terrible reviews, but nonetheless I decided to go to Crustacean with an open mind and hoped for a great meal. BIG mistake. I will have more faith in fellow yelpers.. . Let me start with the good: the service. The hostess was friendly and no attitude. We had reservations and were seated immediately and our server was very friendly and knowledgeable about the menu.. . From there, the rest is pretty much downhill. We started with the appetizer sampler:. Seared ahi tuna taco: good, nothing special.. Lobster lollipop: a bit rubbery, and no lobster flavor (more on why later).. Crab "puffs:" not much crab, a whole lot of fried, thus taste was ok (what isn't good fried and dipped in sauce?).. Shrimp "mouse" in "phyllo dough:" let's call a spade a spade - it was basically a mini egg roll with little filling that truthfully could have just had air in side and would have tasted good (see above explanation on fried food goodness).. . Ok, appetizers were lackluster but I'm thinking they will wow us with the entrees, especially the lobster dish from the famed "Secret Kitchen." There were four of us and we shared a bit so I was able to try everything.. Chilean sea bass: overcooked. How do you overcook a fish with such a high oil content???? The texture of it bore more of a resemblance to halibut due to overcooking. And as a sea bass lover (I will no doubt end up with mercury poisoning) it had little flavor which leads me to believe it was no where close to being fresh and probably frozen for an extended period of time.. . The Dragon Fried Rice dish was stir fried rice with scallops. What it really was: white on white on white. White stir fried rice, with egg and tiny baby scallops cut into pieces served on a white plate. Presentation aside, the dish had no flavor and was quite oily (we asked for light oil because I heard Crustacean has a heavy hand when it comes to oil). There was not a single whole scallop, and even a dousing of soy sauce still couldn't elevate this to a 1 star dish.. . And then the dishes from the "Secret Kitchen:" Maine lobster with garlic noodles at $45 a plate. To me $45 for a great lobster dish is absolutely worth it. Actually amazing food is always worth the extra expense in my book. I'm a hardcore gastrosexual and will gladly shell over mucho dinero for great cuisine. I'm not bothered by small portions (great things come in small packages and on small plates). But for a $45 "Maine Lobster" from the secret kitchen I expect there will be at least some lobster tail (yes I am one of those people who believes the tail meat is far superior to the claws). What was on the dish: the BODY of the lobster. That's right all the parts that other restaurants generally don't serve: the gills, the circulatory system, the liver and digestive system - the area where all the toxins and garbage accumulate. It is mushy, has no flavor and who the fuck wants to eat the innards of a bottom feeder?! That explains why they take it out of the shell and spread it over the noodles for you. If anyone had to pick that shit out themselves they'd send it back stat. The "famous" garlic noodles were so whatever I don't want to talk about them and continue to perpetuate the myth that they are something special. We did complain to management and they were very kind and replaced one of the lobster dishes (with more lobster body and no explanation about where the tail was). . . Perhaps one of the problems with Crustacean is the hype, which it puts on itself with the "secret kitchen" bullshit. A restaurant can only stand up to the hype if the food is phenomenal and spot on every time. Kitchen quality checks need to be in place for every plate that is sent out. Sadly Crustacean is no more then a glorified PF Changs. So there you have it, I know the secret in An's kitchen: they overhype below average food, and get away with charging exorbitant prices because most people don't know good food. I was so disappointed I will never go back.
