ReviewID: rvRMLKfD8VI2AVu6cDignw
ReviewerID: dRZ0gVGH0EpRKgTu4wpwcQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Fraiche is one of my family's favorite restaurants, and we eat there a lot.  For special occasions, or just for dinner before going out, it's a great spot.  A little bit tough to get reservations, but if you use Open Table you can usually get something... otherwise, just make friends with the Maitre D'.. . The ambiance is wonderful.  Very cool, modern interior, nice little bar in the front corner for drinks and fantastic happy hour deals.  During the summer they have an open outdoor patio, and during the winter they seal it in as an extra dining room with heat lamps.. . You can wear pretty much whatever.  Anything from jeans and a t-shirt to dressier fare... up to you.. . I've had pretty much everything on the menu, and I give high reviews to it all.  The way that the menu was put together is something interesting in and of itself.  Each of the owners has a different specialty, so one did the food, one did the wine (one of the best wine lists in LA... I recommend the Flowers pinot noir), one did the desserts... so on and so forth.  The menu changes seasonally, but for the most part it's pretty consistent.  And consistently delicious.. . For appetizers: beef tartar (so fresh), baby beets salad with homemade ricotta (perfect ricotta), mushroom salad (incredibly complex flavors and consistency), and the burrata salad (soft and delicious) are all favorites.. . For entrees: monkfish is a specialty (tender and buttery to the point it should be illegal, and the celery puree is otherworldly), although the kurobuta pork chop is probably my favorite (I don't even know how to begin explaining how wonderfully tender and flavorful this piece of meat is).  The steak frites is pretty good, and the lamb spezzatino is fantastic (flavorful, rich and tender), as is the branzino (absolutely cooked to perfection).  The pastas are all good as well, with special shout-outs to the four cheese tortelli (homemade goodness), the lamb bolognese rigatoni, and the oxtail pappardelle (some of the best oxtail I've ever had... rich and tender and scrumptious).. . If you're feeling adventurous, hungry, and like spending some bucks, go for the fruits de mer plateaus... they're a statement, and will definitely impress your date!. . And the desserts... oh the desserts!  Sample them all!  My reco?  The torta de la nona.  Don't even ask, just go order it.  NOW!. . 5-stars... there's a reason why this place was rated the best new restaurant in LA 2006.  Cheers to Fraiche!
