ReviewID: rWTPvh0fI3sLwPoPv-NZRA
ReviewerID: pbcZjOBuvaS0EV0seIWSqA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Taste on Melrose
Category: American (New)
After going to taste for a few more brunches and two dinners, Taste has moved up to a five-star for me for its relaxed atmosphere, changing seasonal menus, classy comfort food, delicious drinks and rather reasonable prices -- especially for the prix fixe menu. . . I was just here on Saturday night. I made a reservation that day. When we showed up, our table wasn't ready yet because the previous party was taking longer than expected, so we went to the bar for a drink. After waiting 10-15 minutes (and someone in our party still wasn't even there), they told us that our first round of drinks was on the house. That definitely made the wait worth it -- and their drinks are yummy! We had the ruby slipper, the lychee martini, the St. Germain and a virgin concoction for a friend who doesn't drink that the bartender was very nice about. . . Our waiter was friendly, we ordered the pear and gorgonzola pizzetta as an appetizer (delicious again), as well as some truffle oil Mac n Cheese and a very tasty pear, pomegranate and goat cheese salad. . . We continued our decadent feast with a dinner of squash risotto, chicken paillards, turkey meatloaf and chicken canneloni. I'm pretty sure everyone polished everything off, including a bottle of chardonnay that was nice and crisp and reasonably priced at about $36. . . Of course, what is a feast without dessert -- and we went all out. Bread pudding, chocolate decadence and a chocolate devil's food cake. Again, I don't think we left a spot on our plates. . . Our waiter was very friendly and appropriately attentive, there was a fun party atmosphere in the place since there was a small wedding party in the other room, and the small restaurant wasn't bustling, but it didn't feel too noisy. . . Though it took me a little while to warm up to it, this has becoming one of my favorite nearby dinner and brunch spots.
