ReviewID: rXKGLk_X4uNfLWl6sVi15Q
ReviewerID: cufhYFdyrUAt4SWe-m0grQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk &amp; Honey Cafe
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Yowie! That smarts! Yes, I enjoyed the food but it's pretty expensive for what you get. A lemonade, sandwich (pretty small in size; a few bites per half) and a tart ran me $14+. This ain't cheap eatin'. That said, once you get over the sticker shock, the food is pretty tasty.. . The inside space is surprisingly accommodating but do yourself a favor and come here at off hours. Trying to get a table during peak time can be trying. They don't reserve tables and your entire party must be present before you can be seated. At least, that was my experience. If this is an outlier, please, let me know. The ingredients are fresh but I'd have to say that I enjoyed the sweet more than the savory. It wasn't as though my sandwich was bad. It was just small(er) in size, sort of uninspired and unevenly built (one half had the lionshare of ingredients; the other half was bread). So...4 stars? The tart. Man, forget about all the savory noise and go straight for the baked goods. Whoever the pastry chef is...you're awesome. My mixed berry tart was packed with blue, black, rasp and strawberries, their natural juice, topped by a buttery shell and covered with lightly flecked granulated sugar. With every bite, it became clear to me that should I come back, I should go straight for dessert.. . It's  pretty bright and shiny place. I don't know, however, that I would rush back. Last time I was there, I was sitting outside on the patio. It was a typical Chicago day, so there were gusts of wind that would pick up every once and a while. One particular gust lifted the 'please wait to be seated' sign and brained my buddy. The damn thing put a knot on his head. Everyone around asked him how he was and was pretty shocked. Annoyed, I moved the sign where it couldn't attack anyone. A worker came outside to ask if it struck anyone. We replied it did. She replied, 'sorry' and went back inside. I know it was an act of God but, for Pete's sake, give the man a cookie or something. He was injured on your property by your property. Her nonchalant attitude about the matter was troubling. Enough so that it would give me pause to return.
