ReviewID: RxmAUo9-trnzqCcpPwFYmA
ReviewerID: x7zQFNE6XvOI_wBw9C3DiQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
I'll summarize my experience with this:  I waited two hours for a friggin appetizer.  Yes, that's right an appetizer.  . . After a hectic day in which my only meal was a bowl of Special K and a glass of water, I was FAMISHED.  I could have eaten some cold pizza, but I didn't want to fill up on other food when I was so anxiously awaiting Kogi's tacos.  We arrived at the Glendon Way hotel at 5:40 to see approximately 100 people in line in front of the hotel.  Mind you,  we arrived a full 20 minutes before the Kogi truck was supposed to arrive.  Thanks to all of you f*ckers who let your friends, relatives,  distant relations and even complete strangers cut in and extend my wait.  If I had a machete,  I would have gleefully cut you all down in a shower of viscera, strip down naked and dance around in your entrails. In case you couldn't tell I hate people who cut in line.  . . Returning to the review, the truck finally pulled up at around 6:30, but the line didn't even budge forward for another 20 minutes while the Kogi crew started cooking.  My anticipation only heightened as the line crept forward, punctuated by the occasional lucky person who already received their bags of tacos.  In fact, a few had the gall to eat in their cares in plain sight of an anxious mob who wanted a taste.  Some people like to live on the edge.  When the party in front of us started ordering,  a few of them turned around to tell us that there is a 3 taco maximum due to the length of the line behind us.  WTH!!!! The people who were fortunate enough to arrive early definitely did not have this 3 taco maximum.  I can appreciate Kogi's desire to be able to supply tacos to everyone in line, but I didn't arrive this early to sacrifice my tacos for someone to coasted in a full hour after the truck arrived.  In the end my fiance and I chose 1 beef, 1 chicken and 1 spicy pork tacos.  Although their menus shows other items besides tacos,  they were only serving tacos this particular night.  . . Patrons order and pay for tacos in one line,  then get into another line to pick up their tacos.  . . We took our tacos home and snapped some quick pics before inhaling the tacos.  They're pretty good, but I wouldn't wait in another line for them.  The meat was tender and juicy.  The corn tortillas were warm and slightly chewy.  The veggies that top the tacos were fresh.  My fiance complained that the "spicy" pork wasn't very spicy.  Being spice-adverse,  I have to agree that the "spicy" pork wasn't spicy.  It didn't even induce a slight sweat on my brow.  . . I conclude this review by saying that the tacos are good, but they're not worth waiting over 2 hours for.  I'm especially pissed that my taco count was limited and I had to rely on cold pizza to fill me up.  If you happen to pass by and there is no line, feel free to give it a try.  If there is a line,  you're better off marinating your own meat and making your own tacos.  They were 4 star tacos that capped a 0 star experience.
