ReviewID: rXNQkYISPq_1x_2EhTUz2g
ReviewerID: Ai3NbwFPjtLVEBVcOdnurg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Came on a Tuesday around 6:45pm. Called an hour beforehand to make reservations. It wasn't too full, but people definitely lots of people trickled in by the time we left. . . The place is huge and very pretty. The women's bathroom was pretty nifty. You had to walk downstairs and there were mirrors, so it made it look bigger than it really was and I was a little tripped out by it at first. But anyways, onto the food... . Spicy seafood miso soup ($12)- It's got a good kick to it and I really enjoyed it! There were good chunks of seafood and I love glass noodles. The salmon was a little fishy, but that's about it. It's a pretty big bowl of soup.. . Snow crab and spicy tuna napoleon ($16)- I really enjoyed this, but then again, I really like spicy tuna. It was served in between these crispy wonton things and overall it was quite good.. . Tropical Albacore Ceviche ($16)- good chunks of albacore, mangoes, and pineapples. very refreshing with the chips it came with. . . Darth Vadar ($15)- spicy tuna, black rice, and purple tobiko (those bright orange little egg things usually on california rolls and stuff) it was definitely good, but nothing spectacular. . Seattle Roll ($15)- seared salmon, cream cheese w/ a chile-sour cream sauce. I really enjoyed the sauce for some reason. It just had some good flavor to it. . . Dessert sushi ($12)- great way to end the night. It was presented in a very cute/fun manner. Wasabi was a green tea paste, ginger was thinly sliced cantelope, sushi rice was sticky rice w/ coconut milk (YUM!), had different fruits on top of it, there was a pretend hand roll filled with fruit and rice pudding. all in all- yummy!!. . The waiter was friendly and the food came out quickly. I had a groupon $40 for $80. I'm not sure I would pay regular prices for this place. The food was good, but it wasn't anything extraordinary. I think people just pay for the view and the atmosphere. My friend said that this was more "fun dining" than fine dining and I agree.. . $7.50 valet parking.
