ReviewID: RXqsDBrIXqywt55nw_cxxg
ReviewerID: nH2JIFnyU_mrfHtaxxNatw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Stone Soup Kitchen
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Sad to say, but most mornings I plunge a paw into a box of Kashi High Fiber just to fish out sad handfuls of what I pray will dislodge the previous night's journey to constipation. My bowels are like Siamese cats: obstinate, irritable, yet also liable to run unpredictably. . . A need for Downy, scented candles (sandalwood) and Twizzlers (a sickness) prompted me from the duplex early last weekend. Mission accomplished, I noticed Stone Soup Kitchen, a quaint eatery with a name that piqued my tummy, on an unfamiliar street around Grant Park. I parked the Miata and gave a gander. . . Charming! Shelved to the left were an array of homemade soups and drinks, giving Stone Soup a Mom and Pop elan. Dining tables align the right wall. I shimmied into a tiny booth with the grace of a water balloon being pushed through a banister. What a sight I was! The waiter, patient and lumberjack-ish, recommended a few items, but I found myself distracted. He need only place himself on the menu and I'd never endure another Kashi sunrise again! Careful deliberation led to a breakfast sandwich of gently scrambled eggs, jack cheese, and Canadian bacon on a honey wheat English muffin. So, yes, I pretty much ordered an Egg McMuffin, the difference being that at Stone Soup I wasn't also funding an evil clown. . . People, that sandwich was a MARVEL! You'd never think a mere egg concoction could achieve nirvana. No diminishing returns, each bite trumped the last. Pearls of butter and cheese cascaded down my chin and congealed upon my windbreaker. I got a side order of Red Mule grits. The name comes from the use of actual mules that churn the yellow goodness to creamy submission. I know there are those who protest the exploitation of animals, but I say KEEP THOSE ASSES AT WORK! . . Consider yourself warned: brawny hunks and sullen animals are conspiring in Grant Park, bowels be damned! See you there!
