ReviewID: RylQWZZyA_x64HriNgJBsw
ReviewerID: 8YtIgb2h4kxcwy7uSNLcgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
My first Crustacean experience was back in my youngin days when I did not fully appreciate good...I mean GREAT food.  I have only tried the roasted crab and garlic noodles TO THIS DAY and I think I could eat this every day if I could.  Side note before I get to the food - the Sangria is just as amazing but I'm not here to talk about the drinks - I am here to talk about food you must absolutely try before you die! . . First off, how cool is walking on an aisle of koi fish underneath your feet!!  Poor little fellows, probably stressed the hell out, hearing the clanks and clatter of peoples feet above them.  Nonetheless, cool as hell.. . Everyone is dressed in these crazy robe things, but it makes sense...I guess.  But anyway, back to the food... . If you like crab - you must try the roasted crab.  Seriously, who gets the crab out of the shell?  The whole point of eating seafood is to get messy!!  Get that bib on and dig in!!  That is what I love about this restaurant.  You get dressed to get messy!!  You come so put together and then you get this bib on to prevent you from getting your pretty dress or suit messy and just dig the eff in.  You grub until you cannot grub no mo!. . Next!  The garlic noodles are to die for and it compliments the crab so amazingly well - that all of a sudden all your problems go away in that very instant that those noodles touch your lips!  It's like...nothing matters but you and that crab...you and those noodles..it is as if everything just makes sense and everything right in the world comes into place.  . . For a drink, a crab and garlic noodles the meal came out to 82 bucks!!  Not too shabby.  Luckily, my sister was sick that day and didn't order herself a drink and then she found out at the END of the meal that I was treating her because it was going to be her birthday soon - that she wished she would have ordered more.. . OH dear!!!!  I forgot to mention we got the creme burlee too!!  And ..... perfectly crispy on top and the insides were warm and gooey.  I wish the dessert came in a larger portion though, but that is because once again I am a fat ass.
