ReviewID: RyOlKHPl2PjXHJJjCd487A
ReviewerID: uNTv8kz39UfLNxD14awtBA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
We've been meaning to try their "secret" 3-course Peking Duck Dinner here for months, but things kept interfering, including the recent eruption of the Eyjafjallajokull volcano. But with our family's most recent world traveller now home, we activated our group reservation and the order for the duck dinner (the restaurant recommends a 2 to 3-day advance order.) . . For an item that is not on their printed menu, the Peking Duck 3-Course Dinner is a big hit here. Ours did not disappoint, although we were unsure when it would appear in the service of the other five dishes, ordered after we arrived. It wound up being the capper to the evening's servings, artfully carved and presented by Laura herself. All was going smoothly with this, as we chatted and watched in anticipation of our first bites of duck, when an accidental spilling of a full glass of water at our table interrupted the show. This pointed out a lacking at Shu Wah, a shammy (chamois.) The spill got the attention of our duck server and several other staff who brought a supply of paper napkins to the mop-up that was underway.. . We had been forewarned that our duck's breasts would be sliced into bite-sized pieces (each with the crispy skin attached) and presented on a platter with its four drumsticks. The slices are intended to be eaten in "mini sandwiches" that you prepare for yourself, using condiments of hoisin sauce and slivers of scallion, carrot, and pickled diakon radish. However, we were expecting only 6 of the specially-made (in Taiwan) and pre-halved gua bao (yeast-based rice flour buns). So it was a pleasant surprise to be presented with a plate of 10 bao, ready to be opened wide to accept our juicy duck and condiments. . . The earlier part of our meal could be regarded as "appetizers" to the grand conclusion of duck (which ended with the duck fried rice and duck soup.) Here are the other dishes that we feasted on that night:.   - Stuffed Eggplant (a constant favorite, sauce can get heavy.).   - Beef with Chinese Broccoli (requested by the niece, loved by all).   - Fried Tofu Stuffed with Shrimp in a Casserole (liked by all).   - Sliced Lotus Root with House-Cured Bacon (a special that evening, a substitute for asparagus which was all gone, liked by most of us).   - Pig Intestines with Soy Bean Sprouts (most of us liked this, but two did not). . A surprise that came with the typical blister strip of fortune cookies that accompanies the bill (cheap) was a palate-cleansing treat of kiwi sorbet (a guess on the flavor, since it was a grayish green color). Maybe this is exclusive with the duck dinner? We had 2 small scoops to share amongst us. Some used their fortune cookie halves as an edible scoop -- genius!
