ReviewID: ryQPHqA6KR55JEYpCkTDWQ
ReviewerID: 887-WxTKfe6Tcj3o4nNcfQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
I really can't write anything that hasn't been written before.  Basically, Alinea lives up to the hype.  Simply put, it rocked my world.  It is #7 in Pelligrino's 2010 World's 50 Best Restaurants for good reason.. . The outside is completely unassuming and the corridor to the restaurant is otherworldly.  We were seated in a room on the second floor and the first thing that caught my attention was that the man next to us was eating a very intricate dessert off the table.  That's right, no plates, just spoon on rubbery tablecloth.  Once seated and settled, it dawned on me how quiet it was.  There was no ambient music.  Even though when we were seated, there were 5 other parties in the room with us (plus a handful of servers), the silence was intimidating.  We felt the need to be quiet and hush-hush as well.. . We got one wine pairing in a glass that we shared, and that was amazing, for lack of a better word.  The sommelier had a ginormous afro and his demeanor and appearance beared an uncanny resemblance to Johnny Depp's Mad Hatter.  He was energetic and his explanations and background to each and every wine was delightful.  I highly recommend doing the wine pairing; splitting one between two people was the perfect amount to sip on and enjoy with each dish.. . We weren't disappointed with the 12 course tasting; every course was a crazy mix of a sensory experience that touched upon sight/presentation, smell, taste, texture, sound (yes! Our last dish was a bubble-yum hibiscus cigarette thing that made a funny low pitched grunt as you sucked the contents into your mouth).  This was not just dinner, it was a show.  The whole experience seemed to throw out the conventional concept of eating.  For example, we were given an earl grey infused pillow, not to sleep on, but for our lemon custard earl grey cookie dessert course to sit on, and as the pillow slowly deflated, it emitted the aroma of earl grey as you ate.  How cool is that?. . At times, we longingly eyeballed the other patrons who were doing the 24 course tour, who were presented with things like a giant log.  Umm, I want to eat whatever delicious morsels off a giant log!. . At the end of the meal, they present you with a menu in a big black envelope.  That was a nice keepsake and reminder of the most amazing meal I've had to date.. . There were 2 downsides to my once-in-a-lifetime experience.  First, I got chastised for taking pictures of my dishes.  Seriously?  Okay I understand it's kind of bothersome if you're using a flash but I turned off my flash and I told the woman that.  She said "but your camera still gives off a light".  Dude.  It's a red blinking light that most people's camera gives off if you don't use the flash, like the red recording light when you use a video camera.  Hey, we're dropping some big money here, it's not like I'm being a paparazzi and going flash crazy.  The table next to us had to leave early because the woman got drunk after her 5th course, couldn't eat anymore, was throwing her head on the table every 3 minutes and nearly stumbled down the stairs.  And they were frowning on me for taking pics even without a flash?  I'd say her demeanor in the nearly full room was much more distracting than my picture taking when it was nearly empty.. . Secondly, the staff was attentive, so painstakingly attentive that it was almost borderline uncomfortable.  We could see them lingering at their waiting area talking about other patrons (namely, drunk woman), and sometimes it felt like we were children at a library being observed by the librarian. . . Still, those two things did not detract from the experience that much, and I cannot speak highly enough of Chef Achatz's culinary creations.  The Alinea experience brings food and eating to a whole new level.
