ReviewID: RyRpYu3Y6QSD1aQnsSeAcw
ReviewerID: A3i3XMh0iqGBEMHRqxAygQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
I don't get what all the hype is about this place. It is incredibly average food and not worth the price.. . Went w/ a group so I got to try 6 different entrees and a few appetizers. Not a single thing on the table had me thinking it was really tasty. Everyone seemed to enjoy the Champagne Lemon Chicken the best but I thought it was just OK - the flavors weren't 'Chinese' to me.. . Practically everything in this place is fried, and not well. I definitely enjoy fried foods - but many of the dishes had way too much breading and you could barely taste the meat inside. Salt and Pepper Crispy Beef was a prime example, I may as well have been eating straight breading and seasoning. . . Rice: not impressed. We ordered 6 entrees among 7 people and got these two dinky things of white rice. AND they pre-sauce it with soy sauce and don't put any on the table. We didn't bother asking for a bottle as it wasn't a huge deal, but some people don't put soy on it so they're SOL. The amount of rice on the table ended up being fine since we had to much food anyway, so touche Friendship. But to me white rice is the type of thing that you want to see mounds of on your table and expect to have some left over at the end to take home. We didn't ask for more but if we had I pray that they don't charge extra for it.. . Prices - not worth it. Most entrees are about $14 and for the quality and quantity that you're getting it should be less. Just because it comes on a trendy square plate doesn't mean it should be $5 more than what it's worth.. . Staff - average. They were nice and everything, but very no-frills and to the point. Water was refilled often. Here's my issue though. When I'm at a Chinese restaurant, I like to see...well how can I put this, some CHINESE people. Even Korean or some other close neighboring nation. I believe the only asian person I saw was our waiter who appeared to be Filipino. Even the kitchen staff was mostly Hispanic women. Maybe it's just me but I like Asians to be running my Chinese restaurants.  . . Now on to the good stuff. . -BYOB is a plus and their policy is pretty lenient. . -I had a $50 Groupon so that made the price a little easier to swallow.. -Food was edible. . . Overall I would not recommend Friendship and would not go back. I'm not familiar with the neighborhood but there has to be better Chinese places. . . If you're willing to travel a bit further north I HIGHLY recommend going to Great Beijing in Lincolnwood. Best overall Chinese food in Chicagoland.
