ReviewID: RzFQmq1euIsEgqYxsucZ-g
ReviewerID: 5DgFmyjW6hkBtXtTMKl4tA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Izaka-ya by Katsu-ya
Category: Sushi Bars
Oh my goodness gracious! This Katsuya ROCKS! I'm never going over the hill to Studio City ever again! . . Like the Studio City location this Katsu-ya also has valet and the food is of exactly the same awesome mind blowing quality and deliciousness. Not only did this location have me at hello because it offers me creamy rock shrimp tempura and crunchy sesame tuna closer to home, it had my undying love when I realized how much efficient and friendly the staff is! The hostess was incredible. Not only was she answering the phone, taking down the names of people arriving and filling take out orders, she was doing all of that by herself. The Studio City location has 2 hostesses and they don't have their act together. The waiters and waitresses were on point and in good spirits with smiles on their faces.  We were constantly being checked on and not in a bad way. Anyone who passed by would refill our drinks or take away empty plates, not only our waiter.  We weren't rushed at all or made to feel like we were a burden for patronizing the restaurant which is the feeling I often get at the Studio City location.(there's only ONE waitress that's on top her game and friendly at the Studio City location, the rest are rude and suck!). . Though this location is still a bit cramped, it is a lot roomier and larger than it's Studio City counterpart. I would also like to point out that this location is in a cute and trendy neighborhood surrounded by other hip restaurants and shops so you don't have that icky feeling of "uhh did I just have sushi in a strip mall" nope, here you feel like you're in a bonafide restaurant. There's definitely more of a sophisticated ambiance here and in spite of the proximity to Beverly Hills surprisingly there's less pretension at this location.. . On a busy Sunday evening we did not need reservations. We only had a 15-20 minute wait for a table for 3. The place was packed when we got there and packed when we left, but we weren't put out by the crowd at all.   I'm so glad I had a positive experience here! I not even going to try the Brentwood or Hollywood locations. I'm just going to count my blessings and stick to this one!
