ReviewID: RzsYb6HipirA0euGHHB_Og
ReviewerID: SKvaBgXwPGb1JlLzoWv1RA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Toro Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
to start with perhaps the most useful bit of info - you can get there at 6 pm and not wait more than 15 minutes on a friday night, which is what i did - although i think a longer wait would have been well worth it.  . . the rest of this review is purely self-indulgence, because let's face it, how many people are going to read it given the several hundred others?  but the experience is worth re-living. . . this happened to be the choice for a first date, because it was close to the movie theater, featured sushi, and, yes, garnered high ratings on yelp.  the sushi was wonderful - and the date went well, to boot.... . especially memorable was a specialty roll which consisted of sunflower seeds, mango, a chunk of tuna, spicy mayo, avocado - and here's the kicker - all tightly rolled in a pack of spring greens (instead of rice!) and drizzled with a sweet ginger dressing.  (a delicate rice-based? wrap keeps it together).  basically it's a salad roll - dense mouthfuls of lettuce for your inner rabbit! -  surprising and unusual but a delight.... . we also ordered very basic items like sake nigiri, spider roll, and spicy tuna, which were also yummy and fresh, but looking back i wish we'd chosen more innovative items.  however, one commonplace offering - the shrimp tempura -  was possibly the best *ever*.  i was a little skeptical when my friend ordered tempura, because for me, it usually disappoints - either because it's too greasy or not crispy enough.  this was light, crunchy, and very tender.  so tender, compared to the rest of my experience, i thought it might have been undercooked... but my senses were pleased.... . i also loved that the hostess took both my name and cell phone number for the wait list.  we then waited outside because this place is cozy.  very cute, but cozy.  she then called my phone when our table was ready.  nice service to match the well-crafted offerings.
