ReviewID: S1mRL3yHYzhHplm4lfHOUw
ReviewerID: r9Wii37p0kEDIUt2e2_LqQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
NorCal vs. SoCal.. . That was my question.  Simple enough.  And probably considered before in almost every variation (style, sports, women, culture).  . . But given the often one-sided comparison in these categories for me, I thought a novel comparison would be food.  In particular, ramen.. . In one corner, Santa Ramen (San Mateo, CA) - almost universally recognized as the best ramen in NorCal and represented by their hard-to-get stewed pork in pork broth ramen ($8).. . In the other corner, Daikokuya (Los Angeles, CA) - sporting a similar number of fanatical Yelp reviews and similar lines out the door.  Their contender was the Daikokuya pork broth ramen and rice bowl combo ($10).  . . Having been to Santa Ramen a number of times, I was truly looking forward to Daikokuya on my trip to LA.  The 1 hour+ line (at 9 pm) didn't even phase me.  When it was all over, I'm happy to say I had a ramen winner (see below) :. . ------. Daikokuya does so many things well.  And their management of the long lines/crowds/and small space leaves me wishing other ramen places would do the same.  Among the highlights:. . 1) Friendly service and genuine interest - although it's crowded, the wait staff here patiently await your orders and really hope you enjoy your meal and are full when you leave.. . 2) Fair line policy - while names are taken down on a list (which some people try to cheat by crossing names off or writing their name between numbers), the staff does its utmost to be fair.  They try to remember who's been waiting, go outside and ensure no one has missed being called, and occasionally take roll-call to ensure you have a heads up as your number is closer to being called.. . 3) Excellent food stock management- despite the long lines and crowds, Daikokuya never gave any indication that anything would run out.  I, and many others, hate this nightly occurrence at Santa Ramen.  Having your most popular item run out night after night, usually within the first 15 minutes of opening, is inexcusable.. . Now on to the food -. . 1) Ramen - excellent texture to the noodles and a very warm and hearty broth.  The included items were a hard boiled egg, two slices of tender "kurubota" pork, some bamboo shoots and green onions.  It was neither as salty nor as oily as Santa's broth also made with pork bone.  Overall, it tasted good, felt healthier, though slightly less tasty and a bit milkier than the NorCal version. I recall the NorCal version notably having more toppings. . . 2) Rice bowls - absolutely awesome.  Slipping under the radar as a side dish, the rice bowls truly deserve a spotlight of their own.  Each we tried (unagi, pork cutlet, chicken egg) was delicious and felt so right paired with the ramen noodle soup.  Chicken egg featured tender pieces of chicken and congealed egg that was made to perfection.. . So who's the winner?   Based upon ramen alone, I do have to say that Santa Ramen (San Mateo, CA) has a more decadent and flavorful ramen broth.  The stewed pork is the other key that is just hard to beat.  The inclusion of more items in the bowl (sliced AND stewed pork, bean sprouts, seaweed) also leads to a more filling and satisfying ramen experience.   I'd have to say now it's probably the best ramen I've ever had (though probably not the healthiest). . But for overall experience and the vast selection of side dishes (including the excellent rice bowls), Daikokuya is my choice.  If I have to wait for an hour somewhere, Daikokuya is by far the more pleasant choice.  . . So there you have it.  A winner in my ramen war.  Up next for me?  Perhaps US vs. Japan?
