ReviewID: S2fOOmFsf1SxoHgMohFh-Q
ReviewerID: qKVLocEUZUvceYXkiFX9BQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Little Bangkok
Category: Chinese
I finally ate in the restaurant instead of getting take-out and we were lucky enough to get one of the coveted parking spots right in front of the entrance.  . . The restaurant is nice enough and was filled with a bunch of other non-asian people.  I think Little Bangkok is an exception to the general phenomenon that "ethnic" restaurants tend to be better if most or all of the customers are of that ethnicity.  Or maybe I just think that because I'm not Thai or Chinese.... . Anyway, I opted for Thai dishes (Nau Num Tok, Cashew Chicken) and my dining partner in crime opted for Chinese dishes (Sizzling Rice Soup, Mongolian Beef).  The nau num tok was pretty decent, but not as good as usual - I think it was a little over-seasoned actually.  I tried the soup which was decent, but definitely not the best SRS I've had.  I also tried the mongolian beef which was a little crispier than usual (which I kind of liked), but it didn't have much depth of flavor and was a little too sweet I thought.  . . I ordered my cashew chicken as spicy as they could do it and was informed that it would make me cry.  When they brought it you could just tell by looking at it that it was going to be very spicy.  I was pretty amused that they brought a bowl of diced chilis and a bowl of chili paste "just in case" it wasn't hot enough.  Anyway, the dish wasn't hot enough to make me cry but it was really spicy and good.  I didn't need the spicy condiments. After we had finished our meal and were eating our tasty and complimentary orange slices, the server kinda sarcastically asked if I would still need the chilis and chili paste.  Cheeky bastard.  :)  . . Anyway, it was still good - the 2 Chinese dishes weren't particularly amazing and the nau num tok was a little under-par but it was still good all around.  Apparently a couple that had just eaten thought it was phenomenal as they were standing outside their car licking each other's tongues.  That's a first for me.  I managed to keep my food down.. . 4
