ReviewID: s2OElEJF53OKjBM-YloPuQ
ReviewerID: 65uUyG9yuF0rdMh0z7ajaA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I'd give it 3.5 if I could, but as I can't, I find I must round down.  Here's why:. So we arrived expecting Heaven on Earth in Pizza form.  High expectations, to say the least.  The space is pleasant - dark, attractively though not especially creatively lit, with a reasonable number of tables and a long bar along the kitchen of additional higher stool seating.  The entryway was rather crowded by those hoping for an open seat, but with reservations we were ushered in immediately.. Upon seating, you are presented with a set of breadsticks before the menus even arrive, which are light, flavorful, and quite crispy.. The paper placemats are amusingly printed with varying bits of entertaining trivia, from how to speak Italian to facts on pizza.. The menus are single folded sheets - all Italian wine list on the back, food on the front.  There's a nice selection by-the-glass, albeit not inexpensive, but your wine is served in 250ml amounts - enough for a good 2 glasses each, which actually makes for a fairly good price.  The nebbiolo was exceptional, and suprisingly not tannic for a nebbiolo (exactly as suggested and recommended by our waitress; it's great to see that they've been trained on the wine list).. . The menu contains a great selection - appetizers, salads, cured meats, a few traditional Italian entrees, and a vast selection of pizza. . . We had a fabulous polenta appetizer with melted cheese and some crazy Italian form of bacon which, in its uber-salty and intensely flavorful goodness, was truly a religious experience.. . The pizzas, unfortunately, did not live up to the hype.  Both were decidedly over-cooked: the crust was crisped to the point of almost painful hard crunchiness; the cheese on the margherita was browned and a bit tough, not light and still stretchy.  In fact, it was sufficiently over-done that the tomato sauce was barely discernable in flavor.  Additionally, it left a disturbing slick of orange grease on the plate.  What, in a margherita pizza, would leave an orange slick?. The fennel sausage pizza was, while equally overcooked, delicious - mostly due to the incredible quality of the sausage, flawlessly balanced with the onions.  There's no tomato sauce, which I'd normally object to, but it didn't need it.. . Desserts were very good - the cannoli, filled with a cream gelato, was great - though the dark cherries it was paired with were overpowering.  Sorbet was brilliantly good - pear and dark chocolate.  Utterly fantastic.. . All told, the service was good, the pizza was average to good, and the extras were great.  Normally, that'd be just good enough for a 4, but given the prices and the hype (unfair, perhaps, but with the celebrity chef setup &amp; all it's unavoidable) it honestly doesn't measure up enough.  So 3 it is.
