ReviewID: S2ZCdbZ8j6CuBpG7pftwgg
ReviewerID: gmM7maEZA7FrV9XbGsThrQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Café Santorini
Category: Greek
GETTING HERE:. . Love this quaint joint in an alley, accessible by going up stairwell. Not sure where wheelchairs will fit??  . . It is right in front of Forever 21 and the parking lot on Union (which I will not recommend parking here unless you plan to stay all day as it cost $7.00!! and no grace period or validation).  I would park in the public lot by Buca Di Peppo where you get 90 mins free (i think validation needed?) . . This is our 2nd time here and we are never dissapointed. Sit outside and it is just simply wonderful and romantic. Nice for dinner and very california -like during the afternoon.  . . BREAD:. . Bread is good but i prefer something with sauce.  It is basically a flat seasoned toasted bread, kind of like sliced pita. Served warm, no sauce (i guess you can ask for it).. . ENTREE:. . We got the rib-eye and I was vacillating between Chilean Sea Bass Cappellini or seafood linguini. I caved to the sea bass (since it is new item not even featured yet on online menu) and oh my were they huge! I thought they were huge scallops!  Cooked so well. They were smokey, moist, and yet had some crispy-like flakes on them.  The cream was wonderful and creamy, not overpowering.  Cooked with basil, some herbs, tomatoes. I could not fully see all that was in there since this dish was finished quite fast. . . Rib-eye was cooked medium well and it was still so moist and you could smell and taste the burnt feel to it.  Asparagus was perfect and al dente like. Russet potatoes was crispy and soft inside. Such a wonderfully balanced and flavored dish.  My meat loving husband loved it and gave it all tens.. . DESSERT:. . We finished off with the chocolate mousse cake that honestly was not mousse like at all. Ok, hubby basically said it was like a huge ding-dong that would be better served with ice-cream. To me it felt like cheesecake since it was hard. I was dissapointed in the texture of what I know mousse to be.  I should have taken the tiramisu instead. The chocolate was too heavy for an after meal dessert and I think would have been better served at room temperature so the chocolate could soften up a bit more.  Or at least with some cream on the side.. . The latte macchiato came in a SMALL espresso cup. I expected a mug of latte but got a small shot of latte macchiato. He called it a "strong little guy" and although it was good, I would be happier with a bigger guy.. . SERVICE:. . The server was very attentive and knowledgable of his wine selections. Very good service all around. We went on a sunday night about 8pm and it was not crowded at all. Surprisingly. . . FINAL THOUGHTS:. . We just said this place could not fit a baby chair and just about that time a group of 7 and a baby sit came along behind us. Wow. I guess it can be a "family" place but honestly, I would not recommend that since the vibe fits more of a couple or at least intimate gathering.  With the baby chair, you would be very stuffed to a corner. . . Space is a problem here. So be aware that you can hear everyone's conversation. Speak softly please if you don't want us to know your business, because that will be another diner's conversation .... your business. YES, the space is that tight in the veranda.. . PRICE:. . For two of us including drinks, one appetizer, 2 huge entrees, dessert, and coffee, tab came up to $99.00. So figure if this is too much. It is good food and we did bag one entree home. Definitely a place for a special occasion.
