ReviewID: s3USokNGFPK_Edsfmy14Vg
ReviewerID: C0RkWAPYK58ms-BLBrFCVA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Uncommon Ground
Category: Bars
My review of this place would have been a "4" star had our visit been a little different.. . 3 of us show up and put our name in for a table.  It was 1pm Sunday Brunch and sunny!  We'd already teased ourselves a little by reading the menu online so we were looking forward to sitting at their bar right away to get one of their "uncommon" bloody Mary's.. . Service at the bar SUCKED.  The place was busy, but sense of urgency was lacking. It took them 5 mins to clean off the dirty plates where we were seated at the bar.  Another 10 mins to get us a menu.  Finally, we were served our first beverage at 1:40pm.. . The hostess came by by around 2pm to let us know that our table was ready.  We didn't cash out at the bar for another 10 mins because the bartender took his sweet time.  It wasn't THAT busy.. . Finally we are seated.  We get menus and our waiter was great at first!  Gave us some great suggestions and then said he would give us a few mins to look over the menu and return to take our order. We all said that his service made up for the bar.  But then, he must have disappeared for half an hour.  Finally, took our order and we waited....and waited.....and waited..... . Apparently something happened in the kitchen because the food still had not arrived by 3pm. The waiter recognized something had happened and comped us our meal. That was an excellent gesture.  We finally got our food at 3:20 and we ate to our hearts content. Food does taste better when it is free!  There was some disagreement in the kitchen and the owner (?) or manager ripped the chef a new one in front of us. (well, wasn't yelling, but you could tell he was quietly scolding her).  I think after a few mins, he realized that MAYBE it was not appropriate to do that inside and he took them outside.. . Ok, so the food.  It's good.  Not awesome.  I do appreciate the comped meal - but it was expected after all the time we waited.  They are lucky we didn't just walk out.  . . Arrival at 1pm, seated at 2:15, served food at 3:20.  A little ridiculous even though we weren't in a rush to go anywhere in particular.. . If my experience had been better, I would easily go back.  But with so many other restaurants out there, I'm off to try another place.
