ReviewID: s47YT5BQVyeQlcJqFZdOMg
ReviewerID: QyjJ6WFZLBzgXopffaVCNw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Indie Cafe Thai &amp; Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
Took my wife and 11-yr old son to dinner here this past Saturday.. . I intended to try their signature massaman curry with steak (recommended on their regular menu) but the waitress strongly encouraged me to order the crispy chicken panang curry from the specials card. (That wasn't its actual name, but those were the ingredients.). . Presentation: Roughly 7 planks of hot chicken with crispy shell were stacked in a teepee shape, like an illustration of a firepit from a Boy Scout manual. The planks were as long as a regulation sized nestle crunch bar so this was a mighty generous amount of meat--like two meals worth, and I was hungry. Do you like rich and spicy panang curry? Mmmm tasteh. The generous dollop o' white rice had black and tan sesame seeds sprinkled on top, and a funny shape pressed into it.. . Service: Cheerful, friendly, enthusiastic! Cute to very cute waitresses. Oh behave.... . Wife had a sushi deluxe plate. She literally said "dee-lish" so I think she may have read my other reviews in which I quoted her as saying that. She did mention there was more wasabi on the pieces than she's used to, but she loves the stuff. This dish comes on a white plate the size of a vinyl LP so the sushi looks like art. Or jewelry at a boutique even.. . Son had chicken and broc in peanut sauce with wide rice noodles. This was artfully arranged as well. Stop me before I describe again. . .. . Son and I each had a cali maki which was delicious and came sliced and arranged in an unexpected, artful fashion! Ironic, since at this point I expect them to do _something_ cool, but exactly what? I do not know! Expect the unexpected!. . Menus: cool, unconventional graphic design! Who would have. . .oh right, that's so Indie cafe.. . Background Music: unobtrusively hip and cool electro jazzy lounge selections!. . A little warning about the liquor store, the best beers I saw there were Goose Island Honkers', 312 and Kolsch. Fine beers all but I would have liked something more. . .unexpected.. . Misc. details: This is a smallish room and half the other diners had their kids with them. But this was the early dinner crowd (6:30p) and even the little ones used inside voices. Meal was $62 w/tip, totally reasonable.. . I love this place.
