ReviewID: S4BHUSmXMlPEQL2TCYepIw
ReviewerID: sSveQQvgkDrPbpopNvbPSw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: ilili
Category: Middle Eastern
ilili had topped my list of restaurants to check out for a while now, based on viral buzz, critical praise, and general curiosity regarding Lebanese cuisine. The girlfriend and I decided to make Saturday date night and reservations were set. I'm happy to say that, for the most part, ilili lives up to its tremendous hype.. . We figured we'd order a bunch of small plates for dinner, seeing as two full pages of the menu were devoted to them. Baba Ghannouj is typical Middle Eastern crowd-pleasing fare, and I don't go wild over it like some people, but ilili's offering was probably the best I've had. We also had the Beef Fried Kibbeh, an order I could've done without, honestly. They are essentially four golf ball-sized dumplings, but man, are they heavy! Those things sank right to my stomach. The Mekanek was fantastic - a warm plate of smoky, little lamb sausages. But the standouts were the Phoenicians fries - super-salty and super-addictive - and the Duck Shawarma. I loved everything about this last dish - fresh meat, bold figs, just the right amount of green onions, and the signature garlic whip to bring it all home. Next time I find myself at ilili, I'll be sure to try some new dishes, but the fries and the duck stay put. I'm ordering them every time.. . I have to admit that I do have one gripe, though. While the staff was very attentive and professional, I couldn't help feeling rushed. We were already being taken care of and being checked on rather frequently, so I'm not really sure why the restaurant felt the need to send both our server and the floor manager as a tag team to our table. I think we were ready for dessert after only thirty minutes. I think we spent more time on the subway ride to the Flatiron than we did actually inside ilili. I don't think this was the relaxing dining experience I was hoping for. Delicious, yes, but relaxing, not so much.. . The micromanaging service here won't get me back anytime soon, but, like I said, the food will, so I'll take it. ilili didn't succeed in showing me tremendous variation between Lebanese food and other Arabic cuisine, but I can't attest to a finer Middle Eastern at-large dining experience. The decor is very modern and geometric, designed with more hard right angles than a NYC street map. The cocktails come with a price tag, but they pack a punch worth the admission to Tipsy Town, especially the From Manhattan To Beirut.. . Apparently, "ilili" means "tell me". Well, I tell ya - the hype is real.
