ReviewID: s4h5RyOu2PpY6a77iOyhGw
ReviewerID: _YQpQpcdwgSwjziZnJR43Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Ramen Ramen Ramen Lalalala~~~. . So there were five of us, who decided to drive all the way up to Little Tokyo for some ramen. I am usually a Santouka fan, but heard this place rocks, so I was super excited, and hungry.. It took forever to get in, tho. It was such a busy place. I guess it does not help that we went at the prime time for lunch. We waited, and waited and waited very patiently, to have the ramen of Lil Tokyo.. We started off with some kyoja and pork appitizer. The pork was very impressive and well balanced. The meat in the kyoja had a very interesting flavor to it. It was nice.. I ordered cold noodles. Yeah, the weather was sizzling hot and I needed something to cool me off. When I saw the size of that thing, tho, my jar dropped. It was so huge. I kind of wished they still put tomatos in it despite the tomato scare, but they didn't put it in. bummer. I had it with the sesame dressing. It was good. Actually the whole semame dressing and the mustard reminded me of Chinese cold noodles with peanut sauce and mustard, minus the broth.. Ok, the broth. I stole some broth from another ramen. It was a miso based broth but it was rich in flavor, without too much saltiness like you'd find in Santouka's miso ramen. Nice nice nice. The standard ramen also had some pork in it, which made me compare the pork to the Santouka's ramen. I liked the pork here better. It was softer and flavorful.. I also stole some Unagi (eel) from another rice bowl. I am very used to unagi, since we Koreans eat that stuff a lot. Unagi had a lot of sauce on it, which made it very good.. Fried rice. We ordered a large fried rice. The pork in the rice was well flavored as well. So I guess I have to say overall, the pork here is very nicely cooked and full of flavor.. . After seeing that they have another Daikokua in Costa Mesa, I couldn't help going there today for lunch as well. The review is coming up.. . Overall, I liked this place better than Santouka, for their variety of menu and well flavored pork, as well as the broth that is not too salty.
