ReviewID: s5QFo2esclPqWvcoU23hqQ
ReviewerID: jh_rji4QuVSN_hO1pa9D0g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
I'll be the odd duck, I don't mind it. Get some lumber, crucify me. I just don't see what's with all the 4-5 star reviews we got here. First of all, I hate any restaurant that acts as though they are doing you a favor by letting you eat there. I got the feeling that this is the case here, simply because they're so popular. When we asked for a side of Au Jus, they simply said no. They don't do that. I can understand why they don't (hassle) but a restaurant is there to serve you. Our counter lady was very friendly, I give them that. Lovely lady. . I am not a fast eater, so for me... the pre-dipped sandwich is just a soggy mess. Good flavor, don't get me wrong... but not the best quality. I'm not a huge fan of big chunks of fat in my sandwiches. . While we were there, it was busy, but not crazy. I'm sure they've seen far worse, but the place was filthy. There wasn't a single table in the place that didn't have people's leftover trays on them. . We ate upstairs and it was even messier up there. I don't know about you guys, but I felt like i was visiting my lunatic relative in the insane asylum. It's room and room of plain white walls and bare interiors, just huge tables. The fact that the boyfriend insisted on ordering a little cup of tapioca pudding certainly didn't help matters. If you were sitting up there alone, it would be absolutely creepy. After we were done, a worker walked by wearing a dress uniform, panty hose with plain white nurse's tennis shoes. I don't know, maybe there's a mental hospital 'round back. . I read about the famous mustard, but I really couldn't convince myself to dip into the pots that are sitting on the table in the warm rooms, unattended, just begging for someone to stick their filthy fingers in... or whatever other filthy part they have attached to them. Seriously, I'm really not a snob and, so what, I eat things off of my own floor... but this place is just gross. Maybe it was an off-day, but considering how many restaurants are in Los Angeles, why bother?. I'd rather go to a regular restaurant that isn't "famous" that will serve me some F'ing french fries and let me dip my sandwich at my pace. I'm allowed to vote, I'm allowed to own property and I'm allowed to drive a car... but I can't dip my own sandwich. So, really.. there's no French Dips here, just French dipped. See how I did that? . . As I write this, next to me sits the boyfriend who was outrageously offended that I'm writing up our experience at Philippe's without getting his two cents first. I told him to go write it up on his own (unused) Yelp account. So, after we go back and forth, back and forth, I agree to put in some of his thoughts. His thoughts?: "It was alright."
