ReviewID: s5WihT7DXdeZLZTC1GHhCA
ReviewerID: 6EHbIv5w2I4XbXs3dG_D1Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Deleece
Category: American (New)
This is a great example of a restaurant that never would have hit my radar if it weren't for the Chicago A La Card.  So, in effect, they owe my patronage to their participation in the ALC program.  But they didn't seem to appreciate that, as we will see in a moment.  . . First off, the food was mostly enjoyable but the menu doesn't seem particularly inspired.  I ended up with the szechwan steak salad, which was quite good, although there were far fewer greens than I expected and far more rice noodles.  But, I liked the unexpected twist.  The basil/cilantro/mint dressing was the highlight. . . I ordered also the soup of the day--potato leek with bacon.  The soup was a tad too salty but generally quite good, and I appreciated that the bacon topping was hot and crisp, obviously crumbled into the bowl right out of the pan.  I tried a bite of my friend's poblano pepper entree and give that a thumbs-up as well.. . I finished off with the bread pudding, which was decent on its own.  However, the bacon sauce was a fatal misstep.  I am generally not a fan of the "bacon + sugar" phenomeon--Vosges and a certain Avondale kitchen being the exceptions--but this one was terrible.  It took an average bread pudding into "yuck, I want to spit this out" territory.  It left a really bizarre and unpleasant aftertaste, which is the opposite of what you want from a dessert.  Sad face.. . My main complaint regards the service.  First off, our server had a severe head cold which caused him to snort and sniffle every two seconds as he stood over our table reading the specials, taking our orders, delivering dishes, etc.  NOT appealing.  The second snag was with my A La Card:  since we had taken advantage of the half-price wine special, they claimed that we could not use two promotions in the same meal.  I argued that the wine special was on the drink side, while the A La Card was on the food side; I also argued that the A La Card had brought us in to begin with.  But that didn't get me anywhere.  Regardless of their "rule" I would think that after a two-minute discussion, they would realize that pleasing the customer is in their best interest, and give me the discount.  There were five tables occupied on a Wednesday night--a Wednesday night with a half-price wine special, no less.  They need to look at the big picture.  I'm pretty sure that the $10 isn't going to bankrupt the restaurant, and that giving good customer service is a much better investment.. . So between the boring menu and the sour taste left from the A La Card debacle, I don't believe that I'll be returning to Deleece.
