ReviewID: S6e4MJqkMsUhjJDx68nk1Q
ReviewerID: SIZOfo7jTjCXnL8ZtpM2aw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Back to the scene of the crime....2 weeks later....with bf and awesome fellow Yelper Ciara G.!!. . Even though the group waiting at the 2:00 hour on this Sunday looked daunting, we got a table in FIVE MINUTES, woohoo!  Based on my last visit and this one, I still consider myself ruined for any other burger because of this place!. . Why:. . The SoCal Burger ($9.00): ended up being my FAVE today!  The unctuous oven roasted tomato and spread and cheese made this a slippery, sexy, deliciously messy experience of a burger today - in all the right ways!. . The Port &amp; Stilton Burger ($9.00): still super, with its blue-cheesy, caramelized oniony yumminess.  But for some reason hit my tastebuds in a more explosive way the first time.  Was it me or them?  I'll have to do more research to confirm this, heehee.  This was still bf's fave.. . The Hatch Burger ($9.00): for a non-Jalapeno lover, I thought this was a really yummy one too!  The tender pieces of mild Jalapenos were partying in a cheesy sauce-y topping on this burger.  Messy, not overly spicy, pretty good!. . The Umami Burger ($10.00): we cut the burgers in fourths, so perhaps the piece I got was missing part of the mushroom or didn't have enough of the cheese crisp on it, I dunno.  It was good, but just not as good as the others.  Definitely needs more future research.... . The Triple Pork Burger ($11.00): cooked all the way through (bc it's pork) and flecked with little green onion pieces, this patty was flavorful but not my fave.  I guess I like my meat rarer than pork can go.. . Tempura Onion Rings ($11.00): OOOOH, light and crispy, greasy breading with tender onion in the middle, these rings would be the death of me if I let myself get them as much as I'd really like to!. . Not so skinny fries ($3.50): crispy on the outside and meaty on the inside, skinnier than a thick steak fry but not their skinny fries - a little too salty for me.. . The only sadness of the day was VERY SAD for me:  they were OUT OF the Truffle Burger!!!  =O  . . I guess that means we HAVE to come back for it.....sigh.......such a chore, such a chore : P.. . Umami Burger, it's starting to look serious between us.
