ReviewID: s6sQD2SMOoYIloHamrqLtw
ReviewerID: TcMgLChkfdvO_3k1Fjrwww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Aja Restaurant &amp; Bar
Category: Dim Sum
4.5 stars for my Buckhead Restaurant Week experience here. The FOUR-course menu is pretty awesome, and the portions and quality of the food are worth much more than the $25 price tag. . . Yellowtail Sashimi (1st course): Loved it. 5-6 generous slices of delicious yellowtail atop a small bed of sprouts and soy sauce. Those sensitive to spice, beware: there are a few pretty powerful chiles sneakily diced on top. . . Beef Tartare (1st course): Delicious and well-portioned. Served with an Asian flair: fried wontons and drizzles of spicy and sweet sauces.. . Chilled Shellfish Salad (2nd course): Highly recommended. Octopus, shrimp, and really, really good crab meat served on a small bed of lettuce and sliced cucumbers in a light soy-based sauce.. . Thai Papaya Salad (2nd course): Very light and refreshing, but a little salty. Good, but I'd go for the Chilled Shellfish Salad if given the option again.. . Snow Crab Hot Pot (3rd course): Served a little spicy and piping hot in a pot (hence the name?) with delicious bok choy and mushrooms and a very generous portion of snow crab. Highly recommended.. . Coconut Rice Pudding with Mango Sorbet and Exotic Fruits (dessert): Good, but definitely the low point of the meal. Not enough fruit, and way too much rice. 80% of the dessert is sweetened rice - not exactly pudding - and a small scoop of tasty mango sorbet with little diced pieces of fruit. A LOT of rice.. . Pineapple Cake with Ice Cream and Salted Caramel (dessert): Cake was overcooked a bit and difficult to cut. Ice cream and caramel sauce were very good, but dessert was not the highlight here.. . Ambiance is awesome, service was great, and the valet was actually the best I've ever experienced. There were about 3-4 valet guys working, and all were super nice. The head valet, Mark, literally sprinted to get our car like he was about to be stabbed at GA Tech. I have never seen speed like that, and I truly felt like I needed to applause. . . Go to Aja before this deal ends in a week. Do it.. . ** Note: They won't make ANY changes/alterations/substitutions to the  Restaurant Week menu. **
