ReviewID: s737EqaArUePbDptZwMbeQ
ReviewerID: EDX4Hm6nQx4xNAc0kJ417A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Stats
Category: American (New)
I decided to check this place out for the big Patriots game.  I didn't really have a dog in the fight, and from the crowd there, neither did many others.  In fact take away the TVs and it would have been just another trendy bar.. . The aesthetics of Stats are impressive, it has an "industrial loft" feel that's a far cry from the Hooters imitations most Sports Bars end up with.. . The beer taps on the tables seem to be more of a gimmick than a selling point.  There only seemed to be 3 or 4 tables with them, and while watching over 2 hours, did not see anyone actually use them.. . The TV screens were a little small in the dining areas, almost like they were an afterthought.  The massive ticker running across the bar probably looked really cool in the designer plans, but it's distracting.  When we were there it was running headlines like "Young Female Singers hope for good 2008" and a bunch of hockey scores for games that were happening the next day.  I think it would have been better to flip the ticker and the TV screens and then made the screens bigger.. . The waitstaff kept up with the packed house as best they could, though their uniforms of Adidas warm-up tops and Cargo pants were a little to "trendy". . The food was better than most sports bars, the wings are decent.  The french onion soup appetizer is a real surprise.  The Chop Chop salad is unique, but ORDER THE SMALL. The regular would feed a table of 4 easily.. . The location leaves something to be desired, don't expect to go elsewhere for post game. It almost forces you to drive or cab anywhere else, unless you want to cross the park to downtown, or CNN center.. . Overall I got a very "trendy" vibe from Stats, it feels like the place where you go when you want people to know your "going to a bar to catch the game/fight".  I don't see it as the place for my friends to catch a Sunday afternoon of NFL fun.. . It will be interesting to see what happens in 6 months when the vibe wears off.
