ReviewID: s7gghora4mYJVPORFqQXHg
ReviewerID: w9YZ6U4ytl097DS-k6DSEQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
My Father's Office doesn't look like this one... . . His is filled with various sizes and shapes of lumber... cedar... pine... (mmm... smells like heaven!)... lots of tools and gadgets... and sawdust, lots of sawdust. His office of course isn't really an office at all... it's a workshop in the garage that he fills his golden days crafting some of the most amazing furniture that fills my parents house (and mine) with love.. . So really, upon further thought... THIS Father's Office is not so unlike MY father's office... at least not on the particular eve I am sharing with you now... because IT, like my father's office, was filled with love, laughter, and warmth shared amongst newfound family - by way of friends. . . Having been to the Santa Monica location before, I have to say the Culver City set-up is far more accommodating for larger groups... a bunch of us had just left the OYE at Royal/T but weren't quite ready to call it a night and quickly scouted where to head to next. Father's Office was a logical choice.... Their selection of beers is extensive and they DO have some of the tastiest fries in town.  Our caravan quickly made it to Point A and I was pleasantly surprised to see that parking would not be an issue - for anyone. There is a fairly large parking lot to accommodate. Very niiice!. . We made our way to the entrance and I just wanna say... Wow! This FO is huge!! Well, definitely "huge" in comparison to the teeny Santa Monica location. There is plenty of bar and table space inside and the best thing about this location is the outside patio area, which is also heated. . . On this particular eve I tried the Christmas brew that Mike Q. very nicely supplied me with...too bad on unknown person ganked my beer... meanie! Whoever you are! . . Le Sigh. It was nice while I had it. (insert sad panda face here). . Anyways... the burger is aiight ... I'm not partial to the caramelized onions, in all honesty... I need to remember to order without... but the gruyere cheese is yummerz... and the fries some of the best ever. The sweet potato fries are my absolute favorite...I love the side of garlic mayo that accompanies the fries. So bad...yet so good. I ordered six of 'em to share with the tables we had outside because occasionally I am just nice (or drunk) like that. . . Definitely a better FO... I'd come back... if ever in Culver City.
