ReviewID: S7IB-yZx1w_Tc-QH1fQv7g
ReviewerID: mteJOlja359dj7XYQnKzCg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Wurstkuche definitely has the best weiners in town, he he he.  . . I wouldn't have thought that a beer and sausage place that was so highly touted by one of my boys would be that great...but, it definitely impressed me.  The only reason why I don't give it 5 stars is that I'm not totally big on hotlinks and sausages(though you'd think I was because of my love for hot dogs)...and it can get a little pricey for what it is.. . First of all, the place is difficult to see, you won't find any neon signs in the art district in downtown where it's at.   You'll probably be greeted with a good-sized line if you're heading out there for dinner...we waited about 40 minutes before we ordered our food; and that was on a Wednesday.  The positive here is that you can get your beer from the bar and get your drank on whilst you wait.. . Now onto the "meat" of the review, he he he.  This is a sausage place, so you'd be sorely disappoint to expect much else.  There is quite a variety to choose from tho, from rattlesnake, to buffalo, to alligator, to traditional...my friends and i had 2 different ones each and were trying each others' out...they were all very good, really flavorful and great w/ the beer.   You can get carmelized onions and/or sauerkraut on your sausage(it's served on a bun), and I would go with either.   The fries totally rock too, and you get your choice of dipping sauce, I'd recommend the chipotle aioli...mm.  . . Beers - there is a GREAT beer selection here...it can get pricey...I spent about 50 bucks on beer alone, because the edel weiss (which is my personal recommendation) that was awesome, wasn't so awesome at $11 for 16 oz...but hey, I wasn't struggling to make rent, so it was fine.  . . Price - I already said the sausages were great and the fries were awesome...but expect to pay about $15-20 bucks on the food (it's hard to get full off of one sausage...well for me at least, and I'm a small dude) and some fries.  So you can spend a good chunk of change here, esp if you're drinking and enjoying the beer.. . Ambiance and Space...after you make your order, there is a mess-hall type dining area.  Long tables where you can just sit with other people and mingle.  It's a little dark in the dining area, but it's a cool atmosphere.  There are some tables outside, but because of the area it's in, to be courteous to the residents, they put the tables away by 11PM.  Like I said, it's mess-hall-ish...so I personally wouldn't recommend it as a first-date spot...if they're casual and cool like that, then by all means, go.  But not so romantic, IMHO.  :). . Parking - Parking can be pretty tough at times, but it's free and all over the place.  It's right next to J-town too, and there are a few structures there, if you're wanting to pay for parking.  On a busy night, it might take you a while to find parking tho.  . . Service - The service isn't really one to be noted since you order at the counter and they bring your food to you; but the servers and bartender and other workers are extremely friendly.  They even messed up one of our orders and gave us free fries...any place that makes up for mistakes like that gets an A in my book.. . So overall, great place to hang w/ some buddies, eat some interesting sausages, and drink and mingle.
