ReviewID: S7MFtC-xIaH-BKqWG2BCnw
ReviewerID: qWgOaWnjckpS5MAKUlfx3A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Big Star
Category: Mexican
This place is all over the map. . . First hurdle: There is an entrance, but it's unmarked and you will drive/walk past it several times before you figure out that the drab, grey garage is actually the place raved about in the New York Times.. . OK, you've made it inside. Next hurdle: It's a restaurant, but you have to sit around a bar. Wait, there are tables, but oh, you can't sit in them unless you have a larger party. Oh wait, small parties can sit in them, but only if it's after a certain hour.. . Alright, you've decided you can deal with sitting at the bar. Hurdle #3: There is a host, but oh wait, they won't seat you, they'll just explain that you have to hover around the people eating at the bar until someone gives up their seat. And there's no priority system, so you either have to watch your fellow hover-ers like a hawk, or stake your claim to an area and pray they leave as soon as they're done eating. . . Hurdle #4: Cash only. Obnoxious, considering this is not a Mom-n-Pop kind of place that can't afford a credit card machine.. . Final hurdle: The servers don't write down your order. I cannot fathom why places do this. Especially at a place like this, where the menu encourages you to order a lot of small items. It inevitably leads to a screw up, which is exactly what happened. We ended up getting two of something we only wanted one of, and none of something else. There is a very easy fix for this: FUCKING WRITE IT DOWN.. . If you can get past the foregoing barriers to enjoyment, you will probably find that you like Big Star. A lot. For one very good reason: The tacos are tasty little bastards. Fresh tortillas, piled high with delicious carnitas, pescado, pork belly, ect. Add in just the right amount of guac, cilantro, and/or pico. And, most critically, a lime wedge. Top them off with one of the three salsas set at each station. Yum. And they will run you about $3/apiece. Three to four makes a meal.. . Big Star also has a great beer selection, and by great I mean cheap and served with limes. Sip it while taking in the converted garage decor, and by decor, I mean the light fixtures above the bar. Sparse, but awesome.. . Despite the excellent food and drink, I can't give Big Star more than three stars due to the aforementioned set up issues. I'm sure they become less of a problem after the first visit, but I'm not into places that intentionally make it difficult to just show up and have an enjoyable meal. I just don't want to work that hard.
