ReviewID: S8rXXpmXVUjNB8EMzSu0yg
ReviewerID: J1VHJoaa8PvRaiviH4c49w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
200th Review and Running~. . My kinda place~. . Sausages. Beer. Fries. . German beer and Sausage rivals Red wine and Filet Mignon!!!!. What better pairing????. . A big group of us came out on a Sunday Morning to fill our bellies with Meat - Potato's and a refreshing brew.. . When we arrived there was a line.  Holy Crap!  A line, at a restaurant ,on a Sunday morning in Downtown Los Angeles. . . What were we thinking?  . . The line moved pretty quickly.  So when you get to the counter you place your Sausage order.  I went creative, with rabbit, veal and pork.  . Yep that's right ladies and gents.  Rabbit~  Yum Yum good.  For you more adventurous type,  try the Rattlesnake or Alligator.  A few of my friends did and they were not disappointed.. . The Sausage was oh so good.  Perfectly seasoned, grilled and juicy.  Wurstküche will sell you the sausages to take home and grill yourself.  I would highly recommend that you do just that someday.  . . Oh~ and don't forget the fries.. . These were "potato perfection".   They double fry them, which pretty much means.  Give them a little love in oil for about a minute, take them out, let them rest.  Then give them another dip in the hot oil for crispiness.  Seasoned with a bit of garlic and parsley and served with different dipping sauces. . . YUM YUM YUM~. . We had an absolute great time at  Wurstküche.  You sit in the back or out on the patio pretty much "family style" nothing to fancy.. . Just think October Fest in Germany, but every day.  There is a bar in back room if you run out of beer.  So don't worry about getting back in that long line.  20 plus taps to choose from.  Be adventurous,  there is not Budweiser here.  . . Parking on Friday or for that matter, any weekday can be entertaining to say the least.  Even on a Sunday morning when the parking is free, we had to park 2 blocks away.  Make sure to check the street signs if you are out there Monday thru Saturday, so that you don't get towed or get an outrageous parking ticket.. . Food, beer, and atmosphere PERFECT.  Parking Fun!. . Cheers~
