ReviewID: s8xTsh9Q02q7X6Y5rmZyuA
ReviewerID: F_hO7JTjZAs0UX12qpMjGQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
36... that's how many times the word "pastrami" has been used in reviews for Langer's Deli so far. I plan to bring that number closer to 40. Puh-straw-mee! Okay, say it like you mean it-- ***PASTRAMI***! . . Al Langer seeded his pastrami kingdom in 1947 and it continues to thrive  under the tutelage of his son, Norm. After a nearly deadly bout with the recession of the 90's, it thrives with dedicated patrons and a little help from the Metro Red Line adding a stop there.. . There's more than just pastrami, of course. For instance, I've never had a corned beef reuben until Langer's and it was archetypal. If you want to venture out of sandwichville, you can try their braised lamb shank with homemade stuffing for $15.50. If you're an alpha-carnivore, you can brave the trifecta of meats: turkey, tongue, roast beef for $14.95. However most of the sandwiches are around $10-$12. Expensive but each is a tower of power, built like an edible brick, and often "reubenized" with Russian style dressing that can easily be dressed up with sauerkraut and most often accompanied with cole slaw. The French Dip is tres magnifique! It makes Phillipe's version limp with a broken accent (whatever that means) especially since you actually get to dip it here as opposed to the pre-dipped version there.. . Some reviewers (not just Yelpers) seem to have some apprehension about the safety of the neighborhood and even go so far as to conjecture that Langer's curbside delivery on faxed orders is for the really squeamish. Having lived in cities most of my adult life, I think this is a bit of middle class panic. It's a daytime restaurant and most of the customers are downtowners and it's not scary, people. If you're from some sanitized, Disneyesque suburb you might get culture shock but it's time to get out of your comfort zone and smell the pastrami. . . Parking is available for 1 hour free with validation at a lot on 7th and Westlake (1 block east of Langer's). . . I was modest in only using the word pastr*** 5 times in this review. If only I could be that restrained when eating my heart out at Langer's.
