ReviewID: s9YhPF3dcZeW-eCIVJlNmg
ReviewerID: rMEJOntrboZXhqa4raTs1Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Philippe The Original Restaurant
Category: Sandwiches
Ever since Rachel Ray animatedly proclaimed this institution as "YUMM-O," I knew I would be drawn into this place's orbit someday.  Just a hoagie's throw away from Chinatown and Union Station, it was fairly easy to find parking and not be afraid that there will be no car when you return.  We waited about 20-25 minutes (which was longer than I expected - I mean really how long does it take to dunk some bread into au jus?  Maybe the workers go slow as to avoid carpal tunnel syndrome...)  Anyways, when we finally made our way up to the front of the line, lo and behold the sandwich-maker was NOT WEARING GLOVES!  NO ONE WAS WEARING GLOVES!  Unless these workers are really android humanoids who merely resemble humans, and don't actually ever need to, say, use the restroom, or scratch their face, or pick their nose, then I MUST QUESTION THE LACK OF BARRIERS BETWEEN THEIR FINGERS AND MY FOOD.  Furthermore, these are the same people handling the cash - cash is possibly one of the dirtiest things ever...second maybe only to a gas pump handle.  So, that was a little disgusting - ok a lot disgusting.  My stomach just churned again thinking about what I possible ingested this afternoon.... . Ok but besides the hygiene issues, the sandwich itself was not bad - on the recommendation of a friend, i got the beef, double dip, w/ a lemonade.  The beef was tender, the bread was a 'just-right' soggy - saturated enough that the au jus flavor was fully penetrated, but still dry enough that I could hold the sandwich without it imploding.  Lemonade was just ok.  But their homemade mustard was really nice - it reminded me of Chinese mustard, in that it grabbed my sinuses and kicked them a couple of times.  . . All in all, a pleasant meal and nice atmosphere...you basically are sharing tables w/ the other patrons, so that was kind of cool (although if you sit by freaks it could turn the experience sour quickly, I'd imagine).  I just have to complain about the gloveless workers.  I know this place was established in 1908 - but does that mean they have to follow the hygiene standards from 100+ years ago too?
