ReviewID: SaxJKOSpPuQA51Vr9WCymg
ReviewerID: -HudJfGj2P2y9SkuNxv-RQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
After 2 failed attempts to try what everyone was raving about, I finally made it on time to get a decent spot in line. I went about 2 weeks ago when it was in Rowland Heights. . . We got there around 945, before the truck was even there and there was already a line. We waited about an hour before we got our food (and that's because we were close to the front). . . We wanted to try everything, so collectively we spent around 50 bucks for 4 people. Wow, that's a lot of food.. . On to what we ordered:. 1. Short rib burrito. Mouth watering good. I recommend trying this before anything else.It's like a breakfast burrito but with korean short ribs.. 2. Spicy pork taco. Not bad. Definitely has a spicy taste to it. Not too spicy that you can't enjoy it, but good enough to make you buy a drink.. 3. Tofu taco. Really good actually. I don't eat tofu that often, so I'm not the biggest fan. But if you're trying to be health conscious. Get this or don't eat Kogi at all.. 4. Chicken taco. This one was actually pretty spicy. I'd say to try it if you're not a red meat lover. . 5. Sliders. So SO SO good. Who knew such little "burgers" could have so much flavor? There's only 2 of them though.. 6. The black jack quesadilla. Oh my goodness. This is probably one of my favorite things on their menu. My mouth is watering right now. I just might go tonight since they'll be in Rowland Heights. . 7. The chocolate tres leches cake. It was extremely moist. Not as sweet as I was expecting it to be, but still very very good. I'd order it again just to satisfy my sweet tooth after every meal. The top part of the cake was really good with it's perfect crunch and melted sugar. And the inside, with it's ooey gooey tapioca filling!!. . Wow, that's a lot of food. No wonder we spent so much collectively. So if you're hesitant about trying this, give it a shot. If you don't like the food allll that much, at least it's a really fun experience if you go with the right people. And if you don't like lines (like some people I know), then you might not wanna go. Have someone buy you a burrito (if they're nice enough) and bring it home to you. . . And they say they take card if you spend over $5 bucks or something, but I recommend just bringing cash to save you the trouble. Last time I went (on Tuesday) their machine was down. You don't wanna wait in that line for that long only to find out their machine is down. So to be safe, bring CASH!
