ReviewID: sBNfaqcKWbdqfMzhMMINdQ
ReviewerID: oiOVNiwlbBRFY-VSJKdJ_g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: The Shed at Glenwood
Category: American (New)
Please, please, please Shed, take a deep hard look at what you are doing!  Right now you are a little over-priced, and completely underwhelming.  Everyone in the neighborhood wants you to do well, and so we go there even after a first not so great experience.  This morning was my second attempt.. . My wife and I went here for breakfast around 11am.  It was nice, no line, no waiting for Sunday Brunch.  Awesome, but there is a reason.. . The brunch menu looked alright, with a couple of Egg's benedict options, french toast, and some less common things like braised pork, and steak.  However,  I was in the mood for a more traditional breakfast, so I got the 3 eggs any style with grits and bacon.  My wife, the eggs benedict.  . . The good: Coffee was very well done, not bitter, not too strong/weak/ or old.  The waiter was very good, but made some off-color comment that may not sit well with everyone. Did I mention the lack of a wait?. . The bad: My dish looked like it came from Denny's, but with less color, and almost no flavor.  Actually, the bacon was rockin good (note Rebecca K.), but the eggs were in the shape of the small skillet, overcooked (I ordered over-medium and the yolks were solid; this is over-hard), and unseasoned.  The grits were a tasteless congealed mass of overdoneness.  Not what I would expect for a place that is charging $8-12 for most of their breakfast items.  I asked for salt and pepper since there was none on the table.  However the waiter brought out a smaller pepper grinder (nice), and a side bowl of salt and a spoon.  I am sorry, but salt shakers were invented for a reason.  There was no way for me to adequately salt my eggs without turning them into something pulled from the Dead Sea.  Comfort is an important part of the dining experience, and form should always FOLLOW function.. The eggs Benedict were just alright.  The Hollendaise was pretty pale, runny and almost non-existent.  However, the english muffin was rather plump and pretty. . . All in all, I think the Shed needs to focus on making a consistent and good menu, and consider the comfort of the customer more closely.  These things I think would pay off in spades with a good crowd of customers.
