ReviewID: sBp8WmQ9RST2IzjsunVBZQ
ReviewerID: h4arDT6OP1XzvOmojE2nuQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Taqueria Del Sol - Decatur
Category: Tex-Mex
After much hullabahoo amongst my friends, having heard it referenced at least once a month, if not more, I finally ventured out to check out Taqueria del Sol.. . I could take it or leave it.. . Yes, a taqueria technically sells only tacos, and indeed, the menu is highly limited and constricted to tacos, a few enchiladas, and some sides.  But if you're going to go with something like that, then it either needs to be awesome, or cheap, or if you're in the Mission District of San Francisco, both.  Unfortunately, Taqueria del Sol doesn't really fulfill either category.. . Being my first visit, I opted for three tacos, each of a different variety.  Now, at $2.19 a taco, I'd expect something decent, something pretty substantial.  Instead, each taco was almost, but not quite, a street taco, which for all purposes, should sell for about 75 cents, no more than a buck.  A soft tortilla shell wrapped my fried fish (tilapia), carnitas, and chicken, and each was topped by a little topping and a smattering of some sort of sauce. . . The chicken taco was almost instantly forgettable, and indeed, in writing this review just two days later, I struggled to remember exactly what I had.  The fish taco was good, though I could do without jalapeos that overpowered the otherwise tender fish.  After just a bite, I took the remaining jalapeos out and enjoyed it with the lime mayo.  This was probably my favorite, though I'm accustomed to fish tacos that are a little more fish chunk and less fish strip, maybe with some lettuce on top (if I'm going really LA, then it should also be on corn tortillas, but I won't go there).  They were most generous with the carnitas, but the meat was a little on the tough and stringy side, and surprisingly dry.. . A quick tip - if you're eating alone, or don't mind dining with your companions side-by-side rather than across the table, head for the bar where you don't have to deal with the line.. . Now if Taqueria del Sol was open late (midnight at least!), or open for that nice little lunch-dinner snack phase, I might be more tempted to return.  After all, it takes at least three tacos to make a meal, but just one for a snack.  But their limited hours, coupled with limited menu and a line of at least 15 minutes (even at 1:30pm!), turns me off.. . Take it or leave it.  I'll probably leave it unless I'm really, really craving a fish taco.
