ReviewID: sciUMCYDJ4QkBHEuQKMqUQ
ReviewerID: 1zeS9uLQ6Dc3mhtIUjKMbA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Thumbs Up Diner
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Now, I've taken to reviewing a lot of eating establishments in the area, and diners are my favorite... but this diner gets the biggest, well, Thumbs Up.. . (Not my most clever literary moment, I'm aware.  It's been a long day, people.  Stay with me.). . My castmates and I decided to hit up Thumbs Up this past Sunday morning, and I was warned that we'd have a while to wait.  This, I must say, was an understatement, and the only reason for the four vs. five-star rating... though really, all the wait proves is that the place is fantastically popular, and for good reason!. . And another thing, before I move on.  The place is very accomodating to its avid fans who wait outside for the long haul; if you ask for a coffee, they'll cheerfully serve it to you before you sit, so you can take it outside, sip away and chat with your fellow meal-seekers until your table is available.  You can take menus outside as well, so you can constructively spend your time perusing their appetizing menu and choosing what you'd like to have once you get inside.  Now THAT's service.. . So, we're finally seated, and our insanely-busy-but-completely-on-top-of-it waitress immediately gives us a coffee warmup and asks if we're ready to order.  Boy, are we!  I order an omelette with zucchini and goat cheese, two items I rarely get to put in an omelette, and so I am elated.. . When another person joins our party unexpectedly, there is no exasperation or rolling of the eyes to be found, just the same efficient service and congeniality we've already experienced.  Extra points.. . My omelette was amazing.  Fluffy, the zucchini just right, not soggy or overcooked, with plenty of cheese but not too much.  The biscuit, with blueberry preserves (which looked and tasted like homemade), was to die for, and the coffee just kept on comin'.. . IMPORTANT NOTE: Some of you may hate this, but since I knew about it beforehand, it wasn't that big of a deal to me: Thumbs Up only takes cash.  There is an ATM on hand for those who didn't know or forgot to get some on the way, but it of course charges a fee, so remember, BRING CASH!. . So aside from the wait (which is kinda the Catch-22 of any popular place) and the cash thing (not really a biggie), you win, Thumbs Up.  You so win.
