ReviewID: scX0MUWnHIcKqkJpN_xnPg
ReviewerID: y-ZJPJ3zFi7ltCDn53CimQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Roy&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Asian Fusion
Clarification:  A Butterfish, is NOT like a butterface.  Everything is good about the butterfish.  I would even go as far to say that it was so good I licked the plate.  in public.  at a fancy restaurant.  . . Ok, now that I put that out there, let's continue.  . . We went to Roy's for a birthday dinner, and when we made reservations we told them this.  So when we got there, inside the menu it said something like, "Roy's is happy to welcome the X party.  Happy Birthday!"  And then they offered to give us the announcement.  So right from the get go, I knew I was sold.  . . We all split the Kobe beef sushi, which might be the best sushi I've ever had in my entire life.  I am pretty sure I could do nothing everyday but eat that, and still feel I lived a completely fulfilled life.  . . My friend ordered the Butterfish, I ordered the scallops and thought we'd split.  The scallops were great, but from the minute the Butterfish hit my tongue, I knew I was in for a fight.  It was a classic battle...I had a bite, she has a bite; taking our time between bites, trying to feel one another out.  Each bite getting smaller and smaller so we can have the last one.  I knew she was thinking she deserved the last bite because she ordered it, but I was not going to give in so easily.  I pretended to be done with the scallops...offering her the last bite.  But she didn't fall for it.  Foiled again!. . We didn't order the chocolate Soufflé, but since we were there for a birthday, they surprised us with it.  Normal restaurants you have to ask for something like that, but not with this one.  They did it on their own.  I was speechless, not only with the action, but with the Soufflé.. . So why would I only give this place 4 stars?  1) They say Aloha too often and it got on my nerves.  It's cute at first...but by the end of the night I was Aloha'd out.  2) Its pretty expensive, and I'm not baller.
