ReviewID: SdFjCwAYfEQvRYcYxXqZwQ
ReviewerID: PxdoQkTMaeDcHnAhwUiNjw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lil&#39; Frankie&#39;s
Category: Pizza
Something of a 3.5, really, mostly because I didn't quite like my Mezzi Rigatoni Polpettini Ragu.  I thought I was eating Chef Boyardee Sauce and Meatballs with pasta al dente.. . The sauce was too salty and the meatballs were too soft.. . Looking at the menu and even when I ordered it, I was skeptical because the name, Ragu, conjured up, yes, the horrific jarred sauces.  But I ordered it, anyway.  Why?  I wanted some MEAT, that's why!. . Whatever.  I had such a good time and my friend's pasta were so good that I decided to drop a 4-bomb (well, like I said, more of a 3.5-bomb) on Lil' Frankie's.. . Penne Pomodoro e Basilico and Spaghetti w/ Broccoli were quite excellent.  Had I had a full plate (as opposed to stealing forkfuls) I might have gone with a 5 (yes, more like a 4.5).. . Admittedly, we'd had quite a few drinks at The Library . http://www.yelp.com/bi....  before we got to Lil' Frankie's, but I fully trust that my taste buds would have reported the same field results even if they were sober.  I mean, the fact that I didn't quite like my Chef Boyardee Stee'd Rigatoni is a testament to the sharpness of my t'buds (even after 8 drinks).. . Outside of the food itself - from now on, I'm going to simply forget that I even had the Rigatoni, since I will not get it again, and neither will anyone who reads this, and hopefully, Lil'F will remove it from the menu, etc - I enjoyed everything about the quaint restaurant.. . When we got there after 3+ hours of "studying" and "reading" at The Library, even 1.5 hours past the Hours of Happiness (2 for 1on everything, beyotchez!), there were folks out in front, seemingly waiting for tables and what not.  I was dead-set on experiencing some Lil'F lurve, so that didn't hinder us one bit.  . . The hostess quoted us 30 minutes of wait time.  I didn't care.  She spelled my name correctly and offered to call me when the table was ready.. . After raiding the Citibank ATMs nearby, we came back to the restaurant and sat at the bar.  As I was about to order drinks for the troops, the hostess told us our table was ready.. . Frankie's occupies a very cool space, full of nooks and levels and rooms.  Our hostess lead us to the back area, half outside and half inside.  We sat in the middle, right at the opened doors.. . In addition to the friendly hostess, the rest of the service was completely satisfactory.  Our waiter wasn't the most charismatic nor engaging bloke, but he was prompt and attentive.  The busboy donned a Westbrook jersey and I found that to be very amusing - that they allowed guys to just wear whatever at the restaurant.. . Lastly, they were Crunking out some great music.  I asked our waiter, but he didn't really know, so I went personally to investigate.  The hostess pointed me to the bartender and he introduced to Baller's Eve . http://www.eastvillage.... .  Gotta love it when drinks, food, friends, and music all come together to put a crazy smile on my face.
