ReviewID: sfbdrJQjUCEULXCZXNGp3g
ReviewerID: WeQ3sBfjgXpLNmecTdlD6g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Cafe Istanbul
Category: Turkish
Cafe Istanbul is...one of a kind.. . Yes, there are other hookah restaurants in Atlanta. This one's different because it doesn't really attempt to be upscale. . It's in a cruddy shopping area, with horrendous parking options. . I imagine that if the lights were bright, people would shudder at the building's shabbiness.. They are horrible about refilling your water glass. They pretty much refuse to, actually. Service altogether could make this a one star review.. Lastly, there are these old men who always hang out there, as "friends of the owners." They are shady. If you are friendly back they will not give you peace. You are warned.. . However, there is hookah. Delicious double apple or mixed fruit hookah. Other flavor options exist, but why mess with a good thing.. . There is also really good hummus. It's regular style (no red pepper hummus here!) with a couple of diced tomatoes and olives on top and lots of warm pita. I always order this.. . The kebabs are great. The pizza is different but a winner. A friend likes their rice pudding.. Ordering food here would be fine and dandy if they actually brought it out. Forgotten and tardy orders are a problem. That one star service situation rears its ugly head!. . This place is also just fun. . If you're lucky you get to sit in the seating area with pillows at low tables. The belly dancers do their thing in the middle of the room, so customers sit against the walls; this makes for prime people watching. Sometimes there are random drummers who hit it to the beat of the sound system's Arabic music. . If you're very lucky, drunk white people will dance to the music. I  think they attempt belly dancing. It's hard to tell. . . A little warning though: I've been here many times with girls, and we've ordered lots of things on the menu, it was fine.. I double-dated here ONCE (keep reading). The other girl and I were having a great time. The night was just getting started. Or not. The boys both said they were ready to leave. Yep, they'd had enough. We go our separate ways.. I find out the next morning that both of them got ridiculously sick that night. Not puking. The other varietal. Yeah.. They refused to go in again. I don't even know what it was that they'd eaten, but it was one rough night for them. . . So you're warned. Enjoy.
