ReviewID: Si4Y8MnIr8dj4kgCiDB0cA
ReviewerID: L6g2AEzeY-m-9tG-K32Pbg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
Picture it, Los Angeles, 2010, its a cool Sunday prevening, a man in his prime steps off the subway at Wilshire and Western, and his dream girl rolls up in a jet black BMW the same way hurricanes roll up on unsuspecting Carribean islands. She beckons him enter, he does, and then the maiden announces that she'd like to share a frosty brew and something to eat. Where might this boy, all sheepish and aglow with giddy anticipation take such a princess?. . Why, Melrose between Fairfax, the same place he always takes her when he wants to stumble onto something great.. . The last few times we ambled down Melrose, we weren't pushing a stroller, and were, as I recall, dressed for work, so that time we pretty much just found a place that didn't have a green cross and leaf on the front and wandered in for drinks.. . . This time, we were a little more picky, so upon seeing the inviting outside patio of LALA's with its plastic to fend off the sundowner winds (thank you santa barbara fires for giving these a name) and low key crowd inside, we leapt at the chance to sip on an adult beverage or two and enjoy some Argentinean food, which neither of us had had before. The greenery and open space was excellent, and we had ample room to park our massive jogging stroller that doubles as cup holders for mommy and daddy's oh-so-yuppie Starbucks addiction.. . First off, the bread and basil+garlic+??? olive oil dip that they put in front of us was hard to resist. Very flavorful, but not so much that it would taint our pallets the way habanero salsa does right before having Pozole. Instead, this just seemed to be priming my taste buds for the magic that was coming.. . She had the baked cheese, which was reminiscent of the queso fundida you might find in a spanish tapas bar. Since it was provolone, it was a little thicker, and the seasoning hinted of spicy, but it was no Chuck Norris round house, thats for sure.. . I had the steak sandwich, which was pretty basic and unassuming in structure, and included more of the same mystery oil sauce from the bread before, so it worked nicely. It was big enough to take home, and as leftovers the next day, with a bit of the leftover cheese added, was divine. The fries were unbelievably good, not that fries are all that challenging, but these were executed perfectly.. . Ultimately, LALA's is a great place to grab a beer on a lazy Sunday afternoon, and the food does not disappoint. I'll definitely be back.. and maybe, just maybe, so will that blonde bombshell in the Beemer.
