ReviewID: SJ8XcSLk0O8938m5Hz3uqg
ReviewerID: 3Wwf7byw8fq_ew_MA1xzzA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Gibsons Bar &amp; Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I have a hard time even giving Gibson's Two Stars after our last visit there on Saturday night.  Now, granted it was a Saturday night, and we didn't have reservations.....but if the wait was going to be over 2 hours, tell us that up front.. . We got there at 7pm, and were told by the Hostess that the wait for a table for two was "20 minutes, 30 minutes at the most".  After waiting 45 minutes and spending over $50 bucks at the bar on two rounds of drinks (rocks glass is SMALL by the way), we checked with the hostess and she said "we're very busy, it will be another 15-20 minutes".  Another $27 dollar round of drinks and 30 minutes later, she again says "15 minutes".  So, we wait the 15 minutes and check again...."the tables are paid, we're just waiting for them to get up".  We wait another 20 minutes and finally she calls our name.  The hostess walks us through the dining room and back into the back of the bar, to a table in the bar.  "no, we've waited over 2 hours for a table in the bar? We could have had a table in the bar a long time ago"  . . At this point, we're ready to leave and never come back.  We've spend over $120 at the bar and stood 140 minutes getting bumped around.  The host gets the manager, who does offer to get us a free drink as they get us another table.  Finally, after 2 1/2 hours we get seated.  . . We both ordered the "Small Fillet" which isn't that small....10 ounces.  (This is where they get two stars rather than only one)  The steak was very good.....good enough for a 2 1/2 hour wait.....well NO.  It was good, not great.  Mashed potatoes were AVERAGE, gravy was AVERAGE.  Mushrooms were GOOD.  Calimari was VERY GOOD, better than most places.  . . Will we go back even with a reservation?  Nope....there are just too many good places to pick from, and when I can get just as good a steak or better at many of them, why bother?  . . Our bill with all the drinks was almost $300 with tip.  Not worth it if you ask me.  The hostess staff is rude, the bar is crowded and the room to stand waiting for a table is crowded.....so, waiting is not a good option.  If it's going to take 2+ hours for a small table, tell me that, don't tell me "20 to 30 minutes".
