ReviewID: SjAdlnESfQ1HLdYtuJhaQw
ReviewerID: d_ygu4a3ar08ZXuHuPKZVQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
i know i know, this is on top of the hill high-end restaurant. . . i know i know, Zhang ZiYi that lil whore filmed her Memoir of Geisha here for that "breathtaking scene" . . i know i know, this is like THE place to go to if you are trying to impress a date or possibly hoping the chance of getting laid. . . oh wait, what? you don't care my other racist / nasty / biased comments but i need to take back the Zhang ZiYi is a whore comment since she is the most gorgeous woman in the world? ~ oh, i'm sorry to ruin it for ya, but since my uncle did date her, i really have no good comments for her! you can now suck it up and go throw a lil tantrum in your toy house and come back finish reading. . . and let me tell you more, not only that chick did not impress me, the restaurant did not impress me a tad bit either. i guarantee you still won't stand a chance after buying your crush the $200 bucks meal. How do i know? Yup, i was the crush and i "accidentally" poured tea all over myself so i don't have to go through the restaurant's "romantic walk tour" with the loser after the meal. . . My failed yamashiro date happened prior to my yelp days, so the pricing and menu might be a bit off since then (1 year?). But overall, . . - the pricing is wayyyyyyyy too expensive for a boyfriend or date i care about (see? see? i am a good girl not a user), . . - food is waaaaay too mediocre for a foodie friend to try out with me. . . - Okay, to be fair, i admit the presentation is great. Even their cup of tea somehow bloomed into a flower shape once you soaked it up (oh and mind you, it would cost you about $10 dollars). However, whenever i see a greatly presented dish with impeccable craftsmanship, it just reminds me of those overtly gaudy flashy people. If you truly are a beautiful kind person, is it really necessary to cover it up with all that jewels and cosmetics? . . - and god the people here.. someone please save me out of this pretentious hollywood i-am-ohhh-so-hot crowd. they are exactly like the Yamashiro dish i just described. i'd rather be eating my okinomiyaki from Gardena's hole-in-the-wall. . . -------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------. to whoever that's going to judge me for using the poor date: he totally deserved it! - end of the story cuz i refuse to further elaborate the horrendous experience prior to that.
