ReviewID: sKHi388sC9HmdmOBEMVCPg
ReviewerID: kNFZuS-VTBt3lc37HwS-yA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
If the word of mouth accolades didn't bring you here, you can catch yourself up on prestigious magazine articles posted by the hostess stand while you invariably wait for your table at Din Tai Fung Dumpling House. . . The restaurant comes from a family tradition where the restaurant of the same moniker is now widely renowned in its motherland of origin, Taiwan. Perhaps like in its Taiwan flagship dumpling house, time is of the essence here---when you walk up to the hostess stand to receive your Admit One ticket, you choose from a selection of the Dumpling House's famous dumpling creations from a clipboard menu which you fill out and will later give to your server (whenever the time comes that you get seated). . . The lines and excited bustle of the dining room are the soundtrack to your wait, however, interestingly enough, before your eyes in the watch-us-cook kicthen, you'll see a staff of well trained non-Chinese cooks preparing the dumplings the restaurant is known for.  And just so you know they're not skimping, you can watch the provider-of-flour-balls-which-become-dumplings perform quality assurance checks on the weight of each one of his flour-y dumplings-to-be. . . While you wait, there's a Chinese bookstore with it's own snack shop inside (don't let the hunger-demons tempt you to spoiling your dumpling dinner).  Also, for a pre-appetizer appetizer, there's also a great bakery across the strip mall (ibid. on the hunger demons).  When you're number is called, be sure your entire party is present or you won't be seated. . . Once we were finally seated, we started with the true-to-Taiwan goodness of the chicken broth soup (there's also a noodle soup version on the menu ticket from teh clipboard).  The broth is light and savory and just enough chicken-on-the-bone is provided to whet your appetite for the dumpling feast to come. . . Our dinner consisted of a few different types of dumplings: the traditional pork only dumplings, pork and vegetable dumplings, and crabcake-esque filled dumplings.  We had a side of fresh stir-fried spinach to boot as well.    . . For those of you spoiled by the more rotund dumplings at other dumpling-centric establishments, don't be surprised here---remember those tiny flour balls you saw being sculpted just minutes earlier?  Laws of physics say your dumplings will be commensurate in size to the flour-ball from whence they came, but don't fret, dear Gourmande.  At 10 dumplings per steam-tin per order, you're likely to fill your belly without complaint at these traditionally "one-bite" sized dumplings. . . The service is fast paced and a rotation of different servers will take your order, deliver your dinner piecemeal, or check on your status.  It's no frills, though---go in, feast, be merry, and get out so the people waiting in line out the door behind you can have their turn.    . . Compared to other dumpling places, Din Tai Fung is pricier than most, with a meal for four averaging out to be upwards of $13 per person--outrageous in the rest of the dumpling kingdom, but hey you're paying for the prestige of your seat in the only DTF locale outside of Asia, one of three on the entire planet. . . Parking and getting restroom access in the restaurant are both on par with the line to get a table, it seems.  If you're unable to get a spot in the strip mall, side street and side lots in the neighboring blocks don't make it too far of a hike. . . Din Tai Fung is a place for tasty dumplings but the cost and hassle of eating a bite (that would be, one dumpling) are the meta-markups of the flavors of a food that's good but just shy of great.   But there's nothing quite like word of mouth to get you to what you're experiencing here, right?  Hype, intimate crowds, and honest, good-lookin' food. . . And those flour balls.  Don't forget those flour balls.
