ReviewID: slbw8ixctNSJM8moidLa_w
ReviewerID: NBJVYt7sO-2WDg3bPwBT0Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
4.5.... but definitely rounding up.. . And what could I possibly add to over 450 reviews?  Jesus' tears?  Well..... we'll see about that..... . Came here for breakfast yesterday with Jackie G.  As soon as I mentioned this place to her, she was like "can we go here?  I've had it bookmarked forever!!"  That was convincing enough to pick this place.. . Now, let me just say.... I'm an idiot.  I'll explain later.  And trust me, you'll laugh.. . We circled a couple times and managed to get a spot on the street around the corner.  Walking up the place is about 50% full, which on a weekday is pretty good.  Imagine what it would be like on a weekend.... CRAZY!!!  The patio was well covered with umbrellas and had a very chill atmosphere.  We walked inside to the counter and perused the menus.  This place you order at the counter, sit down, and your food is taken to you.  As hungry and adventurous I was, I decided to get two plates of food.  She didn't believe me at first but she was surprised.  Per the suggestion of Fiona H, I got the smoked salmon scramble, with caramelized onions and shallots, topped with goat cheese.  The other dish, I decided to go for the gusto and get the shrimp and lobster omelette with spinach, tomatoes and topped with a "tarrogon-spiked hollandaise", which might as well be a bearnaise sauce, but technically bearnaise is hollandaise with chopped tarragon mixed in.  As for the tarragon being "infused", I'm not sure what you would call that.. . The food came out and the portions were huge!!  Everything came with a heaping pile of roasted potatoes, which were very good, and 4 pieces of toast.  What I liked was there was a tiny jar of jam for the toast.  It added a cute factor to the dish, haha.. . The omelette was good!!!!  The shrimp and lobster were maybe a little overcooked, but that wasn't that obvious because all the flavors just went really well together.  I polished that thing off pretty easily.  Then I moved on to the scramble.. . To be honest, I was REALLY looking forward to this dish, but I don't know, it just didn't do it for me.  Maybe it was the fact that I had a huge omelette right before, but maybe not because it wasn't like I felt full, but I think it was more the goat cheese.  I mean, don't get me wrong, I LOVE goat cheese, but I just think there was too much?  Also, I think there were too many onions and shallots.  Or maybe cuz it had been sitting therewhile I ate my omelette.  Minus the goat cheese, it might have been better, but I don't know.  I might be willing to give this dish another try and make sure I get the goat cheese on the side.  But all in all a very satisfying meal.. . I definitely want to come back for their baked goods and desserts.  Maybe even lunch too.. . So you know how I was saying I'm an idiot earlier?  Well, part way through our meal, we happened to notice what looked like it could've been a parking lot behind the restaurant.  We made note to check it out when we were done.  So when we left and got in my car, we drive by and then that's when we see a "Parking in Rear" sign.  "DAMMIT!!" I said.
