ReviewID: smbGmFPlK0SLtaJ_8H5tSw
ReviewerID: ptLIFLUPwg3MYt-J62s3iA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
When I was in college I was not allowed to have a job. Hence I never had any money. This all came to a head one Saturday night. All my friends were out and I was in for the night. At around 7:00 or so I started to get the shakes from the lack of food. no problem, I will just grab some cash and head down to the corner and pick up some cereal. Ummm, no cash. Hmmmm. I was too proud to call my girlfriend and did not want to bother any of my friends so I made do by scrounging through the couch cushions and looked for any loose change that may have fallen through the cracks. I found a total of 7 cents. A bag of Ramen noodles at the time was 15 cents. . . Do you even realize how much this sucked? . . Later on that semester my parents gave me $2000 and told me to go out with friends and blow it on a nice meal. What a score! I rounded up a few of my closest friends and made a reservation at Mastro's. After each bite of my steak I could not help but think back that just a few short weeks ago I was in my room starving to death. To date, this was the most satisfying meal I had ever had. . . I made a return visit here this past Saturday and Mastros has not missed a beat. They still offer the same outstanding service and some of the best cuts of steak around. I thought about going old school and having a gin martini, but got suckered into having a glass of Glass of Veuve Clicquot to start instead. Not a bad way to live. . . A few high points that I would like to point out. . . If you are remotely a fan of spinach, do yourself a favor and make sure to order their sauteed spinach. I am not sure what they put in it, but it's amazing and goes excellent with any of the cuts of steak. . . The mushrooms are decent, but may have too much going and can actually over power your steak. . . For dessert we both shared the pecan pie. Theirs has a thin layer of cheesecake filling which you do not find in others. I thought it was excellent and am dreaming about it right now. . . So now here is your task. Lift up the cushions of your couch and love seat and take that cash to Mastros, you will be glad you did.
