ReviewID: smnfudKFCVOGCPZgAG61YA
ReviewerID: D__npw7GCcW0Jw1Wb5gEPA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spacca Napoli
Category: Pizza
Last spring my husband and I traveled to Italy. While in Naples - the birthplace of pizza - we ate at Pizzeria da Michele, one of the most famous pizza places in Naples. Ever since that trip I have been craving that unique taste. It's the combination of the San Marzano tomatoes, the mozzarella di bufala and the high heat of the oven that you can't get just anywhere.. . Then I read about Spacca Napoli. Two weeks ago on a Saturday night, my husband and I tried Spacca Napoli. It was crowded, though that is expected on a Saturday night. We waited 30-40 minutes for a table, but it was fun watching the open kitchen and seeing just how quickly the pizza is cooked (less than 80 seconds!). The owner was playing host and was friendly, passing out delicious apps to the people waiting.. . We had a chance to look over the menu while we were waiting, so when we were seated it didn't take us long to order. I only wanted the Bufalina, which is essentially the Margherita I ordered in Naples. Very simple pizza - tomato sauce, buffalo mozz and a touch of basil leaves on a deliciously thin, chewy crust. My husband ordered the Bianca con Bufala, which was essentially the same, minus the tomato sauce. (FYI, the prices, when converted to Euros, was almost exactly the same as in Naples.). . Our waitress was very friendly. We ordered lemon sodas, as we had everywhere we went in Italy. Our pizzas came out fast, but not before the owner stopped by our table to offer us a piece of deliciously fried mozzarella.. . When the waitress set the pizza in front of me, I teared up. It smelled exactly the way the pizza in Naples did. It really took me back to our wonderful trip. More importantly, the pizza TASTED the same. Very authentic. My husband's pizza bianca was also delicious. I also loved how they served it with a knife &amp; fork, just like in Naples. This isn't typical NY pizza.. . We thanked the owner as we left and told him how wonderful it was to relive a small part of our trip. He was very friendly and seemed genuinely thrilled it measured up to our expectations. He also handed us tiny canolis that were to-die-for!. . We'll be back when we need a taste of Italy again!
