ReviewID: SNlFrAtw7BV46mc-u_arrQ
ReviewerID: 36Vr9BASkR2v9NKNoZtiSA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Veggie Grill
Category: Vegetarian
I'm a meat eater. Like I'll eat steak for breakfast, lunch and dinner. But since I'm down for anything new, when a vegetarian friend suggested this place for lunch, I was psyched. I've only been to a veggie place like one other time in my life. I don't do it on purpose, I just don't usually hang out with vegetarians enough to go to veggie-only places. . . It's in the new plaza at El Segundo and if you've never been there, just because you see a store from afar doesn't meant that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. Whoever designed the lot and the plaza was making swirly marks on their blueprints. Whatever. . . Anyway, the restaurant itself was kind of behind YogaWorks and conveniently located next to an Active store. There was a short line, but we got in pretty quickly. The place was bright and airy and wasn't small, but wasn't big. You take a number and sit down. We sat outside, but the area outside has room maybe for like 10 - 15 people with like a few small tables. . . I had the Santa Fe Chickin Sandwich, which was great, with a small side salad for an additional $1.95 with the citrus vinegarette. The salad had couscous on it, which I'm normally not a fan of, but it was a great combo. My friend got the Bali Bliss with avacado, which she really liked. My "chicken" sandwich was awesome, and went well with the order of Sweetheart Fries we shared. I normally don't like sweet potato fries or can't eat too many of them, but they were pretty light and I didn't feel like how I usually feel after downing McDonald's fries. I had a lemonade too, which wasn't anything to write home about, so I probably could've saved the $2. . . Everyone including the cashier, the person who brought our food, and the person who bussed our table, was super friendly, but not fake friendly. We went early, around noon, on a weekday, and we beat the crowd. I can see this place being pretty crowded for lunch on the weekends with men and women in track suits with their dogs. . . It was so good, I already told some friends about it and it might become a normal lunch place. Like Curry House is for me. It was so good that I considered converting to vegetarianism. Until I got back to work and made reservations at Fogo de Chao for a friend's bday. Go meat!
