ReviewID: So0uUpHxuNAqzu06EaQUtg
ReviewerID: inE_LzNxxAFbBU-FAGpZFQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
I went this past Saturday night.  I used to work across the street and hadn't been back since the re-modeling.  We grabbed a quick drink at Sidebar right next to the restaurant.  The bar was completely redone, much more modern and peachy with a kind of Jack FM mix of songs being piped in.  The irony is that, and it's impossible to convey this to folks haven't spent a lot of time there, on weekends and after 8 pm on week nights the median age of the people out in BH hovers around 85.. . Not that that is a bad thing, if you close your eyes you can picture them trying to catch the eye of Jack Warner or being involved in some ritualistic orgy that involved dead live stock and a very live Lana Turner.    . . The restaurant itself goes for a simplistic modernism with a touch of a redone PH vibe with giant portraits of celebs (Clooney, Pitt, Blanchet) on the walls.  I understand there is an attempt to be playful but between TNT and the California section of the Times I get enough of Arnold's piercing blue eyes so having him watch us while we choose between baked alaska and the souffle is a bit much (we split the souffle, it was great).. . We split the soft shell crab tempura appetizer (outstanding with really fresh veggies that were not overwhelmed by a great sauce).  My date had the the sampler of the NY, NEB and Japanese Wagyu beef and I had the short ribs.  I loved the ribs, they were tender and tasted more along the lines of the middle eastern meats found at Chameau than an Indian curry dish but it was outstanding.  . . My date enjoyed her steaks far more than I did, though I did like the NY  one.  The sauces were fairly pedestrian and the mustards lacked kick.  The wine list was excellent with a slightly higher-than-usual mark-up.  . . The wait staff was very quick, polite though it felt they were on a kind of script of descriptions of the food and when we wanted to either ask them questions or had already made up our minds they were reluctant to break off from their scripted run-downs of the cuts and so forth.. . We had a celebrity sighting of an A-list director and his teen kids, they were one table over but there was no commotion or fawning or disruption of our service.  . . Overall they try to blend celeb hot spot, old school menu and Hollywood kitsch and for the most part succeed.  I did miss the old days when the place was overrun with guys named Swifty, Johnny and Jimmy in suits drinking absolute citrons with budweiser chasers, and periodically erupting with statements like "those motherf***ing motherf***ers!" so yeah...I prefer Morton's, but this place was cool too.
