ReviewID: sOlbeHMA6rO2QTVIwzJQDA
ReviewerID: 0Ye7viHrjDX2WoaGl2Zbdw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: FLIP Burger Boutique
Category: Burgers
I hate that I have to give it 3 stars, but let me explain: . . My first visit was about a month after they opened and I was convinced I found my new favorite restaurant in Atlanta.  The service was great, the food was great, the atmosphere was great, you name it -- I was impressed. . . The butchers cut is definitely my favorite burger. I couldn't ask for a better burger. . . Ok -- here's the **minus 2 stars** part. . . My return visit, after hyping this restaurant up for months, I decided to bring my mom and step-dad.   They're hip, fun, young people -- we're not talking aging old folks here.  It took about 10 minutes for anyone to come to our table, and when the server (who looked like she was straight from "The Hills" show on MTV) greeted us, she says "Can I get you guys something to drink" ...then followed by "OK" and walks away. I felt like I was in South Beach....the snotty, "my $hit don't stink" attitude.  I ordered a root beer martini -- and watched it sit on the bar for 10+ minutes before she brought it to the table.  When she came to take our order, she said "You guys know what you want" with this blank 'i dont have time for this' look. . . Without going on and on, i'll just say that the service sucked.  I have a feeling, and after affirming my suspicions with friends -- we believe that the staff at Flip Burger know's that they have something special, therefore it's OK to be snotty.   I'm a firm believer that the food tastes better with good service -- i know that sounds ridiculous, but whenever a server pisses me off, I think it's natural to ride on the negativity wave and unintentionally look for flaws.  Instead of being in a good mood and chatting about whatever, we were talking about the service and how our server was off chatting with the bus boy while we needed refills and condiments.   . . I'm done with my rant and I will update my review when I decide to go back.  I realize that this may have been an isolated incident, but Flip needs to take a big dose of southern hospitality....don't worry, it'll only help, we'll still think Flip is posh.
