ReviewID: Spc48aLpnRzlrhG0sECaPw
ReviewerID: TKzFASCz7GLGUcwO1QG2jA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Just as amazing as I remembered!  I had been to Pizzeria Mozza only once before, back when it first opened, and I always wanted to return but never got around to it.  Last week, Ben G arranged a wonderful dinner for a few Yelpers, and we had a great time!  . . 6 Yelpers = 6 delicious pizzas, 2 appetizers, and 3 bottles of wine (well, one was champagne)!  We all shared and enjoyed the Goat Cheese and Bacon, the Bianca, the Speck and Buffalo Mozzarella, the Ipswich Clam, the Fennel Sausage, and the Squash Blossom Pizzas.  The Goat Cheese and Bacon was voted the most popular (yay, I chose it!), followed by the Bianca with Fennel Sausage added to it.  Some other highlights for me: the Buffalo Mozzarella.  The house-made mozzarella is incredible- so fresh and delicately flavored, very different from the kind you buy at the market.  My least favorite was the Ipswich Clam pizza.  It was good, but I think I like my seafood separate from my pizza.  . . We finished the night with desserts.  Most of the table ordered the beloved Butterscotch Budino, but I wanted to try something else as well so I ordered the Caramel Coppetta with Marshmallow Sauce and Spanish Salted Peanuts.  It seemed to be caramel gelato served with caramel and the marshmallow sauce served over it.  The sauce hardens with the coldness of the gelato and, with the salted peanuts thrown in, it becomes almost like a gourmet peanut brittle under the gelato.  Salty and sweet, mmmm....  The Butterscotch Budino was luscious and rich, but I think I liked the different textures and flavors of my dessert better.  . . It was a fantastic dinner, but a few caveats for everybody: the corkage fee is $20 (ouch), they are very serious about table turnover here (dude with a stopwatch practically), and the valet parking was $10 so go cheap like us and park on the nearby residential streets.  Other than that, enjoy the wonderful food and ambiance of Pizzeria Mozza!  Thanks Ben, for organizing a great night and bringing the wine, and to Cresta for the Prosecco with dessert!
