ReviewID: sQBJb9PkBwIwkk6a6yIijA
ReviewerID: CZsLXcUlT2os3Wj5OVgkzw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
Very romantic- save this spot for a special occasion! . . We originally wanted to sit at the patio after looking at pictures because it looked so beautiful, but they took us to a table in the blue room... which was a small table for two only a few inches away from the other tables.  I guess our faces looked less than excited so he took us to a table in the piano room, which was the same story, different room.  He took us back to the blue room and gave us a huge table meant for 4 secluded on the corner... perfect! When you make reservations for two, I suggest you specify something secluded... the tables are placed VERY close together.  Oh, and if you want something romantic the piano room and blue room will do the trick.  The patio was very lively and loud!  Where you sit is very important because it can really make your night. . . We started with the figs wrapped in prosciutto filled with blue cheese (I might be wrong with the details).  Anyway, Nick thought this was phenomenal and the best thing all night.  We also had the Spicy Steamed Mediterranean Mussels which I liked better.  It had a really interesting flavor in it with garbanzo beans and a whole lotta spices. It was great, but in terms of sophisticated taste the figs win.  . . On to the entrees. I ordered the scallops that rested on top of braised leeks and garnished with a red beet puree.  This dish was a-mazing. I would come back and order this again. Nick got the black olive tapenade  crusted grilled rack of lamb.   It was good, but I don't think either of us thought it was great.  . . For dessert we had creme brulee (when you make reservations online, you can make a special request so Nick ordered it through there so I had no clue!) It was very pretty, but kinda runny.  It was delicious and was a great way to end the evening, but the texture just wasn't there.  . . I wish I could give this place a 4.5 because some of the dishes could be better and its pretty overpriced, but the attentive staff, charming waiter and romantic atmosphere really makes for a special evening.
