ReviewID: Srgp8fWTygx_ALOSwfw_sw
ReviewerID: Ige3GC0ADiKjbps8FWbsDA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
I'm lactose intolerant and I love Milk.. . I've been a long time resident of "Brunch Blvd", that trendy stretch of cafes on 3rd St in West Hollywood. When I started as a lowly PA in this town, my producers always seemed to want lunch from Joan's on Third or Toast. Never mind that parking was impossible and that wait times were long. And truly, the food at both those places was good. Now as a producer myself, I'll find myself saying "How about Toast?" when the question comes up of where to order lunch from. After all, I have my own PAs now and they can deal with the parking and the crowds.. . But last Friday, on a rare day off, I was looking for a place to have lunch with my PA, err I mean girlfriend, and did the usual drive down 3rd. Parking at Joan's was impossible and the line outside Toast looked like an open call for American Idol.. . And then I remembered Milk. I'd driven past Milk so many times and thought it looked like a cool lunch spot but had never stopped. It was probably the subliminal effect of the four milk bottles in their logo and the thought of the havoc that 4 quarts of milk would wreak on my stomach.. . But I put aside my fear of lactose and stopped.. . If there was a cafe in Fritz Lang's "Metropolis", the exterior of Milk would be it. Imposing, industrial and futuristic in an early 20th century way. The clean industrial look continues on the inside, all white tiles, exposed pipes, industrial lights and stainless steel. . . The lunch selection is similarly minimalist. Essentially sandwiches and salads. But you don't need much more when the sandwiches are this good.. . I had the Media Noche, which is pulled pork and ham with manchego cheese, pickles and roasted garlic mayo. Now I've never been to Cuba, or even Florida, but this was hands down the best pulled pork sandwich I have had in LA. The pork was incredibly moist and tender, the slice of ham added another preparation of pork, the bread toasted and crispy and the cheese perfectly melted through. This is a sandwich I could crave.. . My girlfriend had the Turkey BLTC. A good sandwich but nothing was going to compare to my Media Noche.. . If I had left room for dessert, I would have attacked their gelato counter. They had a great selection of fruit flavors and I'll definitely return for it. They also have a huge selection of ice creams, shakes, malts and floats for those who actually tolerate lactose. Ice cream sandwiches and bars too, which I haven't seen for years. Their cake and cookie selection was similarly large. The ones that stood out for me were the cupcakes served in ice cream cones and the Blue Velvet cake. Very David Lynch.. . So the next time one of my PAs suggests Toast or Joan's on Third for lunch, I'm going to fire them on the spot.. . Unless that PA is my girlfriend. In which case I will smile sweetly and say, "Whatever you want baby. You're the boss." . . Then I'll send my other PA out to Milk.
