ReviewID: SsUbA7ndKNgO9JfgxlgxVw
ReviewerID: ajri6UFqdUOsl6qVz2YWCA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Sura Thai Bistro
Category: Thai
I cannot, for the life of me, understand why this place has an average of four stars. The BF and I went there the other night with the intention of trying out a neighborhood spot and possibly finding a new midweek fave. Unfortunately, we were extremely disappointed with the food, so much so that we went to CVS on our way back home to pick up munchies so we wouldn't go to bed hungry. It was a seriously depressing food experience.. . First, I ordered warm sake, and it took them five minutes to inform me that they were out of sake. So, I ordered a glass of pinot noir...which turned out to be pretty gross. And it's hard to gross me out with booze, as am I willing to drink just about anything after a long day of work.. . As for the food, we opted to order a bunch of appetizers to get a good sampling of their food. We got the lettuce 'wraps', the steamed dumplings, the gyozas, and the coconut-crusted shrimp. Everything was served either cold or luke warm, and none of these are cold appetizer items. The lettuce wraps were not wraps at all, and instead were basically a Cesar salad (cold grilled chicken and Romain) with a sickly sweet peanut sauce encased in a crappy caterer-like pastry envelope. I was pissed. I love lettuce wraps and the wonderful interplay of hot chicken, savory goodness, and cold, crispy lettuce. This was the bizarro world version.. . The steamed dumplings weren't hot, nor were they very savory or tasty. The gyoza were NOT GYOZA, and were more like a samosa or something you would get at an Indian restaurant- wrong filling, wrong dough, wrong everything. The shrimp were not tasty, and somehow the coconut outside appeared soggy.. . The servers were nice, but my impression of the food was that it was frozen crap they got from some kind of catering supply store and warmed up (just barely) in a microwave. . . If you want Asian, there are so many more great places in the neighborhood like Joy's. Don't waste your time or money here.
