ReviewID: St9o6CrE3tsYsS-zNU5nUw
ReviewerID: wp0ya-F5FU05QutPd_4c7w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Saw this place from "best thing ever ate" on food network the other day so i decided to try it.  Logged onto their website and fell in love with the unique design.  What's disappointing is that i couldn't find a sample menu ! . Well, I decide to try this place anyways since food network claims that they have the "best burger" in town.  . So when my friends and I got there we didn't see a line so we assumed that the waitress will come ask us "how many people" but no one came so we just found our own table and sat down.  . Then the waitress came and handed us their menu and told us to order the food at the bar.  Although i sorta like this "self-serve" style but is kinda hard to keep track of what everyone wants.  you will know what i am talking about after you read their menu!! the beer list is super long and so is their food list! . For appetizer we ordered their garlic fries and sweet potato fries.  I don't know what kinda dipping sauce it is but is SO ADDICTING! You can't just eat one fry ! it is ABSOLUTELY DANGEROUS the food is situated in front of you because it will magically disappear without further notice.  . Besides their awesome fries, we also ordered a raw ground beef/meat type of appetizer with crispy chips around it.  It taste very bizarre but it does melt in your mouth ! Still not sure what it really is and don't want to ask because my brain would tell me to throw it all up since it is plain raw meat!. Other than good o beers + amazing appetizers we each ordered a plate of "office burger" !! The sauce is very sweet and tangy and the meat is super juicy!  (well is only juicy if you order medium rare- one of my friend decided to order WELL DONE! and the meat looks rough and not appetizing at ALL!) So please please take my suggestion! no WELL DONE BURGER! . Although my burger was juicy, i couldn't finish the whole thing b/c i ate too much fries in the beginning! So l have learned my lesson here never put their fries in front of me or else i won't be able to finish the delicious burger. . Definitely coming back to this place for its burger, beer and appetizers! gotta get those fries again and that bigbig juicy burger!
