ReviewID: SVh8iVAylIRgIcIWU-8a3Q
ReviewerID: eiNTC3h7zmoM3aFCbb_zGQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: ilili
Category: Middle Eastern
This was by far the best of my 2008 Restaurant Week picks!. . You get two appetizers per person on this RW menu, and since I was with two other friends, we maximized and got 6 in total.. . The Kashkawan Cheese - duck egg with cheese and truffle - despite sounding weird was definitely my favorite part of the meal. We also got the amber jack, hommus, falafel, chankleech, and lahmajeen (the last of which I couldn't eat). Everything was good - and despite the fact that there was way too much food for 3 people, we managed to finish it all. They also give you an unlimited amount of warm, soft pita.. . Moving on to the main courses... I got the branzini (fish) which I really enjoyed. The blood orange sauce complimented it really well. One of my friends got the black cod (on the waiter's recommendation), and was slightly disappointed by it. It was good, but it definitely wasn't as flavorful as everything else on the menu. My other friend got the beef kebab and was very happy with it.. . The desserts were unique, but all very tasty. My only disappointments were that the the baklava assortment wasn't available and that two of the desserts were very similar. So, instead we got the three remaining dessert options so we could sample them all. The achta is a traditional lebanese dessert that our waiter described as bread pudding without any bread. It was really light and flavorful, with a hint of rose water. The essmalieh was a napoleon that used achta as the filling. I can only describe the outer pasty of it as something resembling fried shredded wheat. (Still good though). The last dessert on the menu was an assortment of sorbets: passionfruit, coconut, and blackberry. The passionfruit was somewhat overpowering, but great in small doses. The blackberry was good, but nothing special. The coconut was my favorite - not too sweet without losing the coconut flavor. Like everything else that we ordered, we scraped the dessert plates clean.. . But, despite eating a ridiculous amount of food, none of us felt disgustingly full. We all just left satisfied and planning our next trip back.. . As an afterthought, the restaurant itself was really beautiful - with wood beams everywhere and a very geometric design. Red chairs and accents added to the decor. I just thought the restaurant itself was kind of out of place on the block of random buildings that is 5th ave between 27th and 28th. But, who cares? The food was good and it's close to where I live so I'll definitely be coming back!
