ReviewID: SvyYX7TxE_Tiyh9LNTySxQ
ReviewerID: m3FleKsUG-1UNqJsJZid9A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
I wasn't even hungry. I had come back from a late lunch and from drinking loads of fruity fluids from jamba juice and coffee bean which I attempted to burn off by running 2 miles before dinner but I was still feeling pretty full. However, we had decided to go to Apple Pan last night and I didn't want to rain check it since I was looking forward to burger night for a while now. BF was hella starving and he hadn't been to Apple Pan in a long time (I, never) so we trekked out there (like 5 min, haha). I forgot everything I read in the yelp reviews, which may have given me a more objective pov.. . We walk in around 8 30pm and see that all the seats at the rectangular counter are occupied. three groups of people were in front of us, but busy on the phone. Two seats clear up and we ask the people in front of us if they want to sit, but they tell us to go ahead (really!?..alright if you insist).. . A old man (between 60-90 years old...big range, i know, but it's hard to tell after a certain age) with an incredible dry sense of humor hands us the menu. We were thinking he's probably the owner or someone the owner thought to hire to give it that old skool feel. I order the steak burger and my BF orders the Hickory burger. We get an order of fries with diet coke, root beer to go along with it.. . The old man brings us our drinks. They come in paper cone cups, nestled in a metallic holder. I was like whoa. That's pretty cute. Hhehe. I don't know why but it made me feel like Hello Kitty. It's pretty fascinating to watch the cooks behind the brick wall tearing up the lettuce heads and cooking the buns. . . Our order of fries are slammed in front of us. The mountain of buttery french fries were just yelping to be devoured. I reach for a bottle of ketchup to pound out the sauce but the old man comes back, suavely takes a bottle of ketchup and pours it out onto a ketchup paper plate, mumbling a joke about how slow I am. Haha. this guys is freaking hilarious. Reminds me of "grumpy old men" even though i never saw that movie. . . Our burgers come. we take our pictures as we always do before devouring our meals and i check out my steakburger (i ordered it without the cheese). Two buttery buns bookending half a head of iceberg lettuce, a juicy patty with some sort of relish ketchup combo sauce. I take a bite. WHoa. It's like the first time I had an In-N-Out burger when I was only used to eating big mac's. My burger was like a greasier /juicier version of an In-N-Out burger with cuter and more buttery buns. the relish sauce gave it a nice kick. I had a bite of my BF's Hickory burger. I'd have to say it really kicked my steak burger's a$$. Next time I'm totally getting that. . . The fries were 90% gone when we left. It was buttery and crispy and soft and big. Nice. . . While eating, I thought I'd regret it afterwards because the complete meal was this buttery piece of heaven but surprisingly, I didn't feel like crap afterwards like I usually do when I eat something hella greasy like pink's hot dogs or porto's potato balls.. . The size of the burgers were also appropriate. Not too gargantuan. It was the perfect pre-america-gone-supersized portion.. . We tipped the old man generously for providing us with light amusement throughout dinner. I was a bit surprised to come back here to read all these reviews saying that the service is bad and the staff is grumpy. I think they're playing the grumpy character but if you can hear through the grumbles and listen to the jokes, it's actually cute funny. . . QUALITY FOREVER!!!!
