ReviewID: sxEyWx8S5S6g1pDpCb8V5w
ReviewerID: 6d3AKDltJzeTeQCAYJ265Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Top Spice Thai &amp; Malaysian Cuisine
Category: Thai
This event came about one Sunday evening when I was starving, too lazy to cook and too lazy to pick up something to eat. I got on the internet and saw that they delivered and said why  not. Now, I am just recently being introduced too Thai food and I love Lil Bangkok so I had high expectations. I ordered the Spicy Beef Fried Rice, Thai Egg Roll, Chicken Satay, and Thai Tea. After taxes, tip and delivery fee I was at a whopping $30. (Remember my desperation of hunger and laziness) . . Service was prompt and the delivery person actually beat the time estimate. I was so excited. First thing I did was bite into the Thai Roll. Yuck... Absolutely no flavor and the shrimp was not de-veined. I then went to the tea to wash that not-so-good egg roll down to only be more disturbed by the tea itself. That was all types of awful. So that is about $7 down the drain thus far.... . Onto the chicken satay, I NEEDED this to be good. It was EXCELLENT. The only sad part about this is that I wish there were double the portion (you get a nice amount but after eating you will want to devour more). . . The lastly onto the spicy beef fried rice. It looked and smelled really good. Upon first bite, WOW...it was great; however, it was not as spicy as I would have liked it to be. I will have to request in the future they kick it up a few notches. I can imagine it being good in the chicken variety too. Better yet, I would love to see a house special of the spicy friend rice. :-). . I really appreciated the fact that none of the food looked or tasted greasy.  The satay was $8 and the rice $10; I would say this is a bit overpriced but for the quality I can overlook it. And on a desperate night when I am hungry AND lazy, I can spend $20 and not feel so guilty compared to eating a loaded pizza. . . Overall this place is above average but I am not quite in love yet. I may change my opinion after a few more visits.
