ReviewID: sXSuMRMf9feMUXGOhLnMEg
ReviewerID: 8NbMi68s2deHfgWRZlDpog
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
Don't know what took me so long to write a review on this place.. . Porto's Bakery has been a part of the Glendale community for as long as I can remember.  Over the years they have expanded into what is now a huge space that encompasses two dining areas along with limited outdoor seating.  When you step into Porto's you are greeted by organized chaos.  Empty tables are hard to find and are at a premium on the weekends.  As you walk towards the bakery section, there is a long line that snakes through a roped off section.  They have recently done away with their "take a number" system, which I think is a mistake as it is much easier for people to cut in line now, and that could really result in a mob scene.. . The Cheese Roll is everyone's favorite.  In fact, they are so popular that they were sold out of the regular size Cheese Roll's on my visit.  I had to settle for the "party size", which is quite a steal when $10 gets you 25 of these delectable pastries.  These croissant-like pastries are topped with large nuggets of sugar to give it some sweetness.  Inside of its honeycomb structure of butter and flour is a thick stream of cream cheese.  The super flaky pastry is like biting into a nice buttery sponge.  And the interplay of the sugary top mixed in with the tanginess of the cream cheese will surely make your eyes roll to the back of your head.. . The Chocolate Croissant is a gigantic pastry of rich buttery goodness that is dipped in sweet chocolate on both ends.  The croissant is finished with an egg wash before being baked to give it a nice golden brown hue.  Beneath its crunchy exterior lies a light and airy interior that is as soft as a baby's bottom.  Like fingers in a gold mine, two veins of chocolate run the length of the croissant.. . Porto's has much more than pastries and desserts to offer.  They also have a wide selection of sandwiches to choose from.  The ever popular potato balls are also a winner.  If you have never visited Porto's you are missing out on a great culinary adventure.. . Pics included.
