ReviewID: sYDiHVQWnu3cPzCNS7Xjnw
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Chateau de Saigon
Category: Vietnamese
Lucky for me, I was invited out on Friday when a small group of Asian Yelpers invaded Chateau de Saigon like it was 1975 and we were the North Vietnamese.  I'll get into it more, but let me just say that we were all over that dinner like white (or should I say Asians) on rice.  (Though ironically most of us didn't have belly room to eat the rice.). . The pictures I posted do a better job relating the night's gluttony.  We started slow with some spring rolls, then got some roll-your-own grilled pork specials.  (If you don't know what I'm talking about here, you may want to ask your server how to do it.  It's fun!)  Now what to accompany some rolled fatties?  Why  more pot of course!  And by that I mean the clay hot pot entrees.  We got two different ones, pork and eggplant; the pork we were told was Vietnamese-style while the eggplant was Chinese-style.  Or the other way around.  I didn't care. It was all good.. . We also ordered a flat rice noodle seafood combo as well as the "sizzling fish" that was sizzled on your tabletop with a heap of dill.  And of course, there was a whole lot of shaken beef going on. But as that annoying OxyClean guy might say, "Wait!  That's not all!"  After saying it three times ("betel wrap, betel wrap, BETEL WRAP!") some betel leaf-wrapped beef appeared which you, in turn, wrap in rice paper with mint/basil/parsley accompaniment.  That's a lot of wrapping, but we do live in the Dirty South after all.  And given the chance I'll freestyle all over that betel wrap, thankyouverymuch.. . With everything we ordered and the room filling up, the staff was a bit in the weeds.  We weren't in any big rush, though, and our server managed our expectations pretty well.. . Some words of advice before you go.  Expecting the usual Buford Highway joint, I dressed "casually."   Upon seeing how nice the place was, I immediately felt underdressed.  Fortunately as the white people dressed in their shorts descended, I felt a little better.  Obviously you don't have to don black tie by any means, but it is a nice room.  You might want to throw down a little more effort than the "hobo causal" I was flaunting.. . Second, it's BYOB.  Don't know how long that'll last, but for now bring your own booze.  I think that's how the cost of our combined meal turned out to be so absurdly low.  (I'm talking $20 per person and that's WITH tipping like we drunken sailors in a jack shack.)  Drinks, in fact, turned out to be our biggest quibble.  Sodas are still canned (and with the amount of Diet Coke I can put away, that annoys me) and the bubbles fruit smoothies (apparently) were indistinguishable from one another.  I say apparently because I wasn't the one who ordered them.. . Finally, after two hours of gluttony, we rolled out into the parking lot and noticed that a valet station had been set up.  "Valet?"  we asked.  Apparently the valet was set up for the club "La Rumba!" next door.  And no, I didn't add the exclamation point.  It's part of the name.  It also says it's "Fantasico!" which I'll have to take their el wordo for.  Still, the parking lot may have issues late at night so be forewarned.. . Four and a half rounded up to five stars.  I need to come back (again and again) to fully assess.
