ReviewID: SZctV8YS5I4YVh4JFzkrQw
ReviewerID: faUidWZmyn3g6W6G7gy-bA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I have very mixed feelings about Bottega Louie.. . The space is jaw dropping with beautiful design everywhere.  Every detail has been well thought out from the bread and butter wrapped in white paper that is brought to your table to the bright pink boxes for take-out pastries, to the beautiful brass railings and the black leather banquettes.  I felt like I was whisked away to another place and time and for that I will visit Bottega Louie again.  I just wish that the food was equal to the decor.. . I am not a food snob, I am just interested in good food.  I relish tacos eaten in East L.A. as much as a brilliant meal from a super fancy chef.  I really really wanted to love the food here, but alas I guess my expectations were way too high.  . . We ordered: 1. clam pizza  2. the fennel and sweet onion salad  3. portobello fries  4. Calamari  5. spinach w/ garlic  6. Trenné pasta, braised rib-eye with kale 7. Crepe Suzette for desert.. . 1. Clam Pizza:  Well perhaps it is unfair of me to compare the pizza to Pizza Bianco in Phoenix and to Mozza Pizza in L.A., but after having had the best, it is hard not to compare.  The Bottega Louie pizza dough was undercooked and the crust a bit cakey which led to a soggy pizza that couldn't support the weight of it's ingredients.  The clams were not well dispersed, so several slices were like eating a plain cheese pizza.. . 2. Fennel and sweet onion salad:  superb flavour with just the right amount of vinegar.  Simple yet perfect.. . 3. Portobello Fries:  all three of us were underwhelmed.  I felt pressure to like them after reading so many reviews lauding them, but honestly we liked the novelty of them more than the flavour.  We all found them to be bland.. . 4. Calamari:  Nothing particularly special, although I always love a good solid Calamari.  I liked the spicy marinara sauce.. . 5. Spinach w/ Garlic:  Simple yet just right, on par with the Fennel dish.. . 6. Trenne Pasta:  I loved this dish.  (If I had limited my meal to the Trenne Pasta, the Spinach and the Fennel dish I would have given more stars.)  I  enjoyed the crunchy yet chewy juxtaposition of the triangular penne with the delicious melt in your mouth brisket-like steak.  The kale was incredible.. . 7. Crepe Suzette:  Incredibly disappointing.  Crepe Suzettes when done well can be sublime, but trust me, these were not and they were missing a key ingredient.  How can you call them a Crepe Suzette without adding  any Cointreau, Cognac or Grand Marnier?  Without this they become merely an orange pancake.  The crepe itself was too thick and doughy with a pedestrian orange sauce.  This is a simple classic desert so at the very least try to do it justice.. . Our service was terribly erratic, it was difficult to get our charming waiter's attention and we had to get up twice, once to order desert and then later, to ask for the cheque.  We were not offered the complimentary sparkling water.  I found the front of house staff far more attentive.. . In conclusion, I will go back to Bottega Louie for the atmosphere and some of the food, but be careful what you pick.  If you are a pizza afficionado then don't go for the pizza, the oven is not wood burning and until they get more adept pizza makers I would give the pizza a miss.  . . We bought some pastries on our way out all of which looked beautiful, but some were more successful than others.  Skip the dry French macaroons and cup cakes (unless you want something pretty to look at) and instead go for the napoleon and the tarts.
