ReviewID: szJiv3uVu-Idk7B8Aqgs5A
ReviewerID: H8EEDo9STxEi2ENx7DVq6Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
Recently, I stopped at one of my favorite hangouts on Vermont Ave: Fred 62.. . It's got a great atmosphere: dim lighting, excellent outdoor seating even cool nights, amazing soundtrack, excellent servers, and a great menu.. . This time around, I decided that I would change up my order of a burger of sorts, to something new that caught my eye: The Poorest Boy sandwich.. . For those not in the know, a Po' Boy is a sandwich from Louisiana in which a fried meat or seafood and served on a Louisiana style French bread. The Poorest Boy tries to spice up the sandwich by using fried chicken strips smothered with a very light, and delicious, red pepper remoulade.. . Before I go any further, let us step backwards in time.... . One time readers, many moons ago, I was lost in Lousiana near Shreveport. It was raining, it was cold, and I was hungry. Stumbling into a warm bar after searching for what seemed like hours, I saddled up and asked for a menu.. . I figured since I was in Louisiana, I would try a local delicacy, and ordered myself a Po' Boy. It was delicious. The light and airy bread, the lightly fried white fish and shrimp. The lettuce, tomatoes and remoulade that contrasted nicely with the prominent fried flavor.. . Well readers, Louisiana this is not. In general, the Poorest Boy sandwich at Fred 62 is good. But that's it.. . Good.. . I wouldn't recommend it, but I wouldn't turn you away from it if you were so set on having it. Truth is, I'm sure you could find a better one around Los Angeles if you tried. The bread was a little tougher than I would have liked, and the chicken really wasn't that great. It was like the chicken was kept in the deep fryer a littler too long: too tough and not enough good taste.. . The red pepper remoulade was a nice addition and gave the sandwich some missing flavor.. . Despite this less-than-stellar review, don't let me deter you from Fred 62. It's got an excellent menu with a number of other great sandwiches to enjoy. And let me recommend the Mac Daddy &amp; Cheese Balls. Deep fried balls of mac and cheese never tasted so good.
