ReviewID: t-7VE6E7QmXvMxfD8ncugA
ReviewerID: kRLkHf0lJWNOoJrxA5HA3A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Porter Beer Bar
Category: American (New)
The Porter Beer Bar is a complete diamond in the rough. - Ok, so I've been sitting on this review for about.......... 2-3 weeks now? And I'm glad I didn't read or hear a peep from any one else about you until I had the opportunity to experience you for myself in an unadulterated Brew HA HA fest with a group of friends. . So Atlanta Yelp! I am FINALLY ready to let it all hang out about The Porter Beer Bar. . . When I think of Little 5 points I immediately picture myself sitting in the sun on the patio at Brew House sipping a cold one. It's no secret that when I am in the L5P area, it's a sure bet I will end up at The Brew House Pub. . . That! Is all about to change. . Enter: The Porter Beer Bar. . . TPBB fits perfectly in to the landscape of the ever so eclectic, picturesque back drop that makes up little 5 points. Seriously, if you're not looking for TPBB, you could walk right by it. . The place is unassuming and quiet charming in its raw, natural state of mind; and the same goes for the service staff that works there. Any way, perhaps I'm a bit biased of this place as we do have a new friend who works there. But nice is nice and I like it that there are nice service people to be found working here in an area otherwise known for their hipster wanna be, I Don't care, you get what you get, attitude. *aghem* yeah, I'm referring to you Brew House and Vortex. I love you guys - but your servers suck! . . So by strong endorsement of the food, I had to go and see for myself. As Ashley D mentioned in her review, the hush puppies lived up to her "fabulous" description. Yum! Laura and I decided on the fish and chips after eyeing a fellow patron's plate of giant fish planks beer batter dipped and fried to the loveliest golden brown color I have ever seen. And I was there to drink beer so why not batter my fish in it too! The chips (fries for you southern back woods boys) were amazing! I don't know what the green stuff is that they sprinkle on them, but dam it's good! In the words of the lovely Laura B 'That is the sh@t!' They are THAT good. . . Now for the show stealer, and stopper. First the stealer: After hours of putting down the frosty good news of brew after brew at Porters, we HAD to try the Irish car bomb dessert. Again, strong endorsement by Chris. Good call dude. The dessert is served with 3 little shots of very dark, malty, oatmealie (word?) beers that complement every aspect of the dessert; from the sweetness of the ice cream to the rich flavor of the Bailey's caramel. It was dam good. . . Now for the stopper: The day had grown long and turned to night. I finally realized we had been there for hours having a grand'ole time with everyone around us and I was drunk. SCORE! The next thing I know the owner of TPBB is standing in front of me introducing him self. Hi, I'm Nick, the owner. How F'en cool is that! The owner of the joint is out, shaking babies and kissing hands (no J/K!) and meeting and greeting his patrons. For that Nick, TPBB earns an extra star. Any time some one of management, much less the OWNER, of the place comes up and asks. how did you like your meal? Did you enjoy yourself? Gets mad, mad (double mad!) props in my book. The guy is just plain ass cool if you ask me. . . Yeah, I love TPBB and I am a HUGE fan of it. You dam well better believe that you'll find me at TPBB a lot more often now.
