ReviewID: T-PjOXpmCOadMYokRQaNDA
ReviewerID: kjBI_bok4SEMACuP3T-HoQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Are you ready kids? Spongebob Square Pants!. . Honestly, I cannot help but to think of Spongebob Squarepants when I think of this place.  Yes, its weird I know.  The whole theme of this place is a fisherman wharf kind of feel and somehow that reminds me of Spongebob Squarepants.  I think one of the great things about this place is how homey it'll make you feel.  It's just a nice atmosphere filled with fun loving ppl.  They'll even let you write your name on the wall with a marker.  I've written my name down at 2 of their locations already.  =)  If trying to come here for dinner, I suggest coming for an early dinner otherwise you have a good chance of being SOL at getting a seat.  This place gets packed and packed early.  People will wait so long that you'd swear they were hiding money in the shellfish.. . This place is one of Pillbug's and my favorite spots to eat it.  The Garden Grove location is a bit better taste-wise but the Alhambra location doesn't fall short either.  Crawfish and Shrimp is the thing to go for here, if you're allergic to seafood then you're at the wrong place.  The whole concept is that you order you food and they'll throw in a big pot cooking, mix it together in a sauce of your choose then just dump that big bag on your table where you'll use your hands to eat. . . I'm a big fan of the Whole Shi-Bang sauce.  The spice itself has a nice little kick to it but you can change the level of spice based on your tolerance.  I personally LOVE the corn when its marinated in the sauce.  . . Aside from the crawfish and shrimp, there are a few other little treasures at the Boiling Crab that you should try.  The sausage that gets mixed in the bag is a nice little spice flavor and the cajun fries are a great nibbler when you're taking a break from stuffing your face with shellfish.  One of the biggest surprises to me was the oysters.  These tasted a lot better than I thought.  The sauce has a nice little punch to it and the oysters do taste pretty fresh.  After a couple of tries, its made it into the regular ordering rotation.. . This place is awesome!  It's a great place to take visitors who don't mind getting down and dirty with their food.  No Fu-Fu eaters here.
