ReviewID: T0Xk0NCp1mZsoNetJMRW1Q
ReviewerID: zI5pIagg7PVcNMdB9VP9cg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Zaya Mediterranean Cuisine
Category: Greek
My lovely wife and I walked in last night at 8pm after giving my keys to the valet (why must someone else park our cars in the parking deck adjacent to the restaurant?).  The space is standard upscale-ish chain brown box decor filled with somewhat nervous waitstaff who don't seem to quite yet know what they are doing and are concerned you might notice - at least they seem to care.  There were available tables, but none of them ready for a few minutes (jeez, what a surprise - why yes, I will wait at the bar for 5 minutes and throw some money at you).  As soon as our beverages were poured, our table (very small table at that - was a table for four, but there is no way four people and their food will fit at these tables) was ready.  Taking heed of the previous reviews, we ordered only appetizers.. . Pita - good, warm and served with standard herbed/spiced olive oil.  The sesame seeds were a welcome bit of nuttiness.. . Hummus - also good, and with actual tahini - thank you for that.  Rusty crimson sumac sprinkled over the top giving a nice aesthetic, but really no additional flavor. . Tabbouleh - lazy version, roughly (1 demerit) chopped parsley with a smattering of bulgar and a squeeze of lemon.  Diced tomatoes (in March?!?) , tasting of nothing as they were ripened via chemical agent , served over the top.  . . Falafel - very good, crispy, not oily with a hint of red pepper flake heat.  Side of nutty tahini/yogurt dipping sauce - covered with the same tomato pile as the tabbouleh.. . Grape leaves - thinly rolled beef (not lamb - cmon people, need me some lamb) and rice with an ample but not overpowering lemon tang - not too shabby - and also available in a vegetarian version.. . All of the above were between $5 and $8, so wallet impact was certainly tolerable.. . The service was a bit scattered but very friendly - and included the manager - who was helping out as well.  . . Not a turn off or anything, and a nice if somewhat generic space to hang out and have a drink and some basic chick pea, sesame and lemon based food.  Will give a 3 for now,  and will certainly come back.  Some kitchen tweaks and service experience might bump it up a bit - but don't see it going much higher, at least in my book.
