ReviewID: T148xiHfoZdxYhiFoTJN4g
ReviewerID: Br7_jlV7VUhsECo8FNHWDQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
I put off trying this place, even though my hunny kept offering to take me. "Cuban? Meh."  I had been to Madres, and I've always been a little turned off by rice and beans. Especially in a resturaunt. . Why would I go out and pay a 300% markup for poor people food? Add fried bananas, and I just really would rather not. I eventually gave in though :"they have sangria and mojitos? Why did'cha say so before?". So there we were, squeezing into a parking spot -the lot is inadequate, like everything transportation related in West LA. . I saw why when we went in. The place is brightly -obnoxiously painted, loud, full of happy, portly, down-home customers, and buzzing with literally dozens of waiters and bussers.  It feels like a circus tent -fun.. But to the food. .  In my experience, garlic and butter can make anything wonderful, and that's the common thread in most of the dishes I've tried here. Actually,  the dishes are almost all prepared  the same way, just different meat.. The waiters are friendly and effiicent -they immediately drop a basket of sliced bread that has been :-] drizzled with garlic and butter :-] I think maybe they don't speak English, but that's ok with us. We always get what we came for. I like to watch all the mountains of food coming out of the kitchen. It ALL looks wonderful, and people look so happy when that big ol plate is plunked down in front of them. Seriously. They just light up.. . The only thing that dissapointed me once was a salad I ordered. I like my salad, somethimes I just need one before my meal. It was really small and not treally what I consider a salad. I think it was more like half an avodado, a few slices of tomato, and a few rings of that white onion that's on everything else. It wasn't bad -just different. However:. .  You CANNOT go wrong with their signature chicken dish. . . Its 1/2 chicken (I think rotisseried) smothered with this lemony -garlicy-buttery juice -and then scattered with sliced raw onions. I know it sounds harsh, but it actually works. On the side you get a little dish of black beans, which are actually quite well spiced and lovely, plantains -(whatever, I'm not a fan of those, but I'll eat them here) and white rice -which I would  usually abrupty push away were it not for all that sauce spilling over on it. It takes on a whole new meaning. I often get the calamari steak and eat the whole thing but bring home the rice to have for lunch the next day. It is so freaking satifying. . . Try Versailles. Its so good and  simple. Do you want sangria? Do you want butter and garlic? Of course. Now all you have to decide is whether you want pork, chicken, beef or seafood with it. Try not to eat too much bread before your food shows up.
