ReviewID: T1OhKwJJ9x7cKBgfq62vkA
ReviewerID: AP021wdCFFtIXjydBgaUXQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Everybody and their mother has written a review for this place so I'll just put my 2 cents out there really quickly - the spicy chicken is not that great. In fact, Koreans eat less chicken than they do pork and beef so I would just say avoid the chicken (it's not our specialty). If you want more bang for your buck you're definitely going to be satisfied with the beef short rib and spicy pork rib tacos!! Ooh ooh! And the tofu ones are great for non-vegetarians and vegetarians!. . I actually really like the kimchi quesadilla. I've had it twice so far and the first time they used a ton of cheese in it because they were running out of kimchi. I would suggest asking about the kimchi if you get there late because it's better to just save 5 dollars and get more tacos than get a cheese-overloaded quesadilla!. . Average wait time is 15-20 minutes, and the longest I've waited was 1 1/2 hours (yes, I was on a mission to try these tacos). I'm a small girl and I can scarf down 5 tacos...mmmMmmmm. Your best bet on catching kogibbq is through their website and following them on Twitter. My friends and I will normally catch up with them through twitter instead of risking them showing up extremely late and us just starving to death.. . ----. . Edit: I don't normally defend restaurants because reviews are fair game on Yelp, but I have to say something in response to some of the reviews I've read on Kogi. The lines can be long, but it depends on what day and where you are. There have been occasions where the lines were ridiculously long (1hr +) - for example, yesterday I drove to the Alibi room and because it was so crowded I opted to go to the truck in Venice instead. It turns out that there was no line in Venice. It's like going to a restaurant and expecting every time you show up you'll get to walk straight to your table. Kogi has done a good job at trimming their lines down with additional trucks and a permanent home at the Alibi room. Unfortunately, there are areas where the truck WILL be busy - especially on campuses like UCLA. My second point is that people are extremely worried about communication, but they DO communicate and it's through Twitter. They tell you if they're heading out early, late, and when food runs out. If you can't follow twitter through your phone or check online before heading out to the trucks, then there isn't much you can do about it because there aren't very many taco trucks that update you on their status like Kogi does. Anyway, this isn't an attack on the previous reviews but more of an informative note I wanted to make. :) Peace &amp; Love.
