ReviewID: t30MwYw1786012K3cG0P9w
ReviewerID: rMCt5ve_zmDww-nmoW-wtA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
First off, I have been looking for a good burger joint.  Simple.  Burger joint, being a place where you can order a good hamburger.  In that respect, I have found a great place.  . . The burgers here are like the one's your Mom used to make.  They are real red meat made out of real ground beef.  Not Costco patties.  It was absolutely the type of hamburger Eddie Murphy made fun of.  The burger that we used to be ashamed of because it wasn't made at a McDonald or other like chain.  The hamburger was juicy and the lettuce, tomatoe and bun were good.  It was such a nice change in pace.  I was glad to finally find a good place...and I'm sorry, but don't anybody say anything about how good Tommy's, Ricks, Tom's, Jim's or like fast food joint are.  They are not - and that goes twice for Tommy's. . . Important thing to mention about the burger.  The patties are appetite-size.  They are not the patties that we've been accustomed to getting at other fast food places.  I ordered two patties and soon discovered that I had done myself a disservice...because I lost the burger for the meat.  It won't happen again.  One patty for me from now on.  . . The problem is everything else.  The (Belgium) fries are so-so...nothing really special about them.  The chili fries I ordered had chili that was more bland than good.  I'll add a stipulation...I like my fries juicy and chewy.  These fries were more like a fatter version of the In&amp;Out fries.  Not my thing, but it could be yours.  BUT, they do serve their fries with a garlic sauce that's very worth trying.  I can't say the same about the chipotle ketchup...it was more smokey than tasty.. . The pastrami was bland and free of any type of real taste...and this is coming from someone who tends to eat about anything because it's there and suffers from a childhood guilt about leaving food.  I honestly took one bite out of the pastrami sandwich and left it.  Didn't think about it again.  Didn't feel guilty about leaving it there (and don't get preachy with me, you would have left it, too).. . So, if you're looking for a great burger place, count this as a contender.  But, you might want to pick up your fries from some other place.
