ReviewID: T4E8V4sfT8NoOF2Sy55B0Q
ReviewerID: gXX3TJYjX057fHsolYe0Vg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
UPDATE: Oh no :( . . I went last night and had the complete opposite experience from my first visit. I ordered the same steak salad that had been so delicious the first time, but on this visit there were only 3 small strips of overcooked meat (I ordered it medium-rare) atop an absurdly large mound of spinach and mushrooms (it was ridiculous how much spinach there was, no one can eat that much when it is raw!). My dining companion had the chicken Milanese and fries - not something I would order at an Argentinian restaurant, but it's on their menu so they should make it well. It came out looking like it had been napping in a tanning bed all day - dry, shriveled up, and scary. Needless to say, it tasted the same way. The fries were substandard - typical of the kind you would expect to get at a snack shop by the beach: completely flavorless, greasy, and limp. Our waiter was odd and kept darting in and out. Water refills were few and far between and the little birds on the back patio were flying around with avengence. Big let down. . . ORIGINAL REVIEW (4 stars): . Great place to meet up with friends. The menu has a plethora of healthy options (grilled chicken, fish, skirt steak, veggies), is very reasonably priced, and there is a nice heated outdoor patio. We had a little bit of a hard time getting our waiter at some points, but it was no big deal as we were enjoying our gab-fest. . . We started with the bread and garlic/parsley oil (gratis), provoleta, and sarten de champignones. The cheese dish was yummy, but needs to be eaten quickly as it starts to cool off and harden after a few minutes. The champignones appetizer is literally a plate of grilled vegetables with a pico-de-gallo type side of chopped tomatoes and onions; it was perfect for our friend doing a cleanse, but I wouldn't recommend it otherwise. I had sangria (pretty decent) and the grilled steak salad, which was absolutely delicious. The large steak strips were cooked as I ordered them and accompanied by some of the best salad dressing I've had in a while. . . I will definitely go back.
