ReviewID: t5Etg_MF_8PFQFC1uhiqsQ
ReviewerID: kRD9SybtzNVuKcpbnXhk6Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Great NY Noodle Town
Category: Chinese
My co workers are so funny. Every time I go to work, they would ask me what are you eating for lunch today? I was like ah hello good  . morning. Since it was Sunday, there were hardly any patients coming into the pharmacy. If they did, we were only able to take down their information because the insurance companies are not open for business. And so we couldn't ask for approval from them for their surgical supplies. After each of my co workers took turn eating as we do not have a specific lunch schedule, I looked at the stacks of menu in the box. I decided to order rice from across the streets. The restaurant was called Great N.Y. Noodletown. . . I ordered a Ma Pao Bean Curd with rice through the phone so that I can pick it up without waiting. This was something I've always tried at home but never ordered from restaurant. My lunch came down to $4.00. I brought it back to work. I took a snapshot of the food and I was ready to dig in. The bean curd was too rough. There were minced chicken which tasted okay but gave too little. In addition, a few Chinese pickle vegetables which I don't really like so I swap that to the side. I really like the taste of the sauce. I think that is the only good part about this lunchbox. They gave too much rice. They filled the whole box with rice first and then they added the food. In the end, I really hate that I'm wasting food because I only ate 1/3 of the rice and threw the remains away.. . I don't think I'll order this dish again. My co worker Sandy didn't even think my plate look tempting. My mom can make this ten times better and I am not kidding. Every time she makes Ma Pao Bean Curd, I couldn't help but take a bite of it after she finished cooking it which I'm not suppose to, ssshhhhhh. And remember when you do have time and you have some money to spare, let your stomach try something new for a change. ^_^* eat away!
