ReviewID: t7HOGcVo8k00QQaJUZfR7g
ReviewerID: hYhd961l4OCNnRz-odr7GA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Wow! Great place! But super spendy - just a warning; so be prepared to spend up the wazoo. It's definitely a nice place to go for those very special occasions. I took my gf here for our [late] anniversary and we both enjoyed our time. The ambiance is very romantic with dim lightning and there was a guy singing and playing piano - at first I totally thought it was all recorded but not so! Our attendee and waiters were extremely courteous and top notch. Constant refills of our water and checking in at our table. We got there a bit earlier at 5:15pm and got street parking at the closest meter with no problem. Parking is free after 6pm, so we just put an hour's worth of time ($1) in the meter. . . The food was phenomenal, as were the prices! While looking over our menus, they brought out a nice bread basket full of a variety of breads to munch on. That was nice since I was already pretty hungry. My initial reaction was that I was going to walk out still hungry and that I would feel like it wasn't worth the money spent... boy was I wrong, at least about the first part. In terms of spending that much though, I'm still on the fence... of course, I don't intend to come here unless it's a *very* special occasion next time. . I ordered the 12oz bone-in filet and my gf ordered the 24oz Porterhouse. I tried mine rare and she had hers medium. Both were very good. The filets melted in our mouths. The NY strip on hers was OK, but probably because she had it cooked at medium. . In addition, we tried the lobster mashed potatoes and a side of sauteed asparagus. The lobster mashed potatoes were very good. They included huge chunks of lobster and there was tons of butter as well. Really good, but worth it @ $32.95?! You've gotta be kidding me... I knew it would be expensive but not that much. I forgot to ask, but just ordered for the sake of the novelty of it. I must say though, they were quite generous with the portions of mashed potatoes. . We also each ordered a glass of wine to go with the meal, I got the NorthXNorthWest and my gf got a fruitier/lighter Pinot Noir. She felt very sleepy afterwards! . We had to get a couple take out boxes for what we couldn't finish. They pack the leftovers into small fancy boxes and put them in a nice shopping bag. . . Anyway, by the end of the meal, we were STUFFED to the brim. I really wanted to try the butter cake but I was way too full for dessert.. . Also to note of the service, I received a courtesy call earlier in the day confirming my reservation and then asking if the meal was for a special occasion. I told the guy it was for our anniversary, so much to our surprise our waiter brought out a huge slice of a chocolate cake for us after dinner. We took like several bites and had to pack it up because it was just too much.. . Our experience at Mastro's was incredible, and also incredibly expensive. Was it worth the $$$$? Considering the service and because it was a very special event, I'd say it was worth it. Just be prepared to spend :O
