ReviewID: t7ngOzQGCtBDe3vyeOC5Dw
ReviewerID: K0mFbYeHkpA6MME2lllwgw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
Its my cousins birthday and she said "Palms Thai for my birthday at 8pm, Come or I'll kill you." Me being the obsessed Yelper quickly typed in Palms Thai to see what kind of ratings people are giving this place. . . Oh wow, 300+ reviews with a average 4 star rating? Gotta wait to see about that. . . Its about 7:30pm and I ask my sister, why have we not left yet? She goes on to tell me that reservations are not taken after 7pm? I do not understand why reservations can not be taken after 7pm? I found this to be total bullshit when I entered the restaurant, I saw a table that had a reserved table sign. . . It was a crowded and packed night. With a table of 11, no reservations, lets just see how long we have to wait. A good 30 minutes pass by before we finally get seated. The menu is huge with different types of dishes ranging from fried rice, to noodles, seafood, soups, etc. I grabbed a menu while we were waiting for the table and it took me almost the full 30 minutes before I could decide what I wanted to eat. . . I decided to go with the BBQ Chicken, Pad Thai, and Pineapple Fried Rice. The waitress gives me a crazy look as I ordered but whatever I told myself I like to eat like a king. I had a big challenge ahead of me, no leftovers. . . The BBQ chicken came out first so it is only fair I review that first. Half a whole chicken. Parts of the chicken were dry, other parts were nice and juicy. Nevertheless, it was still good, dipping it with the sweet sauce that came with it. I finished it off rather quickly. I noticed a lady staring at the way I was eating, I know I should chew my food. . . The Pad Thai was the dish that came out next. It was sweet, not too greasy, came with a side of crushed peanuts, sliced carrots, and bean sprouts. The squeeze of lime made it that much better. . . The Pineapple Fried Rice had a  abundant amount of pineapples, beef, cashews, and raisins. The first spoonful and I knew it was a bust. There was a strange taste to it. I could not pinpoint what that taste was like but my cousin who also ordered a pineapple fried rice did. He said this taste like CARDBOARD! Yes!!! That was the taste! THE TASTE OF CARDBOARD. Being a trooper and a believer of not wasting food, I finished it off anyways. . . Now you would think after finishing 3 dishes of food I would be stuffed. I think my kbbq training had trained my stomach to expand to the max. . . I went ahead and tried some other dishes that our table ordered. . . The Pad See Ew was delicious. I wish I had ordered this instead of the Pineapple Fried Rice. . . The Pork Jerky was dry and tough. I could see why they passed what looked like a full plate of pork jerky, down my way. They all had a bet going on that I would not like it and the reaction I got while eating it would be the deciding factor. Sure enough I gave a look of disgust. Since one of my cousins did not notice my disgusted look, I told him to try one too. We both cracked up laughing, knowing how bad this dish was also. The waitress strongly suggested we take it home. I said okay, I can feed this to my dog. . . The service was excellent as I never had to ask for a refill on water because it was always filled up whenever my glass was nearing empty. The prices were reasonable, thus me ordering 3 dishes for myself. . . Valet was $3.00 which I thought was kind of expensive. RCA if I could remember was only a $1 or $2 minus the crowd. . . Where was Elvis tonight? All this talk about Elvis, but a no show tonight.
