ReviewID: ta0thBy_b4whCWc9IC4hLg
ReviewerID: 58zhqwfGYEl92MZusTsYJg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
people stop falling all over your face for langers. ITS NOT THAT GOOD! and if you say its just another NY jack talking up about how LA doesn't compare. like i said there's good delis in LA (canters, piko kosher deli-best brisket ever) and i'm not in here talking up that NY has better burrito's. i'm coming from 25 years of experience having eaten at over 2 dozen different kosher delis in my lifetime. you want to see the famous steamers i keep rambling about, see the vid at 7:10. that's why you will never have dry deli meats in katz ever. . . . http://www.youtube.com....  . . corned beef on club for one sandwich. . http://www.youtube.com.... . . pastrami for one sandwich. . http://www.youtube.com.... . . and i thought katz got expensive when i was there last cause i remember when the pastrami was $5 when i was a kid, now its up to $15. $14 for a #19 with half the meat of katz. langers who and it doesn't cost $3 extra if you like your cut lean.... . . again if you've never eaten kosher or kosher-style pastrami before i can see why your all amazed by langers but there are better delis in LA and the best delis will always be in NY. also if i came in here and said the best mexican food was in NY west coast people would have a conniption. there's a reason why the best delis are in the east coast. we had the european immigrants land in NY first not LA. like it says  "since 1888".  . . regarding the bread, again you haven't tasted a real rye. there's a reason why ny pizza, bagels and our breads whether its rye, club, kaiser, challah, heck even french breads taste the way it does. its in the water. . http://articles.latime.... . . and for those that's been to katz and say that langers is better. i compare it to being a mets or jets fans or a clipper fan in LA. there's enough yankee and giants fans out there so let me root for the other team to be different, its the same for all these people that say "they've eaten at katz". the questions i have for them, have they eaten at katz enough to really compare it to langers. i can personally say i've eaten at katz over 300 times in my life and 5 times at langers. the vids show a tiny smidge how life changing a pastrami at katz can be.
