ReviewID: ta81eljysQRFDynuIqhwOw
ReviewerID: qGlxLxpH1vqijSlI_1durQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
Fraiche is beautiful, with a nice separation between the bar area and the tables, so folks coming for drinks aren't crowded into those enjoying dinner. However, when we sat down to dinner it seemed like the tables were pushed a little close together - you could easily elbow someone at the table behind you if you got too excited. . . We stopped at the bar for a drink while they finished getting our table ready (DEFINITELY make a reservation - it was crowded on a Wednesday evening); I got a Hard Candy (nice lemon infused vodka drink with hints of blackberry) but I'd recommend getting The Grape -- it has crushed sweet grapes in it and the best drink grape flavor I've ever tasted.. . The five of us in the party started off with the corn soup, which was a generous helping of light corn cream soup (not chowder like at all) topped with a corn fritter. Delicious! I ordered the steak frites (almost got the lamb, but was told that it was a stew and that it might make my evening "too soupy" with the appetizer). The steak was cooked beautifully and topped with herb butter. The fries were good, although a little too crispy for my taste - I like them when they have a crisp skin but a tender middle, and these were just crisp throughout. Another person got the monkfish, which he declared was "like eating butter." A friend traded me a bite of steak for a bite of the short rib, which was quite yummy. Finally, we ended the evening with desert - I had part of the Bomboloni, an Italian doughnut filled with lemon crème and paired with raspberry ice-cream. I'm a sucker for the lemon/raspberry combination, and how can you really go wrong with fried bread? Overall, it was a delicious meal and a great excuse for a group of us to meet up in the middle of the week. . . My one complaint is about the restrooms - they were just dirty. One of the stalls didn't have toilet paper at all and another had pieces of toilet paper strewn about on the floor. I know this is partly the fault of the clientele, but I'd be lying if I said it didn't sour the last note of the evening. . . They have valet parking, but I'd recommend driving to Cardiff and parking in the structure - it's a short walk, but downtown Culver City is beautiful at dusk/evening with twinkling lights and lots of restaurant activity.
