ReviewID: tBh9JeKohteGV-mUjsIXIg
ReviewerID: B0pYmwPM6zjmibbE646VkA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: El Cid 2
Category: Mexican
The first things that strike me about this place are that 1. It's across from the Logan Square El stop and 2. Its name.. . El Cid was the name of Spanish military leader who fought against and with the Moors around the Early 11th century. I learned all of this because it was in Age of Empires II, a video I was obsessed with when I was in middle school. See video games can be educational!. . Well anyway, history lesson over. . . I've been here twice and both times have been really pleasant. I ordered vegetarian fajitas and a raspberry frozen margarita (veggie fajitas are usually the metric I use to test the quality of a Mexican restaurant). The margarita was tasty - fruity but not overly sweet. At first I thought my margarita didn't have much alcohol, but boy was I wrong later on after I had drank mine rather fast.Thank god the food came just about the time when the booze kicked in or I would have been in trouble!. . The fajitas were good (or as Homer from the Simpsons would say "they were groin grabbingly good!) The had just the right amount of seasoning and the broccoli was a nice surprise. I normally don't find that in veggie fajitas in my experiences eating at Mexican restaurants. I think what makes the food really good was that El Cid really uses quality ingredients. Often times I feel like Mexican fare really tastes all the same everywhere and each dish really is a variation of a single flavor (as John Stewart pointed out). But here, I felt that El Cid stood out on its own. The flavors didn't seem "authentic," but were good nonetheless. Reading the reviews from other yelpers though gives me the impression that this place may have a problem with food quality consistency..... . The prices are moderate so look to put down $10-15 bucks for the entree. We sat on the patio and it was a gorgeous night outside so that really was added to the experience. The clientele here seemed overwhelmingly white and youngish. Is El Cid trendy? Mmm, not trendy as in pretentious, but definitely trendy in that the restaurant caters to a certain crowd and palate. Mainly the yuppie/hipsterish crowd I would say. I dunno, maybe I'm wrong.. . I think they have special nights like a night with pretty cheap wine bottles or something like that. Since it's like 3 blocks away from my house, I'll definitely be back for more.
