ReviewID: tbl9gotb-7NFtIqw7Qx65Q
ReviewerID: Moffb_LClBH4wX79rwUqLA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: 123 Burger Shot Beer
Category: Burgers
The name tells you all you need to know: $1 Burgers, $2 Shots, and $3 Beers.  What the name doesn't tell you (but anyone should know based on those prices) is that the burgers are small (like half the size of White Castle burgers small), the shots are mixed shots, and the beers come in relatively small mugs.. . Now that we've got the facts straight, here's what I thought: Walking in right away, it's got an after-work/sports bar atmosphere.  I arrived around 7:30 to a packed bar and no open tables with people watching the Mets game and hanging out still dressed in work attire.  My friend and I worked our way to the back to find that there was an outdoor seeting area which is where we ended up.  A nice little set up with a wood deck, tables, and umbrellas, but nothing to write home about.  I felt that our seating choice actually led to some sub-par service, as we were all the way in the back corner AND outside, but even with that, the service was ok and we didn't find ourselves waiting too long at any point.. . Now for the food! The burgers are SMALL.  You can see pictures, and that's really what you get.  Any hungry male will probably ingest these in one, maybe two bites and those who prefer to savor their food a little more will probably stretch it out to 3 bites.  What the lack in size, they make up for in taste though.  While it's nothing to write home about, the buns are nice and soft, the fried onions add a nice touch, and the burger itself is ok.  Throw some ketchup, mustard, hot sauce, or barbeque sauce on there (all of which are provided at each table), and you've got yourself a nice little treat.  . . We also ordered some wings, ribs, and waffle fries.  On the wings, our sauce choice got messed up, but even with the right sauce, they're far from good, so steer clear.  The ribs were ok; definitely lacking some meat on the bones, but the sauce was decent.  The waffle fries were great!  A must-order for any trip here.. . As for the beers?  I felt that they were watered down a little bit.  My Belgian White tasted more like a Bud Light, so I can only imagine what the domestics they have on tap taste like.. . Overall, it's not a bad place.  The gimmick of 123 works and seems to draw plenty of people, but you have to be in the right mindset to go there.  Would I go back?  Yes, if I were with a few friends who wanted some quick, cheap food to snack on while watching a game or something with a few beers.  Is it somewhere I'll frequent or go out of my way to go to again?  Probably not.
