ReviewID: tDTKo8RlHS71Talg19yeEQ
ReviewerID: CsLsfpHlHrInwBfJmjR-zg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Oh, the things I do for Yelp. . . With the exception of the Long Beach location, I have been to all of the Roscoe's Houses. Not only that, I have visited each one more than once to ensure the first visit is consistent with the second and any subsequent visit. That said, I have to say the Pasadena location is the best one to go to. . . Don't fear, the quality of the food does not change from place to place, but the fact that it has a decently-sized parking lot with spots on the streets to nab if you need them paired up with the generously sized dining room makes it ideal. The Pico/La Brea location has parking, sure, but it's also scary going there late at night as evidenced at the fact that they need a security guard on the premises (but the chicken is worth that risk). One might run into Snoop Dogg at the Hollywood one, that is, if you can actually get to that one once you find parking. Also, they're quick to seat people even with a wait and the service is friendly and sweet.. . Now I'm not the biggest fan of the waffle, but I like them much more than I do pancakes, but there is something in them that makes them the perfect mate with some fried chicken. I love it. Better yet, give me a brick of their cornbread and mandatory is a bowl of their macaroni and cheese. It's a tiny portion for $4+, but once you taste it you know it's worth the price. And let's not forget the fried chicken....Oh, it's good...it's really really good. . . ...I feel like I need to eat there right now for lunch and just skip the wheatball meal I had planned for myself.. . The best thing about the Roscoe's chains is that they don't have a loyalty to Coke or Pepsi products and carry them both. It's great for those dining with soda snobs. . . If all else fails, and fate causes you not to dine here, at least there's a KFC across the street to satisfy any fried chicken fix.
