ReviewID: TDY9XFvynO-kMM3LvSfltA
ReviewerID: GrU_jo7LMGME7Kqv_yzNqA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Belly Shack
Category: Latin American
Belly Shack fills a void that I didn't know was empty.  Korean Latin fusion comfort food is what's cooking at this establishment and its serving things I couldn't imagine together.. . Don't be fooled by the limited offering; you will find something on the menu that you want.  Chef Bill Kim does a wonderful job of keeping menu short but diverse.  There are no filler items here.  Each item looked like a winner.  . . I went with the Belly Dog which is a grilled hot dog set on egg noodles and a toasted pita, topped with pickled green papaya.  My vegiance (vegetarian fiance) ordered the Boricua, an asian vegetarian take on the jibarito filled with black beans, tofu and brown rice.  We ordered a side of togarashi spiced fries and soft served ice cream for dessert (mine topped with bacon and chocolate chip, her's with huckleberry-lime).  . . The Dog: the hot dog had the nice charred taste that always makes me wonder why people would even consider eating a hot dog boiled.  The savory mixed with the sweet &amp; sour of the pickled papaya really knocked my socks off.  The egg noodles didn't really do much for me.  They would have been a lot better they were fried until crispy and slightly burnt, like Singapore noodles.. . The Boricua: The plantain slices were thicker and softer than what you would normal see on a jibarito.  Eating it was a little messy but it was delicious.  The black bean is a nice touch though it would have been nice to be able to get a full bite of everything at once.  Our sammich was falling apart.. . The Fries:  ooooh, the fries.  Why have I not eaten anything like this before?  Its so simple, yet so perfect.  The fries were perfectly cooked (thin style, crispy outside, soft inside) and seasoned with Togarashi spice (the blended chili powder typically put into Japanese noodles or soups).  They were served with a curry dipping sauce which was absolutely amazing.  When the fries were done, I wanted to use my fingers.. . Soft serve: The soft serve was good.  The huckleberry lime was really good.  The bacon chocolate chip was a hit and a miss.  The chocolate chip cookie bits are provided by Mindy Segal (Hot Chocolate) and were great.  The bacon... SOMEONE PLEASE CORRECT ME IF I'M WRONG... was essential bacon bits.  As a bacon lover, I was really bummed out.. . The verdict: its a little too expensive to eat there every day but if I could, I would.  The menu is simple but daring and I can't think of any time where I wouldn't want at least one of its items.  Belly Shack has a perfect mix of friendly fast food service and fine dining food.  It has entered my list of go-to places when I don't know where to go.
