ReviewID: TEgNNJIK9z2xYcFCuivX7Q
ReviewerID: ZOPLjrmR1qjc0fk6hFPM5w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hide Sushi Japanese Restaurant
Category: Japanese
Sunday, I got hit with a severe sushi craving... Wanted to try Sushi Zo, but they were closed.  Echigo, my favorite, also closed on Sundays.  Good ole consistently reliable Hide Sushi was a college favorite, along with Light &amp; Healthy (does anyone else remember the one in Westwood Village before they moved to Pico) and Cowboy Sushi, which in retropect was horrendous, non-Japanese owned sushi.  . . Everytime I come here as of late, I try to really like it, I mean with all due respect, it's been a sushi institution for so many years!  But for some reason, I just can't get smitten with it... and have a hard time placing my finger on what it is.  Never had a great experience, nor have I ever had a very poor one.  Just sort of unmoved yet unoffended, I guess. . . It's pretty good quality for what you pay for.  However, I would recommend this place to get take out sushi because I sort of have a disdain for the interior and the crowds make it a bit closterphobic for me.  Last night, I was uncomfortably crammed into a corner, waiting for the counter!  And I always end up staring at its kitchy ceiling, not because my company is boring, but because I seriously ponder who thought it would be a good idea to create an acrylic ceiling of the sky and cherry blossoms.. . I do enjoy the 'melting pot' crowd it draws... interesting mix from all walks of life and different cultures.  The wait staff and itamaes here are absolutely lovely.. . So Iast night, I had... uni, saba, hamachi, hirame, scallop, unagi and some spicy tuna roll.  I noticed that the rice was not seasoned very well.  Although I'm a huge fan of warm shari (rice in nigiri) I take traditional room temperature shari for what it is.. . Uni and hirame were the highlights of the evening, but the saba tasted really old and it probably was... my bad for ordering sushi in general on a Sunday, but it definitely did its purpose of curbing my very much needed fix!
