ReviewID: Tf_dG41xaRn_DGIRTc1GDw
ReviewerID: OIPnjz30OotE3y9SklroRQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
My wife and I went here for her birthday dinner and had a great experience.  The ambiance and staff were wonderful.  We opted to select 4 courses from the menu instead of the tasting menu.  We figured we could try 8 different dishes instead of 5.. . We started off with the Soft Boiled Farm Egg Salad, brioche, tarragon, fingerling potato chips &amp; the Roasted Beet &amp; Goat Cheese Terrine, hazelnuts, brown butter vinaigrette.  Both dishes were wonderful although the soft boiled egg was cold. . . Second course was the Thai Spiced Sweet Potato-Coconut Soup, crispy rice noodles &amp; Sunchoke Ravioli, grilled leeks, medjool dates, preserved lemon, quail egg.  I thought the soup was delicious and lighter than I thought it would be. The ravioli was another nice dish, but neither of us were sure we would order it again.  Unfortunately the meal turned a little south at this point. . . The Farro Risotto, sage gremolada, roasted crab apples, golden raisins, mascarpone was fabulous and I am not a big fan of farro, so that says something.  The Boston Baked Beans, braised collard greens, mustard, brown bread on the other hand was disappointing.  It had an off flavor that I didn't enjoy and wound up switching with my wife.  There was something in it that I couldn't put my finger on.  We asked our waitress about the ingredients, and she asked the kitchen, but we couldn't figure out what it was (we did when desert came).. . I would come back for the Spence Farm Poached Egg, smoked potato puree, country sourdough.  As a meat eater I commented on how the smoked potato puree tasted like it had bacon in it, which was a huge plus for me.  My wife's Warm Braised Artichoke and Bread Salad, olives, preserved lemon was another dish that wasn't as well explained on the menu as it should have been.  There was an obvious Indian influence in the dish and neither of us are big Indian food/Indian curry fans.  . . For desert we had the ice cream tasting which consisted of chocolate malt, vanilla and lavendar, rum raisin and fennel.  One taste of the fennel ice cream and I knew what it was that put me off in the baked beans.  Fennel!. . Overall the meal was good, I just wish they were more descriptive on their menu so that I could have avoided the dishes I knew I wasn't going to like.
