ReviewID: Tfcpfv7M8OiF7PplDRpoCw
ReviewerID: MA6t0z6jPHwi87c96LOcHw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
Update 4.11.07 . I took my ice cream lovin' self over here today to satisfy my need for a milkshake (I've been waiting for one of these days to come along because I didn't want to waste precious calories on ice cream when I am not dying for it!) I coerced my galpal coworker into having a milk shake today too so we could be fatties together yay! (FYI she is as skinny as a rail so I use the term fatties loosely)  :)  So I ordered up a Strawberry shortcake for her and a Triple Chocolate shake for me (death by chocolate as I am now referring to it because I can feel my arteries closing in on me) First they only have one size ($5) so hopes for a small to satisfy my sweet tooth wasn't happening. I totally recommend these, cuz baby!  this is what this place is specializin' in!!  Only get them however if you want to collapse under your desk and unbutton your pants cuz thats what I want to do now that I've had my chocolaty goodness :) . . Thank god this place popped up!!! I've been waiting for some new lunch places near my work to open because I am getting tired of the same old. Initially I was intrigued by this place because the signage and building were well designed and for me that is at least one ticket to try someplace new. I figure if it is pleasing to my eye perhaps it will make my tummy happy too. So today was the day. Lunch hour on a weekday and the little joint was pretty packed!! However I placed my order at the counter with no problem and they give you a plastic table number to take out to your table. I ordered the Media Noche since thats what other Yelpers had recommended. I also felt obligated to buy at least a chocolate chip cookie since the place is crawling with tempting looking sweets. Everything was wonderful! The sandwich came out in about 10 minutes and had this little side dish of pickled veggies. The sandwich had an amazing flavor kind of a cross between a pressed cuban and a pulled pork sammy from Porto's. The cookie hit the spot this afternoon too! :) . . I will surely be back to try out some of the yummy looking salads and maybe a milkshake, or a bon bon, or piece of cake....feel free to stop me anytime here... ehh or not.. . I also can't resist sitting outside for lunch on a beautiful day, which is 95% of  the days in L.A.
