ReviewID: tfHVH-ISvvVbhCPtTTa5IQ
ReviewerID: mrCi243flxxmFVu63IK4Lw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
So my wonderful friends took me here a month ago for my birthday (love 'em!).  You can see Hoa P.'s review below- we are the alleged "not-so-punctual friends" (dude, arriving at 7:05p for a 7:00p reservation is HARDLY late).  . . Onto the restaurant... for the caliber (e.g. "$$$"), I expected the service &amp; clientele to be a tad on the snobby side, but not at all.  We actually were able to get into the restaurant on a last-minute cancellation, and were seated right near the door to the kitchen.  My girlfriend called ahead and said "we're going for my friend Stella's birthday" (this will make sense later).  . . We started out with the bread basket, which was delish (the crispy cheesy bread was my favorite).  Next came the steaks... mmm... I ordered the filet, Hoa ordered the ribeye and my girlfriend ordered the Chef's cut ribeye.  They were all good, but man, the Chef's cut just melted in my mouth- not to mention it was the size of my face!  I'm getting this the next time I go.  The sides were decent- sauteed mushrooms, gorgonzola mac n' cheese (which turned a little chewy once the pan it was served in cooled off) and asparagus (I think? It was a month ago so my memory's a little shady).  Accompanied with a bottle of cab (our glasses were NEVER empty thanks to the waiter) and we were set.. . Then came the desserts... I mentioned earlier that my girlfriend told them it was my birthday when she called in for reservations, and that we were seated next to the kitchen.  Now, where we were seated was right next to where our waiter stood when he was done taking care of his tables &amp; he would survey to make sure they were all satisfied.  Once they finished clearing our table, they came out with a slice of chocolate cake with "Happy Birthday Stella" written on the plate, and the waiter told me it was compliments of the Mastro's family.  Sweet, my friends rock for telling them it was my birthday.  But wait, what?  My girlfriend says "I wonder how they knew it was you.."  Huh??  Turns out neither of them had snuck away to "use the restroom," instead pointing out to the waiter that it was the drunk girl's birthday.  Whoever took the reservation told our waiter there was a birthday at our table, and dude figured it out it was me by being attentive and listening to our conversation.  Nice!  Bonus points for our waiter... Hoa also insisted on getting the Creme Brulee (yum!), which they again brought out with "Happy Birthday Stella" written out on the plate.  . . All in all, great food, great service.  And the topper:  they called my girlfriend the next day to thank us for dining there the night before- now that's service.  I'm heading there next month with my bf to show him the awesomeness that is Mastro's (to make up for our horrible Valentine's experience- see my Cucina Paradiso review).  . . If I had five thumbs, I'd give it five thumbs up.
