ReviewID: TFzEmUsCCFoLJqDuIigF0A
ReviewerID: WWnhqRnWWjutMqh-2SzEuQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Modern
Category: French
I took my final lavish New York meal of a delicious New York summer with my work mentors at the Modern.  All in all, not a bad way to go (and free, to boot).. . Like the Bar Room, which I adore, the Modern boasts a lovely setting, very clean and sleek and...new-fashioned, with the dining room looking out through clean glass at the courtyard of the MoMA.  Service is pleasant, unfussy but plenty attentive.. . So the food.  We had barely sat down before we were presented with our gorgeous amuses - tall glasses holding sweet corn panna cotta with crispy lentils and little tapioca balls all resting in moats of tomato water.  It was a large and tasty amuse bouche, creamy with texture interest provided by the lentils and tapioca.  And yes, during my lunch with my mentors I TOOK NOTES UNDER THE TABLE ON MY LG PHONE IN A TEXT MESSAGE DRAFT.  Goodness gracious I need counseling.. . The bread was also fantastic, both the olive and the French roll.  With salt and pepper in shallow dishes for pinching and a cube of butter on its own crystal pedestal, this was not your standard bread and butter.. . There is a prix fixe lunch that's somewhat reasonable, but as my companions were ordering a la carte, I followed suit.  I started with the heirloom tomato terrine with micro basil and spicy tomato sorbet.  I'm sorry to say that it wasn't that great.  It didn't offend or anything, but the terrine was uninteresting and the sorbet redundant.  It came with a little shotglass of carrot soup that didn't particularly help the cause.. . My entree of roasted Maine lobster with chanterelles, hearts of palm, and chamomile blossom nage more than made up for the lack of luster in the appetizer.  That might've been the best lobster I've ever had, cooked firm and elastic and oozing with flavor.  The mushrooms and hearts of palm were superb accompaniments that I would've eaten separately by the plateful.. . By comparison, the taste of chorizo-crusted codfish with white coco bean purée and harissa oil that I traded for with my partner mentor was surprisingly unexciting.  Chorizo and codfish are both winning ingredients, but this preparation did little to capitalize on their combined effect.  The result was nicely cooked fish medallioned with salty dime-sized pepperoni.. . For dessert I opted for the milk chocolate and hazelnut dacquoise with raspberry sorbet, described by our server as a gourmet Snickers bar.  It was much more than that, sweet and tart with a mild hint of salt and a sparkling crackling crunch.. . An impressive tray of mignardises followed the meal along with a dish of assorted chocolates.  The plated bites were cherry amaretto mini scones, green tea macaroons with passion fruit pate de fruit, raspberry tuilles, and sour belts flavored with ginger, lime, and peppercorn.  All but the last of these were unmemorable, but I really enjoyed the kick of the sour belt.  Ginger, lime, and peppercorn candy, who woulda thunk it.. . Overall I really enjoyed the Modern, though I can't say that it was flawless.  The food was generally excellent, but not as consistent as I've found, surprisingly, at the Bar Room, where I've managed to visit twice.  For my money (which has not been spent in the Dining Room), I'd rather dine across the divider.  That said, I don't put a ton of stock in things like formality of service.  The Modern is certainly a more elaborate fine dining experience, complete with all the perks both edible and not that come with that description.  I wouldn't hesitate to recommend it for an occasion meal.
