ReviewID: tgofac3TDhnVbIf3w5FiVw
ReviewerID: YYYhp2xmzxA9Q5wTzi_XoA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
NO, NO, NO, NO, NO... unless you're a fat slob, then YES.. . if you're considering patronizing pinks, you should also be considering a diet... or perhaps an entire lifestyle change including a Lap Band, some Arrid extra dry, a case of Clearasil, ear and nose hair trimmers, a lifetime membership to 24-hour fitness, Brite Smile teeth whitening, Nicoderm stop smoking patches and a new wardrobe you didn't buy at Ross Dress for Less. regardless of how the "food" tastes when it slides down your throat on its own lubrication of grease, i guarantee you two things... you will stand in line for 40 minutes and then you'll spend the next 3 days sitting on the toilet. . . but what do you expect when you shovel into your pie hole two jumbo hot dogs, bacon, pastrami and nacho cheese wrapped in a flour tortilla topped with sauerkraut, grilled onions and guacamole then smothered in a heaping scoop of chili? that is not a joke. the fat slobs there at pinks literally eat those monstrosities. i challenge you to just look at the pictures without getting explosive diarrhea. it's like something out of Saturday Night Live - remember Taco Town? the place where you get your taco wrapped in a pizza? that's this place, for reals! even if you don't get all that junk on your dog, you're still eating a hot dog filled with plenty of low grade beef or pork... however, on the positive side, hot dogs are jam packed with high quality rat excrement, so you still got that going for you.. . look at the fat slobs with bad skin waiting in line and wake up! resist the urge to become one of them. i know it's tempting because they're so attractive and smell good, but instead walk right around the corner to T Salon or M Cafe. or if you must have the authentic old school Melrose Shopping District experience, make the extra effort and hoof it over to Antonio's, Genghis Cohen or Canters. you'll be glad you did, you fat slobs. . . you can thank me later after your triple bypass.
