ReviewID: tH6XA_Wg_0SBRX2dKoM9eg
ReviewerID: tqknAY6Xihzd-HUe5ETRDw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
So after reading all the reviews, I decided to give Orochon a try. And since the only thing of note at Orochon is the spicy, I'm going to skip reviewing everything else (which, as everyone else noted, is pretty average/on par) and get to the good stuff.. . Question 1: How spicy is it?. Well the #4 was just right for me. Spicy yet still enjoyable. Soup was still mild enough to drink but lips were tingly/slightly burning at the end. The #2 was definitely spicy, but nowhere near enough to conquer the Boyfriend. It's on the same level as soaking a few jalapenos in your bowl of pho. I mean, even I could drink the #2 soup and be okay, so definitely a little disappointed on the heat factor.. . Question 2: How big is the bowl?. So this is where the challenge of finishing off a #2 lies: the bowl is huge with more soup than a human can possibly drink, nevermind the spicyness. How are you going to handle all that salt? So salt and spicy combined equals one upset stomach if you finish it all. I agree with I agree with El Jorge T.: It's not really worth it, if you already know you can handle it but don't want the unpleasant side effects like monstrously gross burps. SO disgusting. Burps you can smell from the other room.  But if you're not sure if you're man enough, go ahead and test your skill. Just be kind to your loved ones and keep the aftermath to yourself.. . Or OR if you're a teeny tiny guy (or a teeny tiny girl) it may be worthwhile to get your picture on the wall. But if you're a burlier broad shouldered man, and your picture's on the wall everyone it'll be like "that would be sad if that dude couldn't finish the #2" But check out that skinny dude on the left. What is he--12?!? That's crazy that he finished his bowl!". . Demerits for expensive cha su (a dollar for one extra slice?!?) and cold egg. But props for being able to sit outside. All in all, Orochon is worth a try, but hell, Daikokuya is right down the street.
