ReviewID: TiImBpxajYkjSa_TN3UB5Q
ReviewerID: _txhy3UvyGffFh8FLO2_qw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
Oh my.  I want to move into Cobras and Matadors and eat every meal there.  My husband and I had dinner here on the recommendation of one of my best friends that used to live in the area.  . . It's a small place that sort of reminded me of the first floor of Landmarc in New York.  It definitely has a NY feel to it, which I loved.  Maybe it's because I'm from NY or maybe it's because it was the opposite of Phoenix and a nice change.  We were there on a Sunday night and it wasn't overcrowded by any means, there were a healthy number of diners.  . . We got stuck in traffic after a slow start and had to push back our reservation which they were happy to accommodate.  When we arrived we selected a bottle from the store next door (coincidentally enough the same wine that I had had the night before at the Montage) and they popped it open right away. (No corkage fee.)  The service throughout the night was great, at one point one of the servers saw us getting ready to get the attention of our server and came over and helped us out.  . . The food.  Well, the food was out of this world.  Everything was delivered to our table within minutes of ordering it.  (I was a little nervous after reading some reviews that it would be greasy but it wasn't at all.)  We ordered four plates and each of them were perfect- the flank steak (which was a very large serving and well complimented with the cucumbers) was very tender, the lomo embuchado was out of this world, another dish that was chorizo on focaccia with manchengo cheese (the name escapes me now), and finally the asparagus that reminded my husband of pesach charoset.  The lomo embuchado was so good that we ordered a second plate of it.  At one point I remarked I wanted to marry it, it was that good.  . . Then came dessert.  French Toast with creme fraiche, does it get better?  The answer is no, it doesn't.  French Toast is one of my favorite food items and when they told us that was one of the dessert options I nearly fell off my chair.  Then I asked for a cup of tea and they brought me a tea menu!  A tea menu!  You have no idea what that means to a tea drinker as most places just give you a random black tea or bring out a tea selection that is less than interesting.  I chose the Amore and it was amazing.  It was the perfect way to end off the night before heading out to the chilly weather.  . . I loved every part of the experience at C&amp;M-  the attentive wait staff, the amazing food, the music that was playing was great, and the fact that they offered all of my favorite foods tucked away in a lovely little cozy restaurant.  The 5 tapas, dessert, espresso, tea and bottle of wine with tip came to about $100.  Sigh.  I'm in love.
