ReviewID: TiOEEWGk4LRqhRTEr62zXQ
ReviewerID: jAiGoRmj3eAkeH_3KfudXg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mana Food Bar
Category: Vegetarian
Suck it Gordon Ramsay!! . . The night before Veggie Supper Club I was watching Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares, which was featuring a vegetarian restaurant in Paris. Usually, I'm a fan of Gordon and his foul-mouthed, tough love approach to restaurants, but Gordon's comments about vegetarians made me want to reach through my TV and bitch slap him. . . Why? He has some of the following things to say about vegetarian food: . . *I know their [vegetarians] food is bland in general . *Unfortunately it's a f-ing vegetarian restaurant . *Boring, bland vegetarian food . . I know our last few supper clubs have for the most part been misses, but to label vegetarian food generally boring and bland is just ignorant! Gordon needs to get his butt over to Mana because my meal there was anything, but boring and bland! Ok, end rant and on to my dining experience.. . I like that many of Mana's dishes come in two sizes: small and large. It allows you to try multiple dishes or share things family-style. Being a painfully picky eater I scoped out the menu ahead of time and made some mental notes about things I wanted to try. I ended up ordering the Artichoke Ravioli and Bleu Cheese Tart. Both of my dishes were amazing! The sauce on the ravioli was creamy, tomato-y and had some zing to it. The tart was deliciously creamy and the caramelized onions and slaw on the side complimented it nicely. . . I was also lucky enough to try some of my fellow diners dishes too. The squash salad, rice noodles, veggie chili, and baked goat cheese were all amazing. I also tried a sip of one of their sake drinks, the coconut water and lime sake drink; it was the only thing I tried that I found bland and disappointing.. . The place itself is neat, but tiny. We were fortunate enough to snag a seat on the patio. I think the patio may seat more people than the inside portion of the restaurant - like I said it's tiny. The inside has a bar and a few tables, it is NOT ideal for groups of more than 4. I have to imagine the place seems kind of like a cave in winter since the walls are painted a dark slate. . . Service was friendly and attentive, prices were reasonable and the menu had a nice variety of items. Without drinks I spent less than $20 and was so full I could only manage a bite of the brownie I picked up on my way home. I can't wait to come back here!
