ReviewID: tiPTCUxU8Ukvnin2lO49Lw
ReviewerID: HXLtUj52n24xOHZyXBaTmQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Houston&#39;s Restaurant
Category: American (New)
A very good restaurant. I've been to the Pasadena location several times as well, and Houston's has never disappointed.. . TORTILLA SOUP. The soup had a good consistency and taste. It was served at the perfect temperature; the cheese (which I could tell was freshly grated) was either just starting to melt or in the soft stage just before beginning to melt. The avocado was smooth and cold, which made a great contrast with the rest of the dish.. . I think crunchy tortilla strips would have made this dish perfect; that would have given the contrast of crunchy and smooth as well as hot and cold.. . TUNA ROLL SALAD. This dish was not what I expected. 'Inside-out Tuna Roll' means the rice is on the outside, followed by the seaweed, followed by the inside (fish, avocado and jicama). I expected a salad with all the sushi ingredients mixed together. This dish to me was not a salad; it was a sushi roll with a side salad.. . The rolls were good. The ingredients were very fresh, especially the fish. I had never had jicama in a sushi roll before, and it was interesting to have the crunchy along with the soft and smooth of the fish and the avocado.. . The side salad was delicious. The avocado was soft and perfectly ripe, the mango was very flavorful, the pickled onions were bursting with so much flavor that I had to lean back in my seat to take it all in. The cilantro added a very distinct flavor without adding much texture. The dressing was tasty and perfectly subtle. However, I do recall a piece of avocado that was too big; it would have been better if that piece were cut into two or three pieces and more evenly distributed in the salad.. . I thought the jicama was a bit out of place; the cucumbers added enough crunchiness to the salad, and the jicama added too much crunch. Another aspect of the dish I disliked was the peppers. Either the peppers or the seeds of the peppers were WAY too spicy for that dish. I usually love spicy food, but this made me sit back in my seat for a good 20-30 seconds before I was ready to move on. It was an unpleasant experience.. . CALIFORNIA BURGER. In general, very good ingredients make for a very good burger, and Houston's has hit the nail on the head. The bun was perfectly soft and sweet (are these made in-house like the rest of the breads?). The meat was flavorful and juicy, though may have been a bit undercooked for medium (see pictures). Additionally, the avocado and tomatoes were unevenly distributed (see pictures) and I couldn't really taste the arugula.. . The fries were good, with perfect texture and flavor. However, I think they could have used less salt; my guest and I both mentioned how they weren't far from being too salty.. . SERVICE. Greeters were helpful and smiling, but not overly enthusiastic, which I think fit well with the attitude the whole place exudes (which seemed masculine-sexy-professional).. . Our server, Daniel, knew everything and presented it very well, including letting us know the fresh fishes of the day as well as telling us about the different dishes on the menu. He was professional but also fun and laid back; he kept us smiling all night. Michelle, the manager, stopped by our table and asked how everything was going. I feel that it's rare for the manager to ask a random table if everything is going well, and I liked that.. . AMBIANCE. I liked the lighting a lot. Again, it follows the professional-masculine-sexy attitude. The soft lighting complements the dark woods well. I like the Southwestern wooden cacti. Some of the framed artwork seemed a bit out of place though; I recall one painting with abstract black images on a white canvas, which reminded me of Chinese characters.
