ReviewID: TItXok2UbMgwN4USStEcyQ
ReviewerID: yDbtyjFQKhqLhCFjfqQ08A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
First off - something about this restaurant.... the scene, the location... it makes me want to write this review in an Eva Gabor voice.  It's a very "dahhlink" kind of place.  But I shall refrain from that device because It's obvious and cheap.  Hackery, if you will.  Not Renny Harlin levels of hackery, mind you, but maybe Ratner-esque, which I am sure you will agree is sufficient at least.. . So, now that we have finished the business of establishing the oh-so important "editorial voice" or perhaps, more importantly, what it is NOT, let me then move onto the next item on the agenda.  To wit: a review of Los Angeles landmark restaurant Spago Beverly Hills.. . Say what you will about the breadth and scope of Wolfgang Puck's culinary empire (and what I will say is that it has fared MUCH better than Joachim Splichal's in both acumen and spirit) one can not argue that at the highest levels... Spago and Cut... the focus and discipline that comprise the foundation upon which that considerable empire rests remains firmly entrenched.. . Our party of eight squeezed into a table meant for six on a recent Saturday evening... and to say that I was nervously apprehensive about our relative comfort is to understate the case severely.  I am picky that way, I happily admit.  I needn't have worried, however, as the attentive staff and terrific food proved my concerns to be utterly groundless.. . Passed Hors D'oeuvres... Tuna tartare in a sesame cone, satay chicken, goat cheese and prosciutto pizza.  Tremendous.  A perfect foil for our champagne.. . Smoked salmon and sturgeon on blinis with creme fraiche and caviar...  beautiful fish, well presented.  Paired well with a white burgundy from the Combettes vineyard.  (Can't remember the label, though). . Braised short ribs were meaty, fork-tender, and delicious.  Cote de Boeuf was filled with charry, rare-beef goodness.  And it came with Pommes Aligot... a potatoes, butter and cheese concoction from the Auvergne region of France.  Um, is it redundant to assert that those French have got it fucking going on, food-wise?  No.  I don't think it is.  So noted.. . Dessert found me staring at a zeppelin sized confection called a kaiserschmarren.  If pressed, I would describe it as a creamy souffle-ish crepe.  And there were strawberries involved.  And it was nearly the size of my whole head.  And it was everything I had ever hoped a dessert would be.  Creamy, sweet, vaguely doughy but in the lightest, fluffiest way imaginable.  Kaiserschmarren.  Remember that.  Write it down if you have to.  . . A lovely patio setting, good service, and imaginative, well-executed cuisine.  I understand that many have lamented and will continue to decry the Express Cafes and supermarket soups, but I think Wolfgang offers an impressive level of quality across the full range of his wares.  Spago quite rightly sits at the top of that range and delivers in spades.  Mark it.
