ReviewID: TjsXLImqhoiT_cdOd2WXCw
ReviewerID: ybxHUQa_GsESAaRXINV-dg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
A friend and I went out last night, and we decided to give Mozza a try. We've heard about it from folks, but we were a little concerned about trying to get in on a Friday night without a reservation. We walked in and there is already quite a crowd hovering in the doorway. They asked if we had a reservation, and we said no. However, there are seats at the bar, available on a first come, first serve basis, so we put our name on the list and are told it will be about 20 minutes. Not a bad quote for a busy place on a Friday night. Well, a short 10 minutes later, they called our name, and we are placed on the corner spot of the pizza prep bar. I have to say, I think it is much cooler to sit there rather than at one of the tables, as we could watch the pizza chefs work their magic, and we have a perfect view into the brick oven where the magic pizzas are born.  We also have a great view into all the fresh veggies they have ready to be placed on pizzas, which was kinda cool to watch.. . My friend and I were a bit surprised at how small the location is.  There were maybe 25 tables, and about the same number of seats at the two bars.  Based on the crowd hovering around the doorway, they could easily grow to twice its size, and it would still stay as packed as it was.  . . We asked the server for recommendations, and she listed several specialties, including the most popular dishes.  I've never really been one for sausage on pizzas, but they make their own sausage there, and she said that it is the best and the most popular, so I decided to give it a try. It was the fennel sausage something-or-other, with goat cheese and red onion, I think, and it was INCREDIBLE.  my friend ordered something that I forget what it is called, but it comes with an egg on top, and she also said it was incredible.  (I have to say, when I heard there was an egg on top, I kinda figured something along the line of a scrambled egg drizzled on top or something, but no. They pour a raw egg into the middle of the pizza, and then put it in the magic oven, and viola! it's like having an egg over easy crowning a pizza!)  Originally we thought we might split a pizza, but we decided to each get our own, which is a good thing, because we ate just about every last bite!  . . I'm not usually one for liking a place because it is popular, but here, I have to say that Its popular reputation is hard earned and well deserved, and it was a fabulous meal for a reasonable price. We did laugh a little at the fact that my friend's glass of wine was the most expensive thing on our bill, but overall the prices are quite reasonable, and the entire experience is well worth it!
