ReviewID: tK9rlXf5AzNN0JURqr87aA
ReviewerID: 9HyAuq4Vfv7JRsQrGj2etA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
The view is excellent.  The "palace" is pretty cool.  The food is so-so.  . . My fiancee ordered the crispy chicken appetizer (which is more than enough for 2 people to share, trust me... surprisingly tasty) and I got the miso soup.  I have never seen so many mushrooms in a bowl of miso.  When I was 2/3rds of the way finished, there were still a zillion mushrooms -- so many that I was compelled to take a picture of it (check it out.) . . We decided to try some of the "special" sushi rolls (e.g., the one with pineapple and plantain, the one with cilantro and chili, and the one with mango, macadamia and coconut.)  I have never seen rolls like this at other restaurants so I really wanted to try them but they were aight -- I mean, not as ground-shaking as I'd hoped.  Also note that the California roll is the type that's all mushed up with mayo and roe (not my pref).  I've never been to a PF Chang's but this is what I'd always imagined their food to be like. Not horrible, but not too great either.  You're paying for the view, not the food.. . I have to take a moment and crack on the music.  You know the kind of music played when you get a massage?  Well, it was that kind of music for a while (pan pipes, Enya, etc.) and then it got weird... Gregorian chants with trip hop beats (anyone remember Enigma?), a song made out of samples of birds chirping and just flat out cruddy ambient stuff like BT -- my fiancee thought she heard a promo for XM Radio at one point so they could very well just be playing some World Music station.. . As for dress, it seems to be very casual.  I wore slacks, shoes and a collared shirt but I saw men in shorts, flip-flops and t-shirts.  The valet parking is $6.50.  The service was good -- not great, but good enough.  Our table was not ready when we arrived and we were handed one of those beeper/buzzer things -- which proceeded to buzz exactly 2 seconds after we ordered drinks at the bar. Our waiter was attentive but was not there when our food was served so we couldn't identify the different sushi rolls when they were set down. But generally he was solid.. . Two mai tais,1 carafe of sake, a bottle of still water, the crispy chicken app and miso soup plus 5 sushi rolls (3 of them "special rolls") and 1 piece sashimi ran us $130 before tip.. . I was happy to stroll around the grounds with my lady before dinner (I recommend arriving 15-20 minutes before you dinner reservation).  And the view was romantic -- although I should also note that the seats with the views are not outside or open air.  There are outdoor seats in the restaurant but they don't have the view of the city.  I would go back again but likely to show out-of-town friends the view.
