ReviewID: TK_46PZ8E4ktgtjXag_CPQ
ReviewerID: MacVhfdoYEBD-a8m9WQbDg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
Today was my first visit at Lamill. The mere thought of meeting up with some friends for brunch in Silverlake was interesting yet odd. I grew up in LA my whole entire life and knew Silverlake was the place to avoid because of the dangerous neighborhoods. However, because my friends are "good food junkies" like me, I knew I can trust my friends.. . First impression... ah... there is private parking!!!!  Love it.. I don't have to worry about parking my car elsewhere. As I walked in, my second impression was, "WHY HAVE NOT BEEN HERE BEFORE?" The decor is funky, eclectic, formal with a slight euro flair. Love it! Most importantly, this establishment is packed and CLEAN. It's gotta be good.  *big smile* The menu has plenty of teas and coffees to choose from. I decided to go with the nonfat vanilla latte since I didn't have time to peruse through the long menu with my 2yr old son nagging to me about wanting his cars.  Sigh... I ordered the scrambled mushroom and bacon omelette, I'll be honest, portions are WAY small. I'm use to going to places that have double portions... think Marston's in Pasadena. Of course, you are reading opinions from a person who has "bigger eyes than what she can really eat". To my delight, the portion  was perfect for me . Of course, I also ordered a black iced tea as well. . . I did not have the chance to try the donuts as it was sold out for the day. It's going to be a must-try the next time I go there. I hear you have to show up early for that... because once it's gone.. IT"S GONE.  I also have to comment that they have such friendly servers. They are busy but they are always trying their best to come by each table and make sure everyone is ok. Drinks were a bit slow though.. then again.. it's not like they have a whole vat of iced tea in the back. I'm assuming that they brew each drink for each order each time. Hence, the delay and the wait. . . All I know is.. i love this place.. it is truly a hidden gem in old silverlake. Big "Hip Hip Hooray.." for la mill. . . Brunch and drinks for the 4 of us ... around $100.
