ReviewID: tKHA9bR09jtdDo-n3DKCEw
ReviewerID: Ocz_Adp2JGTakaUq2m04fg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Buona Terra
Category: Italian
This isn't like the most incredible Italian place I've ever been to,. it's cramped, and loud, but it's got tasty food for a pretty decent. price on a Thursday night.. . They don't mention the Prefix deal to you so you need to make sure. when you order that you specify. Otherwise they just might sell you a. special or something.. . What's Tasty:. . A lot of people have been raving about the bread, so when I tried it I. expected it to sparkle and pop into my belly but unless you put the. spread on it, it's just bread. However! That spread is also good on.... . Appetizers:. . Caprese: (Sliced tomato with fresh mozzarella and basil). It's ultra. basic but really good. And as I was saying, put a little bit of the. crazy spread on your tomato with cheese and basil and enjoy. Makes the. dish even better if you want a more complicated flavor.. . Carpaccio: (Sliced tenderloin of beef drizzled with truffle oil and. topped with portabello mushrooms, capers and shaved parmesan.) This is. also really good. I'm pretty sure that the crazy meat is raw, but its. so thinly sliced that it didn't matter.. . Entrees:. . Ravioli con Vittelo: (Ravioli pasta stuffed with veal in a brandy. cream sauce topped with fresh mozzarella). This wasn't what I ordered. but I totally should have. It was ULTRA awesome, and the sauce was. great for dipping bread in as well, as it was plentiful.. . Pollo Afumicatto: (Sauteed chicken breast with smoked mozzarella in a. tomato and smoked bacon sauce served with pesto mashed potatoes). I. ordered this, and it was actually just about as good as the Ravioli,. however I just wasn't entirely in the mood for it. The portions. especially for this meal were absolutely awesome. The mashed potatoes. were probably my favorite part of the meal, they're not too loaded. with pesto but you can definitely taste it in there.. . We wanted to get the Profiteroles, because our friend had told us that. they were like her favorite thing in the entire universe but YOU HAVE. TO GO EARLY, we found out :( They sell out quick apparently. We ended. up having gelato, which never fails to be delicious, but still, as. much as I love gelato I haven't had a puff pastry in quite some time.. . Service is decent, tables inside and out, defiantly make reservations.
