ReviewID: Tky98Ga_tnmJBWo8TktCLQ
ReviewerID: uqDhN27G6q818TuLIYwgGA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Ok- so I wouldn't have known about this place if it wasn't for Groupon! I'm glad that they had that special deal $40 for $80 worth of food! I read on Yelp about it's fantastic views so I thought it would be nice for me to finally treat my fiancé out since I haven't done it in awhile! It was fitting because I was able to use it for our 6 Year Anniversary. . . I quickly &amp; easily made the reservations on OpenTable with no problems at all. Upon arrival I told them that we were Groupon customers and I was half expecting to get treated poorly because of the Groupon coupon, but NO! They were very nice and accomodating. Our server accepted the coupon and did not sacrfice the quality of her service one bit. . . My fiancé ordered the American Wagyu Steak with roasted shishito pepper &amp; brocollini hash, crispy onions, tomato-ginger salsa $39. I ordered 2 Makizushi rolls: the Seattle Roll and the Crunchy Roll they were like $16 each. We shared everything and boy was the steak delicious!! The meat was perfectly flavored- not too salty or bland, it was so tender that the meat melted in your mouth with the delicious flavors. The vegetables that came with the dish were the perfect compliment to the tender steak. The rolls didn't impress me too much and the sushi wasn't the freshest but it was still tasty and hit the spot as I was craving for sushi that whole week! . . The alcoholic drinks were okay, my sangria didn't taste like wine- it tasted like a mixed alcoholic drink. Our waitress was really nice even though her English wasn't too good. She always stopped by out table to make sure everything was great.. . We were super impressed by the restaurant's view overlooking Los Angeles. The place was romantic and we were able to take beautiful photographic shots of the scenery after dinner. . . Overall, it's a great place for a romantic dinner and the food and service was great despite the fact that they knew we were there for a discounted dinner special. I give this place 5 stars and would like to come again in the near future!
