ReviewID: TlV5unG1AAEC6Vnjp9PLxA
ReviewerID: XwbnUSJeDscLDGfe4A1x3Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
the morning after.. . as I plop on the couch, The Wife asks what I'm gonna write in my Yelp review. "It was complete crap, never go there." Then she throws a cat at my head and says "No, seriously. Maybe 'it costs a lot, but they take care of you?' " . . There you have it. Red Light: it's expensive, but you get treated well. Words of wisdom from the birthday girl.. . So, intially based on a recommendation from Yelpr Michelle M. then confirmed by all of you beautiful people, we went to Red Light last night to mourn the end of my wife's 26th year and welcome the 27th. The decor was nice, a little weird, but still neat. I didn't get the sultry thing that some people were mentioning. We were supposed to do the mini-chef's tasting - 5 courses, $50/person. But when we got there, they said they don't do a mini tasting. Okay, well, someone needs to tell the chick answering the phones then. No biggie, we went with the full tasting. Everything was presented with such care and delight. We definitely ate with our eyes first. . . Here's what we had:. . Everyone got two pieces of flash seared ahi tuna with a sweet soy sauce and a mild wasabi sauce. The tuna was a tasty appetizer. It was firm and flavorful.. . Next were the steamed foie-gras &amp; pork dumplings, set in a cognac hoisin sauce. More delicious-ness. These were good, but after four straight hours of eating, they don't stand out.. . After that was the roll course. We each got half of a crispy maine lobster-mango roll, a shrimp &amp; beef vietnamese spring roll &amp; a chinese egg roll. The lobster mango roll was my favorite. The mango worked so well with the lobster. jackie Shen herself brought these out.. . Next they brought out the Shrimp &amp; Pad Thai. The Black tie sesame shrimp was coated in black sesame seeds and served with a passion fruit chili sauce. The kung pao shrimp worked well with the pad thai which wasn't too spicy and was loaded with shrimp on its own.. . A few courses in and we're starting to fill up. A few glasses of wine and we're starting to slow down. Little do we realize we're in for a gastonomic work-out.. . Okay, back to the food. The bbq course came next. Five spice salt ribs &amp; peking duck. On separate plates, obviously. The ribs were something I wanted to try, and was a little dissappointed by. But, we're still talking about varying degrees of incredible here. The ribs were coated in a spice rub that really gave them a lot of flavor. Nothing like the usual grease &amp; fat-fest that define chinese ribs. The duck was spectacular. The host mentioned something about it being put in a citrus bath first to cure off the usual excess fat. I liked it, because I usually find Peking duck to be too fatty. This let you really taste the duck meat, while still enjoying the crispy skin. It was served over a plate of cranberries swimming in a delicious orange ginger cranberry sauce.. . They give you time to rest between courses, but it's never enough. The problem is that the food is so amazing, you can't help but eat until the point of pain. At least we couldn't. It was seriously that good.. . Okay, now we're suffering. We saw a few waiters carry out a whole catfish and our busboy nods &amp; says "Don't worry, that's coming out next." Part of us is excited, part of us just wants it to end! Please stop, we can't take anymore gourmet food!. . But, then it comes. The Crispy Shanghai style Whole Catfish. They take a little liberty with the word 'whole' because the head is no where to be seen, but we were all fine with that. The catfish came out with a massive plate of wrinkled green beans &amp; stir-fried beef tenderloin with mushrooms &amp; scallions. I'm getting hungry &amp; full again just writing this. Okay, I'll start with the catfish. It was amazing. The host carved it at the table for us and the presentation was just as good as the meat itself. The skin was cripsy &amp; the flesh was moist &amp; firm. I really enjoyed the tenderloin. It was seared, then allowed to rest, then sliced thin and stir fried with cremini &amp; shitaki mushrooms &amp; thick scallions. Everything had an incredible bite to it.. . Thankfully, after 4 hours, that was the last of the food. Nope, there was still dessert. Of course we make room for dessert. They brought out a coconut-banana cream pie, a Berrry Marscapone tart &amp; Jackie's Chocolate Bag. Bag? Yes, Bag. That thing was a tower of chocolate will with berries and belgian white chocolate mousse and fresh rasperry sauce. The other desserts were incredible too, but when you're staring down a six-inch tall tower of chocolate nothing else comes close.. . So, that's it. We rolled ourselves home and savored the memories.
