ReviewID: tMZysJlRjlbMy9qWZuuPLA
ReviewerID: LJ8U5ZVnFpF8XNUR7DcUng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Coalfire Pizza
Category: Pizza
Ugh. So. Full. So. Happy. So very very happy. . . Pizza is a rarity in my life. I eat it maybe once every few months, but when I do, I try and make sure I do it right. I try a new place. Savor every bite. Indulge myself a little. Perhaps make sure I get a second so I have left overs. When I realized I was going to be home tonight, I thought about getting pizza. Then when I got four hours of sleep last night and I was massively exhausted, I decided there was no way I was going to cook and I needed an escape plan, I called, I walked over and got some Coalfire.. . The place is larger than I thought but certainly hopping with families in the early hours of the evening. It took about 30 minutes from call to having the actual product in my hands, just what I was quoted on the phone. The gentleman behind the counter was friendly and helpful when I asked for a slight modification on one of my pizza. I briskly walked home, slightly dazed, woozy, not all with it, partly due to lack of slumber, but I think the smells that were emanating from these two boxes were not helping revive me. Then I opened them up and got a full whiff. . . Sniff. Twinges of glee poured across my face. Pavlov would have been proud of all the saliva that was pouring from my mouth at the sight of what was laid out before me. Oh my. Maybe Homer Simpson would be beaming with more pride. In one box, their pesto pizza, with ricotta and black olives. Over on the other side, my modified four cheese pizza with some very lean, very tasty prosciutto. Oh me oh my back the hell away or so help me you may get your fingers bitten, I've got some eating to do!. . Yes. It is a slightly burned crust. I don't care, it was tasty. It was damn tasty. Slightly chewy, slightly crunchy, but oh so good. The consistency of the crust is what got me, it was just so good. Just chewy enough. The red sauce? Slightly sweet, slightly tart, just balanced, just right. The pesto pizza, slightly salty, had a kick to it and made me rest assure that no vampires were going to visiting me this night. I wish the prosciutto was just a little more crunchy but really minor mood point. Its not like it stopped me from eating a good chunk of each pizza. . . The pizza has a fair price, the pizza is great, the place is conveniently located to me. Oh crap. I might have to rethink this once every few months rule....
