ReviewID: tN9o0x9eo5szmX1bKCuyLQ
ReviewerID: Am6SCuQHGMEUxRjFyNrIIg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
This place is an adventure in its truest form, both for the palate and eyes. Eating here is like taking a tour through the corridors of food cultures and your tour guide is a peculiar, yet lovable sort. And his name is garlic.. . For being a Saturday evening, their parking was not a problem at all. My girlfriend and I were seated promptly into an uncrowded section of the restaurant and sat at a cozy booth, but the romance immediately got shot down with anthropomorphic garlics painted on the walls. Just the same, it is still a very fun environment. The server even took our picture inside the restaurant. That says something. This place has an air of fun and flavor.. . For the quality and quantity, it was a bit overpriced, but relatively speaking, Stinking Rose neighbors some very expensive, high class restaurants. So in comparison it is a good deal. . . I ordered the Neon Ravioli and it was delicious, but portions were sparse. The sauce was creamy and the insides yielded a soft flavor of potatoes. Unfortunately, my plate wasn't doused in garlic as I was expecting. . . Following the meal, I wanted to be adventuresome, so I asked for a sample of their garlic ice cream and they gave me the entire thing. I communicated to the server the mistake and he said, "don't worry about it, its on us." So I dug right in. Upon the first bite the vanilla hid  the garlic very well and I had to close my eyes and shut down some other senses in order fully concentrate on my taste buds. But then there it was, the garlic came through and I discovered that vanilla and garlic actually do go well together. Maybe I could taste it because my meal wasn't garlic heavy. I would suggest avoiding the ice cream if you already had a a strong garlic meal or if you find it difficult to separate flavors in your mouth.. . Stinking Rose provides a fun pit stop for fun in Los Angeles, but I wouldn't center the entire evening around this place.
