ReviewID: TPDObNiDwGh9XkX9rSMaSg
ReviewerID: B2AN-a_VCYQQ-Gv0Dd8MXw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
I suppose I'm in the minority here but I'm not terribly impressed by Umami. My mom and I were on our way home from Union Station (she likes the train, go figure) and in a hurry to get back to the West Side, so I suggested we take out. She'd been blown away by Umami when she first went there and had been insisting I try it. My mom's natural tendency is to LOVE a place upon first visit, like it the second time, then never want to go there again after the third. It's a rare restaurant that makes it past the 3rd visit with Mumsy.. . Anyway, this was time #2 for her at Umami. True to form, the shine's off the apple - and it's no wonder from where I stand.. . Walked in there and immediately felt NOT at home. The host guy behind the register and then the waitress kind of looked at us like we were from Mars - perhaps thinking we may have been, gulp, romantically involved (Ugh! No Oedipus I!) but whatever. The ambiance is pretty much nil other than the particularly nice shades that covered the late afternoon windows, oh, and the fact that the forks are placed at an ANGLE on the napkins (super nice touch, Umami!). . . So we sat there and waited for our food: $30 for two burgers, fries and onion rings. I'll mention that again: $30 for two burgers, fries and onion rings. One more time: $30 for two burgers, fries and onion rings.. . WTF!!????. . My mom insisted it was worth it for this "delicate" and "scrumptious" experience. . . Right.. . Well, I bid farewell to the waitress, whom I tipped $3 for handing me a bag (she did not respond, by the way) and we left. . . Got home and opened things up.. . There were 12 French fries and 9 onion rings.. . Again, this time with particulars: $30 for two burgers, 12 fries and 9 onion rings.. . The burger I'd ordered (Truffle Burger) was about the size, bunwise, of a regular McDonald's hamburger. I must say that there was a goodly amount of meat between the two buns. Chaw #1 of my Truffle Burger ($11) yielded an explosion of flavor: Yes, delicate and, indeed, scrumptious, but this meat had more than just a few serious and important pieces of gristle in it, necessitating several finger trips to the mouth. The taste, to be fair, was quite engaging, but over all too soon. This is a five-bite burger, max. I can think of many, many a-burger around town that is just as good and lasts twice as long in the eating. . . Umami's much vaunted catsup, for which one has to PAY after a single, precious allotment plopped in a super fancy plastic container much akin to a dentist's rinse cup, had a flavor I did not like to it, so, being only steps from Mom's well-appointed fridge, I trotted out the old, reliable Heinz. The French fires, though very thick - the way I like 'em - were not even good. Hard to put my (then) greasy (for grease is Umami's strong point) finger on it, I just did not care for them. The one shining moment of the meal, once I made the catsup adjustment, was the onion rings. These are terrific and lend themselves, in character, more towards the tempura-esque than to traditional, California-style onion rings: light, crispy (but not TOO crispy) without a hint of the bread crumb filler that less imaginative onion ring purveyors rely upon. Quite delightful!. . And not worth the $30 spent.. . I'd have given the place 3 stars but the waitress did not say good-bye and her male counterpart there bore an expression just this side of contempt. My mother and I are not slovenly bum-asses bent on kyping a free repast. We are über presentable and eat at the finest restaurants in town, nearly always being taken care of and, at times, fawned over, by professional and/or alacritous staffs. What's with THESE hipsters? Yeah, all right, so they're lucky enough (for now) to work at a new, hot restaurant (see the L.A. Times dribble all over its slowly rotting corpse in praise). This is NO reason for the rudeness and, perhaps even, disdain. Wait a few months and Umami will have been cast aside like other "enduring L.A. favorites" that have been left at low tide at the capricious whim of Tinsel Town diners.. . By my count, there are 338 burgers that are every bit as good as those found at Umami and all but 3 of them cost far less than $11 a burger. . . I'm sure there's one near you.
