ReviewID: tpJdsUdzAGDqXWUoRz8I3A
ReviewerID: f0YjqeS2qqtmx__4SPSCbQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kitsch&#39;n On Roscoe
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I've been to Kitsch'n several times, but recently found  myself not feeling inclined to go back.  (Which, frankly, I'm going to chock up to being next to Orange and having some very lack luster experiences there that seem to have tainted my view of the superior next door neighbor)  Had some friends come up to the hood for breakfast, and I decided that this would be the most friendly restaurant to all of our tastes.  . . First, I gotta say the service is always good.  Today especially.  We were having some communication issues with the fourth member of our party (basketball over brunch?! silly boyfriend!) and they were totally cool about letting him join us (potentially) later in the meal, after we got started.  Usually we are not obnoxious like that and are all too cognizant about being respectful to servers and bussers because most of us have spent some time in the hospitality industry, but thanks to the staff for letting us have our moment.. . For whatever reason, I always think of the food as "meh", but today reminded me that the food is consistently good and that I need to work on my food memory when it comes to this place.  I ALWAYS enjoy the coconut french toast (which, I might add, is remarkably better executed than the french toast kabob next door).  Anything with their fried chicken is good--particularly the chicken and waffles.  Today I had the chilaquiles (add avocado and chicken), which was a good call, even though the avocado had seen better days and those additions made my chilaquiles total hit $12.50.  Wooooorth it!  I don't love their burgers--which is weird for me--but there is so much other good stuff on the menu, who cares?  They use Intelligentsia coffee, so that just rounds out the solid experience.. . Oh, oh, oh! I almost forgot!  They print the check out with individual guest totals so you know how much each person has to pay without doing that awkward thing where you pick the best "math person" at the table and make them figure out what everyone owes.  It's the little things, ya know?. . The wait can be a bit horrendous on the weekends, but just plan appropriately (you know, get your butt out of your house before 10:00 am) and you'll be fine.  In my opinion, Kitsch'n is the best all around brunch place on the block.
