ReviewID: tPOZaI5mvkt_WoQvKjHk3A
ReviewerID: Tk_FWXueutKii3f9yJFsdw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Chego
Category: Korean
A fast food atmosphere where if u order to go, it involves waiting in the back with your number and once you get your order, you cover your food with aluminum foil and pack your own utensils and supplies. If you order in, you get a bus boy bringing your food to your table in a very quick fashion.. . Since I haven't even tried the original Kogi truck (and meaning to soon!), I thought I should try this place, and I found out that Chego! is walking distance from my residence.. . Before walking in, I immediately noticed the long line streaming out of the entrance during dinnertime on a Friday night. The inside has a retro looking, toy store (sorta like Japanese toy store) vibe with random trinkets on shelves including a Pee Wee Herman doll. Small tight eating area. Check out the bathroom, which features chalk wall art. . . The menu has a limited amount of choices. My bf and I tried their 3pm meatballs which included tiny pieces of polenta on the bottom of them. I thought these meatballs had an interesting taste to them, a litte bit of spice and fish paste.  I ordered their One Chubby Pork Belly Bowl which had pork  belly cubes, a runny egg, radish, basil, and chinese broccoli over a mushy, wet rice. It had a weird hodge podge of flavors, spicy or bitter, which I couldn't put my finger on and to my opinion, just tasted plain weird. I just didn't like it! My bf ordered the prime rib bowl, which was just what people said....the meat was just dry and the rice had that mushy consistency and weird taste like the Chubby Pork belly bowl. Ehhh.. . This place serves food pretty fast, so fast that even they forget things from your order. Like I mentioned, I ordered their meatballs, and I had to flag down a server after at least 5 orders after me got their order  to get my meatballs. Just make sure you check your orders before you go.. . To be quite honest, this place is seriously overrated, and I really wanted to like it. The food here was just a bit too expensive for "experimental" cooking (You're definitely going to spend at least $20 for two). I'm just hoping that the Kogi truck doesn't disappoint me or I really am going to second guess that Chef of 2010 award for Chef Roy Choi.
