ReviewID: TqHClJHmnaD1W4odEcC8jg
ReviewerID: 4-X45Vj4QQ5zhpEc19nL8g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
Have been a regular at Tender Greens since the happy week they opened three and a half years ago in Culver City; if you can get one of the chef-owners to tell you the story (as I was fortunate one night to hear), it's quite inspirational. . . They've taken a stand for local, organic, sustainable food, they do a beautiful job of feeding a huge number of diners every single day (the lines are there for good reason), plus they employ a lot of people -- it's decidedly a labor-intensive proposition, a salad bar of this quality. . . And it bears noting that along with Ford's next door, and the 2 art galleries nearby, their opening was largely responsible for catalyzing the final blossoming of downtown Culver City. The redevelopment took years and years, and wound up being a decade-long "overnight success". ;-) Apparently locals didn't want any more chains, or truly mediocre family restaurants; something for which Culver City had been famed. (Los Angeles Magazine once said that CC was -- and I quote -- "a culinary wasteland." No more. Now there are 3 - count 'em, 3! - organic, veggie-friendly restaurants within 2 blocks. And a great variety of choices. We've even got a Michelin star or two. Very cool. TG &amp; Ford's really started the whole thing.). . Healthy, super-fast food is *not* an oxymoron anymore, which is where Tender Greens has truly blazed a trail. It is also friendly to virtually every kind of (western) dietary orientation - carnivore, chick/fishetarian, vegetarian/vegan, cooked and uncooked, so you can always bring a diverse group of friends here and know they're likely to find something they like. The Nicoise is a perennial favorite among my international guests, who love coming here and always ask to return - often on the same visit! My own passion is for the Grilled Veggie hot plate - especially during the summer months -- accompanied by their delightful spinach/goat cheese/hazelnut salad and mashed potatoes.. . Agree with other reviewers that the portions really depend on who's plating, it is inconsistent. Apart from that, this is an exceptionally wonderful, casual restaurant, backed by an inspired vision and great entrepreneurial spirit. . . Highly recommended.
