ReviewID: tqJPa6-20bV7e9Syi42wQA
ReviewerID: 3unnOhHuozEoDDn4s6c-Mg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Bluebird
Category: Wine Bars
Lately, I've decided that I love birds.  Not real ones, mind you, but in decor.  Case in point: I fell in love with these bird wall hangings in a window of a store on Chicago Avenue.  Every time I walked by, I would wave to "my birds."  Unfortunately, the birds disappeared one day, and I thought those birds were gone forever.  Funnily enough, those birds found my way into my apartment for my birthday.  (Turns out, the store just moved a few blocks west on Chicago Avenue, lucky me.). . And, in sticking with my "birdie birthday" theme, Bluebird was my choice for the birthday meal.. . The decor is marvelous.  Exposed brick, low lighting, wooden beams set a very lovely atmosphere that was natural, yet very polished.  We had a cozy table for two toward the back near the "fireplace" which turned out to be the perfect setting for our meal.. . Extensive beer menu, perfect for the brewery connesiuer, including Belgians and other lovely brews.  I stuck to a couple of glasses of the Mawby bubbly, which had me floating on a lovely journey of Bluebird's treats.. . First stop was meats and cheeses.  We sampled the merguez lamb sausage (from New Glarus, Wisconsin) and the smoked duck breast  alongside the cana de cabra goat cheese (from Spain) and the chimay la biere cow cheese (Belgium).  Presented beautifully with an assortment of olives, fruits, and warm, crusty bread, we agreed that this was a highlight of our meal.  . . Second stop: Plates.  Pork chop (with pears) for him, and grilled flap steak for me.  Both meats were excellently prepared to our choosing, tender and flavorful.  We also shared a side of frites which came with a curry ketchup that was perfection in a little ramekin.. . We ended with the fabulous chocolate mousse cake that  paired with my champagne perfectly.  (Chocolate and champagne together = heaven.). . The one thing holding me back from five-starring this joint was the service.  It was inattentive and just not very nice.  For example, when she brought the first beer, she slopped it in the glass and it overflowed.  Her reaction?  "Ooops."  And slowly walking away to talk to another table.  It was just....odd.  And the timing was off.  We were in no rush, so when the pork chop and the steak came out when we'd barely ventured into the cheeses, it just seemed off.. . Service issues aside, this Bluebird helped my birthday truly sing.  Simply fantastic.
