ReviewID: tQRvm2rsnRrojTO-6GX-Vw
ReviewerID: rb6vMqFYgNvWduP5iMxsPA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bacchanalia
Category: American (New)
I seem to have this curse wherein restaurants that have been around for decades seem to close down the moment I decide I want to eat there. Therefore, my husband and I saved up so we could go to Bacchanalia before this might happen. Allow me to point out that I am not really a foodie (meaning I love lots of foods but I don't have a lot of experience with "fine dining" and also can't stand things such as foie gras, pate, or caviar), so I actually did not always know what the heck I was ordering.. . As a result, I am recording for posterity the things that I ate (it's a four-course meal).  The portions were all perfect--large enough so you didn't feel cheated because your meal cost 9326568947807489 dollars and that's all you got, yet small enough that you could actually eat all 4 courses and not feel like you were dying.. . Part of the deal with this place is that they make most things inhouse, and that in between courses they bring you small portions of other things to try. While we were deciding, they brought us these little puff pastries with warm, sharp cheese inside them. I forgot the name (sorry, uncultured), but yum.. . Appetizer course:. My husband and I both had the house-cured charcuterie (if you are ignorant like me and don't already know, this is a plate with assorted meats on it--this particular charcuterie was served with the yummiest ever fresh mustard and balsamic vinegar). Also, the building in which Bacchanalia is located did used to be a meat factory, so it's fitting that they cure their own meats. :). . In between the appetizer and main courses, they also brought us out these tiny cups of a delicious "Thai-style" cold soup that had lemongrass and bits of yummy veggies in it. Also, at 3 different points in our meal, a waiter came by and brought us each a slice of warm, homemade bread (with butter that tasted homemade too).. . Main course:. I had the pan roasted lamb loin, which has a yummy yogurt sauce and something called "mache" which was made of tomatoes, mushrooms and pure yumminess (this was SO GOOD). My husband had a yummy pork loin dish that was mmmmmm, even though I'm not even a big fan of pork loin. Actually, I'm not even a big fan of lamb, normally, but for some reason that's what I wanted to order and it was so good.. . Cheese and Contrast Course:. I had the sheep's milk feta with local cucumber and watermelon. My husband had buffalo mozzarella with tomatoes and yumminess. Again, I am not all that experienced with four-course meals, but the idea of a "contrast course" after your entree is total genius to me. It's like an appetizer for your dessert!. . Then they brought us a "gift from the chef" of something whose name I can no longer remember, but it was a creamy, sweetended yogurty substance in a parfait cup with house-made granola and blueberries on top. Mmmmmm. Dessert to go with our dessert.. . Dessert Course:. I had the squash cake with brown butter ice cream (yummmm). My husband had a warm peach crisp that also came with some type of ice cream on top (I think vanilla). The dessert portions were cute and smallish, which was totally fine because I think if I'd had to eat a large dessert at this point I would have exploded.. . Afterwards, we were each brought a warm, fresh madeleine and then a small plate with "some more treats" that included candied grapefruit zest, some kind of butter cookie, and chocolate thing that I can't remember the name of anymore.. . ...Hmmm, I think I understand why it is called "Bacchanalia" now. It was a total Food Orgy.  Definitely worth the money, even if you have to save up like we did.
