ReviewID: TQs3bEVlK45dbC2WNUnJyg
ReviewerID: e7YqL66GjjTnKH3r0Na9IA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
I've never been big on ramen. Perhaps it's because when I think of ramen I equate it with instant noodles or because the flavors aren't really tantalizing. However, I'm slowly getting past the point of disliking it entirely to even craving it once in a blue moon.. .  I've actually been to this place three times but didn't think to leave a review until now. The reason I'm giving it three stars rather than four has nothing to do with the place itself. It has more to do with me not being a big ramen fan. This location is quite small and probably only has six tables or so as well as counter top seating. All the workers here are Japanese (at least the ones I came in contact with.) That really boosts the authenticity of this place since most other ramen places and Japanese restaurants I have been to are either Chinese or Korean owned. I guess the prices here are a tad more affordable than other places but just how much more affordable I'm not sure.. .  I went with my sister and two grandmothers today for lunch. Good thing there was no wait because by the time we were done people were waiting outside. I don't remember what I got in the past but today I got Combination C, which is the Hakata Ramen (chashu, ginger, and scallions in a pork flavored soup base) set with Takana Fried Rice priced at $7.75. At first we didn't know that each bowl of ramen came with chashu (pork slices) and proceeded to get extra chashu. We had originally thought it was just pork flavored rather than having actual pork. When the server came by to take our order, she  told us that each bowl comes with chashu already and confirmed whether or not we wanted to add more. I really liked that she asked us before placing the order otherwise we would have spent an extra $8 on an addition we didn't need. I only got spicy miso for $1.25 since none of the other toppings really appealed to me at that moment. Plus I wasn't about to shell out extra money because it might seem cheap but it really adds up in the end. . . The portions that came with the sets were very small especially the gyoza, which came with six to an order. The ramen itself was a pretty decent sized bowl. Thank goodness for that otherwise I would have most likely left hungry. It was such a good sized serving that I took most of it to go. The spam musubi, which cost $3 for four was just whatever. There wasn't much spam and consisted mainly of rice. . . We also ordered dessert. Surprisingly they have creme brulee and lava cake. I can attest to the fact that the creme brulee here is really good. I had the regular flavored one before and the Green Tea flavored one today. However, for $4.50 it's sort of pricey. The lava cake came with a scoop of Vanilla ice cream and a dollop of whipped cream. It was even more ridiculously priced at $6. . . On a side note we noticed several misspellings. Hahahah, they spelled creme brulee as cream bluree and wonton as wanton.
