ReviewID: TqVo9fpug0Vf4ZqNsNVVYg
ReviewerID: o-pTJcQHdoCnmRJBsqdHHQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
Long have I yearned for the sweet, sweet meat of hand-cut pastrami and corned beef a la New York's famed Jewish delis. Retreating to SoCal every now and then, I learned of Langer's from a magazine article, and immediately said to myself, "It will be mine... Oh yes, it will be mine.". . On our way to "the happiest place on Earth," the gf, the cousin, the dog and I skip the traditional chicken fried steak and eggs breakfast at Mike's Roadhouse in Kettleman City along I-5, and head straight for the Westlake district of LA for some gnoshing. As we approach Langer's, we notice something... We're in the freakin' ghetto. The weather was quite warm, we had the dog with us, so we decide that perhaps it's best to get it to-go rather than risk having our car broken into and losing everything we brought with us for our little four-day excursion.. . Looking at the menu posted in the window made my mouth water, but the prices immediately made my palate flaccid. I've paid $17 for a sandwich before, but that was a Kryptonite from Ike's (inspired by Man v. Food) which was a 5 lbs. sandwich. Needless to say, this sandwich better be worth is.. . I ordered a # 80-something. It had pastrami, Swiss cheese and sauerkraut with mustard on rye. The gf ordered a pastrami on rye with LIVERWURST (Ugh!) and the cousin ordered the traditional #19. In total, we spent $45... $45??? For sandwiches??? These better be the best sandwiches that have ever graced my mouth with its presence.... . I speed for as long as I can down I-5 so that we can eat, but unfortunately because LA is the only place in the world that has 6-lane freeways and 24 hour traffic, we have to hold our appetites for another 40 mins.. . I will say that Langer's knows how to pack a hot sandwich; it was purposefully wrapped in butcher paper to ensure maximum heat retention without creating soggy bread from meat juices and condensation. My sandwich was beautifully made, the meat was juicy, tender and a little fatty (in other words, PERFECT), and like a well-scripted sitcom/TV series leaves you wanting MORE. The gf's sandwich gave her the runs unfortunately; liverwurst=BAAAAAAD. The cousin inhaled his sandwich and forgot to taste it on the way down.. . I will say that Langer's is good, but it's not $15-a-pop good. Yes, the bread is fresh, and yes, the pastrami is juicy, tender and a bit fatty. But price-wise, I can't warrant spending almost $50 on SANDWICHES that really didn't satisfy the hunger.
