ReviewID: tRDdSmLQe7u3-vdeH6yG0g
ReviewerID: tvn8fCy1FdEOztS-MjCbCQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Coobah
Category: Latin American
DISCLAIMER: Coobah does not serve Filipino food, but I decided to include it in my Filipino food list because they serve, to quote from their website, "Latino fusion" food described as "Cuba, Spain, Brazil meets the Philippines".. . I came to Coobah with three friends to see what Filipino influences we would find in Coobah's menu. Verdict? Little Filipino influence but excellent nonetheless.. . Located conveniently next to the Southport brown line El, Coobah is a hip though pricey joint with patrons who love coming back for more: choosing to dine or sit at the bar and listen to live, bossa nova music (at least on the Wednesday we were there), or dine al fresco in the "poshiness" of a Lakeview neighborhood.. . My friends and I ordered the asparagus and crab lumpia, a definitely Filipino dish with a twist. The lumpia was plated beautifully in a sort of fanned-out tower, with four ~5-inch pieces, and drizzled with some sort of sauce. I don't think I'd have it again because the entrees are so satisfying. . . Of the four of us, we had three different entrees, all of which were plated nicely: . - grilled skirt steak. - pork tenderloin bicol. - zaruela. . The Grilled Skirt Steak (cumin and garlic marinated veal steak served with caramelized plantains, jasmine rice and mint-basil chimichurri)  was a total miss for my friend. I couldn't eat it because it is made of veal, though I did steal a plaintain.. . GET the Pork Tenderloin Bicol! (Lean pork tenderloin stuffed with shrimp, bacon, coconut and pineapple served with jasmine rice, seasonal vegetables and peppery adobo glaze). I was so satisfied after eating this that I ultimately forgave myself for paying $30 for my entire meal. The "bicol" aspect of this dish was an "adobo glaze" that you couldn't really taste because the coconut flavor takes over. The tenderloin was soft; and the sweet, textured stuffing was just...divine.. . I also liked the Zarzuela (Rustic Catalonian seafood dish with shrimp, mussels and scallops cooked in a saffron, white wine and roasted tomato broth served with grilled baguette ). The scallops were large and cooked perfectly, and it was just an overall pleasing dish that I could see myself eating on a cooler day.. . I suggest splitting the Pork Tenderloin Bicol and Zarzuela with a friend so you can maximize your taste experience with a nicely salted, seafood stew with the tropical, meaty taste of the pork loin.. . So why not a better rating? They didn't offer us a dessert menu, and according to their website, they offer dessert.  If there was one that night, then I WILL update and TAKE OFF A STAR OR TWO from this restaurant because that indicates poor, if not judgmental and assuming service (What? Like we can't afford another item?). . Great food, generally questionable service.
