ReviewID: TsLP6KKQ7b6wMLJnBYrZLQ
ReviewerID: 1mI_WcnyKUfTX10XNey_AA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
So I went for the second time (this year) and it was fantastic!!!  I Love this place, possibly the best food in LA.. . 1st Course:. . *Agnolotti filled with grilled corn and mascapone-This was delightful. Again, perfectly made pasta. The corn is grilled on their wood burning grill, giving the corn a wonderful smokey flavor and the mascapone gave a velvety texture.  I suggest you try this.  However, the agnolotti changes all the time. . *Short-rib Tortellini_ This was again another spectacular, flawless dish.  The meat also had a subtle smokey flavor , maybe it they braise it in a wood burning over. It's a beautiful dish. Paired with a smooth red wine, perfect!. . Second Course. . Steamed Lup De Mer Hong Kong style- Lup the mer is Mediterranean sea bass. it comes with bok choi, and other Asian veggies and a light Asian sauce. The fish was incredible fresh, moist, and incredibly delicious.  I also order the loi mein noodles on the side (it comes with Jasmin rice) this was extra, but soooo worth it! There was ginger, a touch of star anise, and everything was so perfectly balanced.  I would defiantly re-order this dish again, and highly recommend it!. . Leg fog young Sonoma "natural" lamb-. OMG!!!  can this dish be any more perfect!? It was cooked to perfection, perfect bulls-eye!  It comes with some veggies (can't remember) and pommes puree, I requested for pommes alligot, not sure if it was substituted or an extra charge. But pommes alligot are creamy potato puree with cheese, it's really cheese godness and it's really sooth. . Lamb lovers: You will die for this one! and non-lamb lovers, this dish will make you into one! . . *NY Strip Steak. Cooked med-rare, again, a very experienced grill man/woman cooked this too. It was done perfect and season to perfection. Comes with bordalais sauce and we request pommes frittes.  Excellent! . . Dessert. . Corn meal with blueberry, and other berrys- not good at all! I think they F-up on this one. The caramel around the edges of the cake seemed to have crystallized therefore, making it really chewy and making it hard to get it off you teeth. The corn meal cake seemed to have a grassy taste, this just did not work! . . Sorry pastry chef at Spagos, I have very much enjoyed all of your other creations, but not this one. I think someone might have had a cold when they thought this tasted good.  NOT GOOD, please take it off your menu!. . However, I can not bear to give this place anything lower than a 5star. The service is great, my waiter (Blane) gave us great service and took the dessert off our bill. He has been working there for 12 years. I remember him when I used to frequent the place back in 2001, he was a very good waiter then and still is now. Very pleasant and friendly.   I would highly suggest you request him.. . The bill was hefty, but it was all worth it. The food, the ambiance were all perfect!
