ReviewID: tsT9bDL7zwQpA8s0eN8ftA
ReviewerID: wGEWMqOxZb2hHg6WACmEQQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
My god, this place is good. This place is lick your fingers, rant to your friends, then order another plate of food good.. . I honestly don't know where else I would go for Chinese seafood after this. And I'm Chinese.. . So a couple friends and I went here because one of them has been bugging me about going to a Chinese seafood restaurant for the past three weeks. So I dug deep into my Yelp bookmarks and found this treasure of a restaurant.. . We ate so much food and all of it was absolutely perfectly cooked and seasoned. First, we ordered some veggies to start off - the Chinese broccoli with oyster sauce - which is hard to mess up so I'm not going to write much about that. But, I am going to rant and rave about the seafood.. . The Newport specialty crab came out first. I hate crab, only because it is such a pain to eat, but I didn't mind this one at all. Every bite was worth the effort - you pick through the shells to find a sliver of meat, shove it in your mouth and you're greeted with an explosion of pepper. I was satisfied with sucking on the shells and when I was lucky enough to get a piece of meat, I was in heaven.. . The fish with black bean sauce came out next. It didn't look all that great, it was just a full fish with some bean sauce on it. But, again, take a bite and you start thanking the seafood gods. The fish was super moist, flakey, perfect with that dollop of rice on your plate. Not to say non-Asians don't know food but when your white friend starts fighting for fish cheeks, you know there must be something to it.. . We had only ordered three dishes for the three of us but we polished off all this food in a matter of minutes after it was put on the table. So we decided to order another one and told them to give us some kind of squid dish that was spicy. What did they bring out? Battered fried squid and boy, was it amazing. It was light, not greasy, and you could really tell it was something special when our conversation went something like this:. . Friend: "blahblahblah...*puts squid in mouth* OMG! *chews*...blahblahblah". Other friend: "blahblahblah *eats squid* OH WOW *chews* blahblahblah". . In total, the meal cost us $70 for all four dishes. Totally worth it.
