ReviewID: tsyF7pBEo_2m9uwbEsN_2Q
ReviewerID: eMAmkqtFhhqkzTWKcsARSw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Came to LA visiting friends and ended up here for a friend's birthday dinner. by recommendation.  No reservations + large party (9 ppl) + Saturday night = long wait. Because of the rain and due to curiosity we stuck out the wait. . . Food was 2 stars. Portions were on the small side. Flavors lackluster. The only bright spot was the strong basil (which I love) that came with the bruchetta style tomatoes on a friend's Chicken Milanese &amp; the sauce that accompanied the portabello mushroom fries. . . DO NOT ORDER RAVILOI. My other poor friend who is a tall big boy with a relatively large appetite paid $10 for 4 small pieces of ravioli. Thank god the boyfriend ordered the pizza and could share with him.. . The calamari and mozerella were decent appetizers. I ordered the Penne Gamboli. Basically shrimp, penne, broccolini, tomatoes in a too salty broth. Clam pizza was eh. I don't intend on eating the left over slices. . . Dessert was the DISAPPOINTING Peanut Butter Triolini as suggested by you Yelpers out there!!! Yelp has failed me here. I actually was interested in trying their Chocolate Souffle, but I guess in another lifetime. . . When seated, the service was 4 star. The waiters consistently filled the waters, cleaned up crumbs, served new plates/silverware for each course. Given our large party and the long wait, they additionally served us some small desserts on the house!. . Ambiance of the place was upper class given the lofty ceilings, big windows and marbled flooring. Our party dressed fairly casual but there were dressed up people as well. . . Up front they have a deli. Two long glass show cabinets feature Italian style deli foods. Salads, huge blocks of lasagna, mac n cheese, rices, etc. Also I hear they serve sandwiches (to eat on location or to-go) at lunch.  They also serve cookies and other small sweets at the deli. At the end of it they serve some drinks, fruit, and various cheeses, fresh bread, wines, vinegars and oils. . . IF I were ever to come back, it would be at lunch with bruchetta and a chocolate souffle.
