ReviewID: TtdALH0pHCD8KBsFYpMVUA
ReviewerID: -Yxkmh-LP2oMfCcCkfAUYQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Glenn&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
My boyfriend and I were going out on a date and chose Glenn's because a seafood lover in my office recommended it.  Our reservations were for 7:30, it was about 7:20 and we were still at my house as I finally decided on what I should wear...typical.  We walked as fast as we could without losing our breath to the el and got on the brown line north to the Montrose stop.  My date was freaking out because A. he hates being late and B. Glenn's told him they would give away our table if we were more than 15 minutes late.  It was now 7:35, five minutes late already and still at least a 10 minute ride left on the el.  Then my boyfriend's phone rang.  It was Glenn's calling to make sure we were still coming to dinner.  The first generous guesture of the night to make me feel like Glenn's is a nop notch place.. . We arrived at the restaurant at 7:45 and a nice table for two was waiting for us.  The ambiance of the restaurant was friendly, homey and casual - exactly the kind of place I like.  The waiter immediately brought over a carafe full of ice for our 2 bottles and started our night off right.  We ordered the mussels for an appetizer, since I'm pretty sure one of my boyfriend's favorite things to eat is bread soaked in the mussel juice.  The mussels were great and there were more than enough for the two of us.  For the main course, we asked the waiter for his recommendations and he gave three: the sturgeon, the sea bass, and the halibut.  I ordered the sea bass and he ordered the sturgeon.  The sea bass was cooked perfectly and the sturgeon was in a really rich sweet tasting glaze, which I really enjoyed but my boyfriend could have done without.  For dessert we had the maple pecan pie which was really sweet and delicious, hats off to the local bakery who made it.. . When the check came I was pleasantly surprised that the corking fee was only $5 for the two bottles of two buck chuck we brought with us.  However, I noticed that my sea bass cost was higher on the bill than what was on the chalk board.  Honestly, most people would've let it go because if I tell you the price difference you would smack me for being the cheapest person alive, but after about a bottle of wine, I wanted justice.  I asked the waiter about the mix up in the nicest, most innocent manner possible and without a missing beat, he took the bill away, had it corrected and brought it back with his most sincerest apology.. . So, all in all, Glenn's has the food of a fine dining restaurant, the prices of an upper scale chain, and the atomosphere of your mom's kitchen - all three in one make a fine restaurant.  I'll definitely be back.
