ReviewID: ttIc9kk1xRS5esbi7a8J5A
ReviewerID: y6cy0wfDyqb7CNUVlMUwWw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
Before we get into this week's Grub, let me ask you a question... How would you like your... chili-smothered, bacon-ladened, pastrami-topped, cheese-tastic ... burger to be cooked? ... Medium? Medium rare?... And yes, we did just say "pastrami-topped." Sound magical to you?... Well, read on about the Oinkster my Grub-panion. Doesn't sound magical to you?... Well, now you know why nobody showed up for your birthday party. When we saw this mythical beast upon the menu, we knew we had to go for it. But when you add in the fact that it's called "The Royal," the decision was set in stone. After having this one, we think a revision to the classic Pulp Fiction scene is in order... "Yeah, they call it a Royal with cheese. You know why?... Um, because of the metric system? .... Hell no! Because it's topped with chili, bacon, and pastrami you fool!" But the Royal is only the tip of the iceberg at this slow-paced, fast-foodery.  To add to the Royal, we were torn between the BBQ pulled pork (I mean, come on, the place is called the OINKster) and the Oinkster Pastrami. The original Grub-suggestion raved about the pastrami, so we went for it... plus the Gruyere cheese, caramelized onions, and red cabbage slaw didn't hurt its chances. And man, this is some serious pastrami we're talking about! Flavorful, rich, sultry... definitely the most seductive of all the salted, cured meats. After taking a few bites, we weren't surprised at all to find out that they cure their own pastrami for two whole weeks before it gets loaded with fixins and launched into a french roll. Add to your order some of their thick-cut Belgian fries and maybe a cup or two of curry Ketchup (a Good Grub personal favorite to go along with any meal). In my mind, this place should be changing the public's perception of what it means to be "a pig." Next time you see your mother-in-law... or a police officer... say with confidence... "Hey there! How you doing you Oinkster!" ... or maybe not.... But In general, this place just has a good, crunchy-groove vibe going on. Its got a great selection of local and craft brews on tap and they throw in a daily happy hour to top it all off. So journey down to Eagle Rock and take a crack at this place. And when you do, make sure to take time to give thanks to the sky above... For on the 8th day he created the Oinkster.... and it was Good.
