ReviewID: tu9ILaNS-yD_iIyKITEwCA
ReviewerID: gztoWVPHriHwhB2v9oyNBw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
First of all, I am a huge Top Chef Fan, so when I heard that Tom Collicchio opened a joint here in So Cal, Zoolander and I had to try it.  We decided to go on our 2 yr Anniversary and actually left baby zoolander with the grandparents.  . We got a reservation at 9:30pm since we called at the last minute, but I didn't mind.  The place is in between a bunch of big huge highrise business buildings.  It's a really nice clean area.  I like the decor and the outdoor gazebos were pretty cool.  . On to the food:  We tried the Sable with Bacon Sabayon, Beef Short Ribs with root vegetables, Grits with vermont cheddar, assorted mushrooms, Pork belly appetizer, 4 different types of oysters, doughnut dessert and the waffle dessert with apple compote.  Zoolander and I finished everything.  I have to say the Sable was just aaiiight.  Nothing special so I wouldn't order that again.  The Beef short ribs were too die for so tender and melt in your mouth.  The pork belly was awesome too!  Oh my I love me some pork.  Normally I don't like fat on meat, but the pork fat that was fried was so delicious and crispy and light.  Loved it.  The grits were good and I don't like mushrooms at all, so Zoolander got them and I tried them, but definitely still don't like mushrooms.  But I'm sure a person who loves the Funghi would love this dish.  The doughnut dessert was really good, way better than Krispy Kreme or any other doughnut shop I've been to.  The waffle was a little overcooked and way too crispy.  It almost hurt my mouth.  It would've been better if it was cooked less.  Oh and there are the most amazing little amuse bouche's (sp?) These were little tastings that we got free of charge and part of the meal experience that were all surprises.  Had some Wagyu beef tartar that was awesome.  Also had a green tea sorbet, yummy.  And peach cake tarts, very good.  And with our check we got these awesome pumpkin muffins that we could take home and eat the next day.  I felt like we had just left a party and that was our party favor.  Overall I like the ambiance and the decor and service was good too.  The food is extremely expensive, but some if it is well worth it.  I've only been once, but the stuff I did like I think is worth all the fuss.  But if you got all just o.k. dishes I would say not worth it.  So according to my visit stay away from the waffle dessert, and the sable entree.
