ReviewID: tVgSiMEZH6FjG0zyIDUEgQ
ReviewerID: goySoihp-Hq1WRtl03eqbg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
"What time do you want to have dinner at Pizzeria Mozza? We need to make a reservation." That's the sentence that my friend asked me that got my attention. A reservation at a pizza place? I've never heard of that. Even at chain pizza places like California PIzza Kitchen but I digress.. . We arrived at Pizzeria Mozza on a Saturday afternoon at 4pm. With its large solid doors and trendy color scheme, this wasn't your average pizza place. I also would like to mention  the place was PACKED. I would hate to see what this place would look like after 6pm. We're greeted &amp; seated immediately. Right away I can tell you that I don't like the seating arrangements. The tables are so close to each other that you literally have to push the tables apart to sit down. The place setting was cute. A brown placemat with Italian facts, and silverware tucked nicely in a  brown envelope. It was clever. We were given breadsticks right away and had our drink orders taken.. . Our server had come by &amp; gave us great wine and appetizer suggestions. We ordered prosciutto de parma, tomato caprese, and garlic bread. It doesn't take long for the appetizers to arrive. The garlic bread consisted of two huge slices of bread, the prosciutto was served  on a large carving board, the only disappointment I had was the caprese. Small cherry tomatoes &amp; mozzarella served on a saucer. A saucer of all things. It wasn't worth the price &amp; I'm thankful we ordered other items to go with it. All of the food was very tasty.. . The wine, Dolcetto d'Alba followed shortly after. It was also very good, not too dry, the server definitely made a great suggestion. We placed our entree order. I ordered the pizza Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage. The server left to enter the orders into the system and after that, we saw him sporadically. . . Between the time it took him to enter our orders &amp; the time they actually arrived, we didn't see him at all. We had to ask other servers for drink refills. However, the bussers were very attentive. The minute they say empty plates, they were right on it, clearing them out of the way. They were like this all night &amp; for that I give kudos.The pizzas also took a little while longer, I know it was a busy night as well so it may have very well had some effect.. . My pizza, also dropped off by a different server looked wonderful. It also tasted as good as it looked. The cheeses and the herbs melted perfectly,a great combination. The crust was chewy, not overdone, not stale. It was a good choice. . . Our server didn't come by and ask how we were doing as we feasted on our entrees, however he did come back once we were through and offered us dessert. I had ordered the Caramel coppetta with marshmallow sauce &amp; Spanish salted peanuts. . . Once again, dessert took a bit longer than normal but it was a very good portion. The caramel, marshmallow sauce &amp; peanuts were a great combo as well.. .  When we finished, a different server asked us if we needed anything else &amp; gave us our check. She was very quick &amp; efficient. We settled the bill &amp; left to go home.. . All in all the experience was alright. I loved the ambiance and the food but could do with out the cramped floor plan and, although knowledgeable, often  absent server. I would probably return on a weeknight, maybe it would be less cramped.
