ReviewID: tvlRfI4pub3P79BWynoE0Q
ReviewerID: E3WSr4iCCIbKYBiraT9gEw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
My dear Yelpers, I feel like if I don't write at least one review a week I'm committing a sin. A Yelp sin! . . Speaking of sin, isn't Spain Catholic? And isn't Catholicism big on trying to prevent us sinners from partaking in wonderful things like lust, envy, and gluttony? Well folks, it's no surprise that straight from Spain came tapas--little flavorful dishes that allow you to eat a little of a large variety of plates rather than stuff your face on one whopping dish. Well Spain, you tried, but Cobras and Matadors induces just the opposite--consistent face-stuffing. Except now you're also eating off other people's plates. Way to go, Cobras. . . My four lovely girlfriends and I were looking for an intimate dinner with light food and some wine. Cobras was the perfect setting. Dim lighting, black and white portraits of what I assume to be Spain, and smiling dinner guests everywhere you look. The only downside, if you consider it one, is the seating. The tables and seats are small and jampacked together so they you are practically touching the person from the next table. It seems uncomfortable at first, but you know what? Angelinos need more human contact. If it wern't for Cobras, you probably would have gone another week without ever touching another human being, especially if you haven't had a "drunk encounter" in a while. . . Okay, back to what's important: food. Here is the run down of what I remember eating despite several glasses of wine:. . Truffle Risotto: Amazing. Sensually mixed in with mushrooms, creamy, and strongly tasting of truffle oil, my absolute favorite cherry on top. High recommended. . . Burrata: Creamy buttered mozzarella that comes in a little glass jar alongside crostini. Pretty good. Recommended. . . Paprika patatas: Roasted potatoes seasoned with paprika. I loved the paprika seasoning, but otherwise these were just plain old roasted potatoes. Skip unless you love paprika like I do.. . Skirt steak: A little overcooked to my liking, but well seasoned. Make sure you get it medium rare, even if you usually order medium. Skip. . . Bacon wrapped dates: Delicious. You can't ever go wrong with these at any restaurant. BUT Cobras teases you...you only get four pieces. Recommended with you can horde these before your friends get to them. . . Prosciutto and arugala salad: I just ate the prosciutto pieces--those were good :) Skip. . . Eggplant crostini: I remember a good explosion of flavor, but I can't tell you exactly what was in it. Highly recommended. . . Dessert: Churros with chocolate sauce. Speaks for itself...wonderful! Highly recommended. . . WARNING 1: MAKE RESERVATIONS! Otherwise you will wait until you feel like gnawing on your hand to hold you over. . . WARNING 2: Cobras doesn't have a liquor license so it's BYOW-bring your own wine. You won't get charged any corkage fees. Everyone must have known this fact coming in because every table cradled a wine bottle or three. This city is run with alcoholics. Okay, well I'm off to my AA meeting...
