ReviewID: TvPnXAZ6Tc1wW1vJiMhokA
ReviewerID: DD9y38PieYPDdhPwnVDfjg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Geisha House
Category: Sushi Bars
This place is horrible.  The service at this place is absolutely ridiculous.  We had a reservation for a party of 8 (although I told them it might be more or less). We were seated after about 10 minutes, which was fine...but then began the most horrible dining experience ever.. . First, let me say this...it took 20 minutes for anyone to come to our table. I am not exaggerating. We were never introduced to our server, and eventually had to flag a busboy that was running past so that we could get some water.. . The busboy came back with the water and got our drink order.  30 minutes after having sat down, the server finally shows up and is totally rushed in taking our orders.. . Our food took another 45 minutes to get (and on top of that our appetizers were delivered after our main courses).  Our server wasn't even the one who brought us our meals.. . No one checked on us to see how we were doing, or to get refills on soda or asked if we wanted to order more drinks.  The server DID appear with the check though.   It was already well established that her tip would be absolutely horrible, and would not feel bad at all.  Well, the server charged us a mandatory 18%.  WHAT?!     We call her over, and she tells us that tip is automatically included in the bill for parties of 8 or more.   Okay...that'sfine...except for the fact that we were only 6 people!!!   Her retort: "well the reservation was for 8".  I don't care how many people the reservation was for....we were only 6 people. They only served 6 people!. . We have a feeling she tried to get away with this because of that fact she knew she wasn't going to get a good tip.  We left her an abysmal tip which is completely deserved.  And you know what happened? She chased after us in the restaurant yelling at us!     My boyfriend and friends had no problem setting her straight in front of everyone else.  We never saw her, she never did her job, she was rude and obnoxious.  I'm not going to tip you for doing absolutely nothing.. . It was a horrible place, and I should have thought more about complaining to the manager, but it's too late for that I guess.
