ReviewID: TVUSf6J3MCrxyVGejfpoeQ
ReviewerID: R9hWBD_0MTRbbFSyGB-UOg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Canoe
Category: American (New)
So far, the best contemporary American fare I've had in Atlanta. The location is great: situated besides the river with a small vegetable garden (heirloom tomatoes, okra, carrots, squash...) and a sizable garden to walk through, this isn't a place to just eat and leave. And walking was necessary after noshing through the appetizer, entree, and dessert. Here's a rundown:. . Appetizer: Mussels in curry-like, lemongrass broth. I like mussels, so I'm already biased. But I liked the suggestion from the server: dip your sourdough bread into the broth - it's like a meal on it's own!. . Entree:  Australian lamb. Wow. This may have been the first time I've had lamb cooked medium-rare and I do not regret it. Not funky like lamb can sometimes taste, the outside was seared until crunchy and the inside was soo tender. I ate a chunk of fat and did not gag. Yummy. Served on a bed of risotto (double yum) with a tart-ish dressing. I could've done without the capers, but that's my only complaint. . . Side note: Heirloom tomatoes were extremely flavorful. Not on my dish, but recommended. . . Dessert: Semifreddo of blueberry sorbet, sweetened yogurt served with lavender sauce. I was hesitant about this dessert, but this sounded like the lightest thing on the menu. The syrup smelled so nicely of lavender that I wanted to bottle it up and sniff it all the way home. The greek yogurt was so delicious and it paired well with the sorbet (and I'm not normally a fan of sorbet). It was sizable enough to share. Is the pastry chef single?. . Our visit was pleasant and our server was extremely helpful and accommodating. We had to wait about 10min to get seated which kinda irked me since the lady at the entrance wasn't the warmest person, but the person who sat us made up for her. The servers were very friendly; we got smiles, farewells and greetings from other servers (maybe they can sense my grad student budget trickling away). I don't know what the other yelper was talking about - the place was pretty quiet and mellow for a Friday evening. And as always, bread service (recommend the flat bread!) and crumb sweepers impress me.
