ReviewID: TwWCAq0pFixgt-DfEjju3w
ReviewerID: wGEWMqOxZb2hHg6WACmEQQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
If God resided in a restaurant, I think he would live in Mastro's Steakhouse.. . I'm going through food coma and a little buzz but I have to write about the best meal IN MY LIFE. The food was orgasmic, the service was superb and the environment just reeked Beverly Hills.. . The food. Oh, that food. . . Started off appetizers with the seafood tower, complete with lobster, shrimp the size of my hand, oysters and crab. Delicious, fresh and I honestly still can't believe they found shrimp that large. It was perfect.. . Followed that up with a french onion soup. Now, I've never had real french onion soup but my coworker has - and she had it in France. She says the french onion soup here is as good as it is in France and I don't doubt her. The cheese was so gooey and melted, the soup perfectly seasoned, the baguette next to it nice and crispy (and retained enough texture when you dunked it in the soup). Ooh...I'm still thinking about it now.. . By now, I was full. I only had two things and I was satisfied with my meal. I could have ended with the soup and been perfectly content...but then the bone in filet mignon came. MY GOD, that was the best steak I've ever had in my life. It just melted in your mouth and was so tender, I can't even describe it in words. Add a side of lobster or garlic mashed potatoes, creamed corn and asparagus - I'm still shivering in delight just thinking about my meal.. . But that's not all! We also got a creme brulee and chocolate covered strawberries. The strawberries were good but that creme brulee - at the first taste, the only thing I could think of was "Why did I eat so much before? If only I had enough stomach to finish the whole thing!" It was absolutely decadent.. . The drinks here are as delicious as the food, and just as expensive. $17 for a martini. Almost ridiculous until I had a taste - they only use high end vodka for their martinis and the taste is so smooth and refreshing. Try to peartini - it was so good, I had to have two.. . I don't think words can do Mastro's justice...All I can say is that, whenever I hear Mastro's from now on, I'll reminisce about this meal and hear horns and angels in the background.
