ReviewID: TXppUYFu3ZURA2A8LZEZkQ
ReviewerID: 4CM3z0SXk4VN5-3zoCUnZg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
I was going to meet some friends for brunch but what I really wanted was an excuse to have a milkshake for lunch so I lured them both to MILK. I was going to have some pancakes or French toast with my milkshake so my meal wouldn't be completely devoid of nutrients. . . At 10:00 in the morning, there was plenty of parking. But no breakfast. The sole breakfast item they had was a buttermilk waffle with strawberry and bananas for $7.50. The waffle was decent sized and the strawberries were fresh, but it was a little hard. But if you pour some of the maple syrup on it, it softens the corners a bit. . . My friends got the roast beef sandwich and the California Chicken Salad. The salad was leafy and green and all things that a salad should be. The roast beef sandwich was warm with a slightly crispy crust crinkling into a juicy, gooey center of roast beef and swiss cheese. . . Then we had dessert: 1 slice of triple chocolate cake, 1 brownie sundae, 1 ooey gooey double chocolate cookie, 1 triple chocolate shake and 1 ice blended vanilla cafe latte. Probably went a little overboard with the sweets but it had been a long week for all of us. . . The triple chocolate cake a little dry but the fudgy icing on the outside was delicious. The brownie sundae came with a warm square of brownie topped with a scoop of vanilla ice cream, chocolate ice cream, whipped cream, toasted walnuts and a cherry. Good thing we got this as the vanilla ice cream gave us a break from all the chocolate we were wolfing down. . . The ooey gooey double chocolate cookie was incredibly intense. It's a tiny cookie that would fit in the palm of your hand but they've somehow crammed enough chocolate in there to make you think you're eating 20 chocolate truffles at once. So of course we had to wash that down with the vanilla cafe latte which was cold, creamy, and very vanilla-y. . . I don't think any of us really wanted to drink the triple chocolate milk shake after realizing all we ordered was chocolate, chocolate and more chocolate, but we split the sizable cup. It tasted just how you would expect melted chocolate ice cream to taste. Next time I would try something a bit more different. The strawberry shortcake milkshake didn't look too bad.
