ReviewID: tYErQTLArcKAu9sFdCG7rg
ReviewerID: -MyRHSRZWm24iJ8eP-NSpQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bourgeois Pig Cafe
Category: Coffee & Tea
Wow, it can be both thrilling and depressing reading people's comments about your restaurant...I am the owner of The Pig, Mason. I feel really bad about Jared's experience walking in with that huge group, and I wish I could pinpoint who was working that day, because they won't be working here any more when/if I find out. I wish I could convince him to try us again, because we really do value their business! You can't judge the world by one person, nor my cafe. It's unfortunate that happened, and I apologize. After 13 years and hundreds of employees, you will occasionally get a smartalec who doesn't care if her wisecracks are overheard. Thanks for letting me know, but I think you should try us again...please.. . I would also like to address a couple of other comments I read, including one about the sandwiches being overpriced. What? Is $5.50-$6.95 for a complex sandwhich that weighs about a pound, is made with only fresh, real food, and takes a several minutes to make overpriced? My bread costs more than $5.00 per loaf, it is not mass produced. It is made just for us at Breadsmith's. Yes, there are cheaper places to eat, true, and you will get what you pay for. Most likely it will be deep fried as well. What does a combo meal cost at you-know-who? About the same as us, and ours is real, healthy food. We make our own hummus and pesto and soups and smoothies and shakes from scratch. This country is becoming so spoiled by getting everything instantly that they don't even appreciate it when something is really made to order just for them. It saddens me.. . I know we take great pride in all that we do, and our food is top notch and hand crafted. Our ambiance is like no other cafe. I have spent much effort and money to make it so, thank you for all the recognition on this, I like to hear that. Thank you to everyone who loves and supports The Pig. It's a grassroots kind of place to be sure.. . Somebody said we don't have airtight storage jars and that light also destroys tea. Well, we have one of the largest selections of loose leaf teas in the country, let alone Chicago, and I assure you the our tea is kept in airtight glass jars, and always has been.  That person should have looked closer. True, direct sunlight may injure tea, but our tea is no where near the front windows, and I think that the light of a couple chandeliers is worth the risk of displaying if you want to display a massive selection of up to 100 teas, which by the way, people LOVE to inspect easily and compare and read the description cards about. What else can I do? Where else would you put 100 jars of tea, in a very large closet? Put them in a series of chests and give out description cards? I don't understand.. . And finally, I pay a starting wage of $6.50 + tips for baristas and $7.00 for kitchen help. My top person makes $11.00, most are in between those numbers, so when somebody comments that I am a jerk and pay almost nothing they obviously don't know anything about running a profitable business. I suppose I could pay everybody $15.00/hour, and charge $3.00 for a huge sandwich, but then we wouldn't be here, would we? How come nobody squirms about a $9.00 hamburger at a pub? My ambition is to be here and to make people happy.  . . Thanks for the opportunity to defend The Pig, it is a great place!
