ReviewID: TYqZTSp6zAgieBImA6oIew
ReviewerID: ay4r9nenqGhf9IAAnG3OrA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
well to start its more of a 3.75 stars but i rounded up, because well.....i did....end of that. . . beers, to say i was a little disappointed in the beers is an understatement. i knew most of the beers on the list and i did expect more as far as belgian beers go, but hey it is still better then most. beers i had on this visit: . . racer 5 ipa - good start off beer, hoppy, but not too much so. . . new belgium brewery grand cru - very interesting, it had like a banana, caramelly taste that reminded me of bananas foster, a good once in a while beer . . dales old chub scottish ale - absolutely one of the most complex beers i ever had. it has a deep, hearty, smokey taste that had me thinking of BACON! a beer that makes that makes me think of bacon! im in! this was the eye opening beer, that i was expecting more of. . . deschutes black butte porter - deschutes is my favorite american brewery, hands down and it has been a while since i had one that i figured what the hell. it was good as always. . . as for the food i was looking over the menu and saw the usual suspects, and then, behold, i see it, ROASTED BONE MARROW with toast, fleur de sel and parsley caper salad! be still my beating heart! warm, melty bone marrow scooped out with a little spoon and slapped on toast with some salt! hells yes! give me bone marrow over foie gras any day! . . cheese plate - pretty good. all the cheeses were familiar, but what was a nice touch was the high quality honey they used. . . white anchovies - vinegar cured and served with fennel and piquillo pepper salad, solid but not spectacular. . . soprosada - little open face sandwiches with soprasada, onions and manchego, good little starter, i recommend it as such . . i liked the place its self, and like the order at the bar thing they have going. it was warm and inviting but not too much so and i felt quite calm and comfortable being there. . . what i did really appreciate is the fact that the bartenders actually KNEW what they were talking about as far as beers go. they actually had answers, to my questions
