ReviewID: TZ3LcffffYUcFyoUJ3ob4Q
ReviewerID: geJV8EiTITinkq4aKtTz2g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Tru
Category: American (New)
Date: March 24, 2006. Location: 676 North Saint Clair. Corkage: not allowed. Cost: $550 - Market Collection Menu &amp; Wine Pairing (includes t &amp; t). Phone: 312.202.0001. . Had a 9:45pm reservation at TRU on the Friday I arrived in Chicago. As Crystal and I checked in, we were directed to the bar as the staff gets our table ready. We ordered two glasses of the 2004 K Vintners Viognier to start off the evening.. About half way through the glass, we were informed the table is ready and offered a tour of the kitchen before sitting down. The kitchen tour wasn't too interesting, just a standard quick walk-by.. . The dinner menu was presented to us, one side listing the pre-fixe menu with choices and the other listing the Collection options. Unfortunately the Seafood Collection wasn't available, which was what I wanted to try, but we made do with the Market Collection for the both of us.. . A different approach to the wine pairing aspect, nothing listed, offered if asked and kind of go on a whim based on the $$ one wants to spend. Not exactly how I would of done if if I owned a restaurant, but that's a different topic.. . The Market Collection is a nine course menu as listed below, course three through seven were prepared two ways with each of us having a different preparation of the same main ingredient.. . ***. Grand Amuse-Bouche. ~Scallop Ceviche, Avocado Puree, Lime Segments. ~Tuna, Marinated Trevio, Orange. . Italian Black Pearl Osetra Caviar, Chilled Cauliflower Creme, Lemon Confit. 2002 Selbach-Oste Zetlinger Sonnenuhr Riesling Kabinett. . New Zealand Langoustine. ~Fresh New Zealand Langoustine, Thai Chili, Lemon Zest, Watercress. ~Roasted New Zealand Langoustine, Baby Carrots, Turnips, Fennel, Langoustine Jus. 2003 Hirsch Gruner Veltinger Kammener Heiligenstein. . Duck. ~Duck Bouillon, Duck Prosciutto. ~Veloute of Duck, Duck Confit. NV Rare Wine Company Charleston Sericial Madeira Special Reserve. . Nova Scotia Halibut. ~Nova Scotia Halibut "a la plancha", Sea Urchin, Preserved Lemon, Citrus Jus. ~Roasted Nova Scotia Halibut, Razor Clams Casino, Bacon, Clam &amp; Spinache Sauce. 2003 William Fevre Chablis Montmains. . Pasta Course. ~House-made Farfalle, Chicken Wing Confit, Bayonne Ham &amp; Foie Gras Glaze. ~Spaghettini, Carbonara Sauce, Parmesan Reggiano, Raw Amish Egg. NV Henri Billiot Rose Brut. . Prime Midwestern Beef Ribeye. ~Roasted Prime Midwestern Beef Ribeye, Braised Beef Short Rib, Glazed Pearl Onions, Crispy Bacon Lardons. ~Grilled Prime Midwestern Beef Rib Eye, Fondant Potatoes, Bearnaise Reduction. 2003 Yann Chave Crozes-Hermitage Tete de Cuvee. . TRU Collection of Cow, Goat and Sheeps' Milk Cheeses. . Cherry Mint Soup. . Duet of Desserts. 1999 Chateau Pajzos Tokaji Aszu 5 Puttonyos. . Mignardises and Lollipops. ***. . While the food was good overall and we got to try two different preparations, not one single dish gave me the wow factor. As usual, the final meat course failed me once again, although good to see it was ribeye rather than the standard filet mignon, but that's about the only compliment I can give the course.. . The wine pairing choices were nice for the price they charged, but the word pairing should be crossed out as none of the wine paired well with the food. Not saying the pairing was awful, but definitely more thoughts could be put into the process.. . The service was attentive, prompt and precise, but WAY TOO mechanical and stuffy. Small talk with the Sommelier didn't go anywhere, seem disinterested. None of the staff at the restaurant had a smile on them except for one person. Same type of service as French Laundry, but not what I would enojy as a dining experience.. . TRU is not a place I would return, just from the food standpoint, French Laundry, LaToque and Cyrus all out performs TRU. I can certainly name a few other places of different type of cuisine that out shine TRU as well, not a difficult task.. . Perhaps I am a bit spoiled and too critical, but a restaurant of this level should still show better.
