ReviewID: tZBuKbdUNOPZnO1KUlii9w
ReviewerID: OLsivAKzZHZ8g5IyzRYM-w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Twist
Category: Sushi Bars
If you've read my Sushi Huku review then you know that I know and love my sushi. . . I eat at Twist relatively frequently with my family as it is close to my grandmother's house. I enjoy sushi, so naturally that's what I get when I go to Twist. Unfortunately, Twist likes to spread itself too thin and likes to think of itself as an American eatery, a bistro, salad place, a tapas bar, and a sushi bar too! Well Twist, you should take note from Sushi Huku and even from Doc Greens....specialization is not such a bad thing. . . The sushi I get at Twist is not bad. It is just underwhelming. A-OK, if you will. Today my mom and I got four types of rolls: a cucumber roll for my rather unadventurous mom (don't tell her that...), a spicy yellowtail roll, rainbow roll, and a langosta roll with lobster a spicy mayo and some sort of fruit that wasn't actually on the menu. . . Here's the breakdown: the bread you get in the beginning is meh, but the garlic butter is pretty tasty. The cucumber rolls were, well, cucumber rolls. The spicy yellowtail is well seasoned but the yellowtail wasn't as rich as I like. The eel on the rainbow roll was fishy. The rest of the fish on the rainbow rolls was good, but not great...fresh and not slimy but definitely not worth the 15 buck price tag. The langosta was good (how could fried lobster be bad?), but the spicy mayo was overwhelming (last time Twist automatically put the mayo on the side but not this time...so ask for it specifically on the side). The wasabi is the fake stuff, so I find I have to use a ton of it just to get the heat I want.. . As for their entrees, the woman next to us ordered halibut and all I could smell was fish the whole time I was eating...the fishiness was overwhelming and not even from my raw sushi! But I think she was a mail order trophy wife bride to a much older man, so that made the lunch interesting at least.. . Our waiter was terrible, the diet coke was slightly flat, and there was no soap in the bathroom, making me hope my sushi chef had an employee bathroom to wash his hands in... All in all, I am beginning to wonder what all the hype is about with Twist. Maybe I'll try Shout next time and work my way through the Beatles' song.
