ReviewID: tZRfloXR_ApCt4Rc76mgrg
ReviewerID: ivmonVcqM-cqfLO0xF6L8Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I drove all the way from Thousand Oaks to eat lunch here with my friend (who loves food as much as I do).  I looked forward to this meal for weeks and it did not disappoint me.  . We ate the following:. Caprese salad (Burrata cheese and roasted tomatoes with a light pesto dressing). Pane Bianco (the best toasted bread I've ever had--a carb-lover's dream-come-true).  We used the bread to spread the burrata and tomatoes on.  . Goat cheese and Bacon pizza. Sausage and Fennel Pizza  (Both pizzas were delicious and the crust was excellent.  I loved the crispy, edges.  Great texture and flavor.). Butterscotch Budino (Loved it.  I love any custard/pudding.). Copetta (Caramel ice cream sundae with marshmallow topping, salty-sweet caramel sauce and salty spanish peanuts.  I get tears in my eyes thinking about this dessert.  It was the perfect combination of salty and sweet and the flavor caused a major endorphin release!). . I have a big tip for those of you who are like me and get annoyed by noisy restaurants (especially when you want to have a conversation).  Reserve one of the 4 tables that are in the wine storage room.  It was perfect for enjoying the meal without all the noise in the other room.  . . I have 2 SMALL complaints about our experience:  for about 30 minutes, the music they played was awful and inappropriate for the restaurant (hard rock).  Thank goodness they changed the music to something more appropriate.  The other complaint is the coffee.  My friend ordered decaf with dessert and we both agreed it tasted burnt/bitter.  She is a  lover of french roast and is used to strong coffee, so there is no doubt this coffee was not good.  She even asked for a freshly brewed pot, but it still tasted bad.  . . Okay, even with those 2 small complaints, I still give it 5 stars.  So go and enjoy your food, people.  Life is too short to waste your stomach space on crappy cuisine.
