ReviewID: U1BzD6zXvOeLdERYQU6cXQ
ReviewerID: 58zhqwfGYEl92MZusTsYJg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
we wanted to see what the hub-bub was all about. heck if my parents in NY is asking about the Kogi truck because of a special they saw in the local news Kogi must have gone national. . . everytime we've tried to eat it we've always had a change of mind. not because we are not fans of korean or mexican because we are, but we've always found something else to eat when were in LA. . . we ordered the short rib tacos and short rib burritos. . . 4.5stars: for their short rib tacos. we loved the marinated beef for its flavor and super tenderness. we also loved the greens and what i thought before taking a bite was some sort of gimchi salsa but it wasn't. it tasted so different from any taco i've had and understandably but the only thing that made it a taco was the shell. it was more like 90% korean and 10% mexican. . . 3.5stars: for their short rib burrito. it would've been better but halfway though it got soggy and messy and the flour tortilla couldn't hold up. the beef again was amazing and they had something that looked and felt like korean bbq dip of garlic and sesame oil but couldn't taste it well enough to know. it would've been great if they could've put some of the greens of the taco inside the burrito cause it would've helped the burrito from falling apart.  . . 1star: for their ordering method. when we arrived there was already a huge amount of people waiting in line. when i found a line i saw people with yellow tickets and looked around thinking is someone taking orders. after watching what was going on there was no line for orders or pick up. so the people that need to order and the people that are waiting for their order are all bunched up in the same cattle. stupid! how easy is it when its busy to have two windows for "orders only" and one window for "pick up" and if its not busy take down the signs. do they do it for the show effect the mass hysteria or is it they could care less.      . . overall it was very good and a great idea. korean mexican fusion on wheels. the overhead is certainly a lot less than opening a restaurant.
