ReviewID: U1OdcyEt4xXVEZugIrLnCg
ReviewerID: 3iqLanEea4KtYVY58-FHWg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Strip House Steak House
Category: Steakhouses
Last night was the second time I've been to this place and I just don't get it.  The food was just okay both times and the service was bad last night.. . Let me just get this out of the way:  The creamed spinach was incredible and the sommelier was friendly and helpful.. . The food had some misfires, but what caused me to wake up at 5am this morning was the way we were treated by the staff.. . The oysters ($18 for a half-dozen) were flaccid, small, and tasteless.  The $112 rib-eye for two was raw in the middle.  It was also carved tableside, so the waiter could clearly see that he was serving us raw, not medium-rare, steak.. . But, again, if the food was the only thing, I wouldn't feel compelled to write this.  (I'd just not go back.). . When I checked in, the hostess was clearly displeased that one of our party was going to be fifteen minutes late.  If we had just stalled instead of telling them we knew we were going to be late, maybe none of the rest of it would've happened. We waited on a couch in the lounge area.. . The hostess approached and asked us if we'd "like to have our cocktails at a table while we wait[ed]."  I agreed, even though I didn't see the point.  Once we sat down at the table in the bar, menus, wine list, and bread arrived.  They were trying to shift us to the lounge area instead of the dining room.  I did not appreciate the underhanded way the hostess did this.  When I made it clear that our reservations were for the dining room and we weren't going to be strong-armed into the bar, she led us to the worst table in the place, right at the mouth of the dining room, swarmed by wait staff and food runners.  When we left later, there were still better tables sitting empty.  This was dishonest manipulation, and, when I called them on it, pure vindictiveness.. . I should've gotten the check for our two Manhattans right then and eaten elsewhere.  Instead, I got poorly executed food, an enormous bill, and my foot stepped on three times.
