ReviewID: U2BUoJb-xu156MAU6jgBOg
ReviewerID: YYJ5oYIIUm2wSuh9tE7OyQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I loved loved loved this place!  4 stars you ask?  Why just 4 stars?  Well, my service was so so bad that I could not give a perfect 5.  There were a few minor things making this less than perfect.  I hope when I visit again, it'll be 5!. . First off, parking is usual DTLA parking.  $$.  I luckily found a meter the night I went.  . . The place is gorgeous.  Just beautiful inside.  The bathroom is so nice, I went twice!  The people who fill the water and clear plates- so so so attentive and did a great job.. . The menu selection was great.  The food- wonderful.  Delectable.  The wine was OK- yes, just OK- and the service sucked.  But, just my server sucked.  The wine is available in 1//2 pour, glass and bottle.  The nice things for me with 1/2 pour is I can try more than 1 wine.  I am a lightweight and so I cannot have multiple glasses of wine.  Here, I can!  And the 1/2 pour is not much more $$.. . We had:. Mussels and clams- cannot wait to have again. . Meatballs- they were cold (not hot like they should be) but tasted OK. . Crostini- delicious. . broccolini- very very very oily, greasy and not hot- but still tasty.  Kind of spicy in a good way. . White beans and sausage- good per my friends but I didn't taste. . Louie Salad- .....it never came..........never came ......never came.  My server even told me he would still have it come- though late and it would be on him.  It never came, he never mentioned it again.  Got nothing for him forgetting my salad.  The actually first brought out the wrong kind of salad- a chopped salad so they took it away.  When the server came to say sorry and he would have the right one soon.......he never did and everyone else was near done with their entrees and I ate so much off theirs, I was full.  Told him 2 forget it.  He said "it's coming"  I said we are all done now and he said OK it'll still come but be on him.  Never came.  That pissed me off.  Esp because he never addressed it again.  He ignored us and avoided us the rest of the night!  Who does that?. . Anyways, the pizzas look great and the Brunch menu does as well.  Bakery delicious!. . Anyways, I wanna go again because the place is cool and I HOPE i get better service!  If not, I won't be back.  But I hope:)  I hope
