ReviewID: u52Q0if7NgKpjn-Ck6Vyvg
ReviewerID: UKZOT5w5B8tGJxiMddRbNg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
Yay! I'm not quite a fan, but I will give them four stars for the steak they serve.. . I happen to be very into red meat.  I know my steaks, whether they be prime, choice, grain or grass fed, Wagyu, or Kobe.  I was very pleased with the dry aged steaks they serve here.  That is the only thing.. . Service was slow and the sommelier didn't come to our table until after we had polished off four bottles of wine (we had a group of 7) even then, that person insisted we try a much more expensive wine than we had been previously purchasing. . . The appetizers were OK.  Beef sashimi was good, but we ordered three for our table and barely had evough for everyone.  We orderd the bacon appetizer?!? How could they go wrong.  We sent it back, the fattiest most tasteless pieces of bacon I have ever had in my life, and for $10 it was a joke.  . . The steak:  I ordered a 55 day dry aged ribeye.  I like my steaks "black and blue" simply meaning that the oustside is darkly charred and the inside is still rare.  Mine was brown and purple; barely brown on the outside and cold on the inside.  This is true test of a steakhouse, because they have to turn the ovens up higher for your steak alone while having to keep a close eye on the other orders.  They failed.  I would have sent it back but....The steak was so damn good!  Keep in mind, when you have a steak that is aged 55 days, it isn't quite a steak anymore, it becomes more like a salami or cured ham.  Like pancetta, the steak is dry but tender and every bit as flavorful. I basically ate the whole steak raw, but it was very tasty.  The marbling was interesting as well.  ususally you see wavy lines of fat through the meat (this is how they classify meat as prime or choice) but the marbling on this steak was like little pencil erasers. I have never seen this type of marbling before, but, once again, it was delicious.. . Skip the toppings (luxury, Oscar, etc).. Not only do they add $15-$30 to the price of your $50 steak, but they are tasteless.  I had the Oscar, asparagus and crab meat paired with bernaise sauce.  The crab meat was very pungent with the smell of the sea. Nasty and after taking a bite, my teeth were crunching down on either salt, sand, shells, or grit.  It was horrible. Thankfully I had it on the side.. . Other people in my group ordered fish and other items.  We had to send back the salmon, it was too salty, which brings me to my next point.. . Sea Salt: anyone worth their salt :) would know that if you use large grain sea salt, you either have to grind it up,  or mix it in with something wet like a sauce or even a dressing and let it sit for a minute.  This place used salt on everything, and they just basically threw it on whatever they were salting in these huge grains.  Everyone of us complained of the salt crunching in our teeth.  . . Come on DB's, you want to charge $900 for a dinner, then get your s%$t together and give us top notch food made by top notch chefs.  I don't need the dishwasher cooking my meat or the bathroom attendant salting my appetizers.
