ReviewID: u6NJIDmVNjFfvNOfUXf0Dg
ReviewerID: l58GiI354JSPMFwaDhRlUw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Maggiano&#39;s Little Italy
Category: Italian
Being Italian myself...I am not typically a fan of Italian chain restaurants, and if I am I dont typically advertise that fact.... . The exception however will be made for Maggiano's. This place is just right for a large gathering of family or friends--especially great for the hungry men in your life... They offer the option of family-dining which is nice if you are wanting to feed alot of people and willing to share.... You choose two options for each course and receive an unlimited amount of everything. Typically I dont share, since my cravings differ from other people in my party.. . The food is full of flavor, tasty and satisfying. You leave feeling like you got your money's worth. The sauces are really good...I highly recommend the Calamari Fritte for an appetizer.... . Crispy calamari coated in egg whites and seasoned flour, deep fried and served with marinara sauce. . . Also a very good appetizer is the Four Cheese Ravioli  which is a. Homemade ravioli stuffed with ricotta cheese, cream cheese, mozzarella, and provolone filling sprinkled with cheese, then browned in the oven and served in pesto-alfredo cream sauce with a touch of marinara. . . The Handcrafted Pizza  is also very tasty...It's a thin crust with imported Fontina cheese, Italian sausage, tomato pesto sauce and oven-dried tomatoes. . . When it comes to salad choice...I usually go for the Caesar Salad which is a  traditional Caesar salad of romaine lettuce tossed with Caesar dressing, croutons and shaved parmesan cheese. . . When it comes to entree selections..I am a loyal patron...Eggplant Parmesan  all the way...Sliced eggplant, breaded and fried, layered with provolone cheese and marinara sauce . . Also exceptionally yummy is the Veal &amp; Mushroom Ravioli  . Homemade ravioli filled with ground veal, mushrooms, Marsala wine and asiago cheese. Browned on top with toasted bread crumbs, and cheese. Served with Alfredo sauce, sun-dried tomoatoes, basil and parsley.. . My favorite sauce is Joey Z's Pomodoro Sauce. . . The best thing about Maggiano's is the loud, bustling family atmosphere.If you are seeking a restaurant that serves huge, tasty portions...Maggiano's is the ticket.. . Leave room for dessert because its pretty damn life-changing.... . Nonna's Pound Cake with Caramelized Bananas is a pound cake toasted and served with caramelized bananas and  hot fudge sauce. Vanilla bean ice cream comes on the side. When you mix all of this together on the spoon...The taste is out of this world. Id lick the plate clean if that was appropriate...Id definitely suggest sharing since you will probably be super full from the dinner-but don't look away for too long or you will be left disappointed when you turn back to see the pound cake almost completely devoured..... . Maggianos is one of my favorite places...It's difficult to get in on Friday and Saturday nights and they dont really take reservations...So Id recommend trying to get there around 5 to beat the rush. The wait is worth it...I'd recommend getting a drink at the bar during the wait. . . Valet is an option, or you can park yourself. I'm excited because Cumberland mall has opened a 3rd location. So that's always an option, but I assume that its busy as well. . . Food: 5. Atmosphere: 5. Service: 5. . Recommendations: . Ceasar Salad. Calamari. Eggplant Parmesan . Chicken Parmesan. The Handcrafted Pizza. Four Cheese Ravioli. Veal &amp; Mushroom Ravioli  . Nonna's Pound Cake with Caramelized Bananas &amp; Hot Fudge. . All in All: Seriously Large Proportions!
