ReviewID: u7XkIR7MqCMm9S1L8XS6ug
ReviewerID: aMt8UCSvXNpNWHxzuPJLWg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Over Easy Café
Category: American (Traditional)
Fabulous.  I could just leave it there, but then you wouldn't get to read about the friendly, attentive and efficient staff; the lively atmosphere; or, best of all, the really great food.. . Don't be put off when you pass by the people waiting outside; there is no room to wait inside but the wait passed quickly for us (15 minutes tops at about 8:30 on a Sat morning) and is made easier by the complimentary coffee stationed outside (really nice touch in my opinion).. . Once inside an offer of coffee came immediately, and the waitress was not far behind to take any other drink or food orders that we were ready for.  I had a very difficult time choosing because many items looked good, but finally settled on the Damen Avenue Omelet, which was one of the specials.  When it came out, I thought there was no way I would ever finish it, but in fact it was a perfect portion because it was so fluffy.   The toast selection is about 5 different types, although to be honest, I stopped listening after she said "sourdough".  My husband went for the Sassy Eggs, which were well named.  Very spicy, with rather a lot of jalapeo, but that was perfect for him.  He described it as perfectly balanced and not needing any hot sauce - and this from a man who has literally 6 different types of hot sauce at home (don't laugh - they each have their own purpose, or so I'm told).. . Our usual judge of service comes down to getting the check since we've been to many places where service was great until we were ready to go and then the wait staff was no where to be found.  Not so here!  Check was prompt but not in a manner that made you feel rushed out.. . Inside was loud (but aren't pretty much all brunch places?) but not to the point where we couldn't have a conversation (albeit with a few "what?"s).  I liked the color scheme - some light orange and greens against the exposed brick walls, and the mirrors made it feel a little bigger than it was.  The egg decorations were cute but not overdone (no pun intended).. . The only suggestion I would have for management (if you're reading this): keep the front door closed a little longer until it gets just a bit warmer!  I certainly understand the desire and it makes the entrance more welcoming, but unfortunately it also cools off the food and coffee rather quickly if you happen to be close to it.
