ReviewID: U8ejsQBR7hK-370oS_l3iQ
ReviewerID: ggOhKph3o-PPHq7EFEzVyQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
This is a great place to get a tasty sausage and people watch at the same time. . . It's located in a hip area, just a couple of blocks east of Little Tokyo. . . They've got a huge selection of sausages-- some very exotic like rabbit &amp; rattlesnake or traditional like Bratwurst or Hot Links--and different types of German beer as well as a wide variety of soft drinks. You also get two different toppings on your dog, either on the side or on top, like caramelized onions, sauerkraut etc. . . You order up at the counter (which took awhile even though it was a short line because these chicks couldn't figure out what to order so they just stood there and had the poor cashier define the entire menu for them) and then get your number and find a seat in the back of the Wurstküche that has long picnic benches and some tables on the inside and patio tables outside. If you don't like sitting next to strangers you might get freaked in here. They bring the food out to you.. . It's a cool atmosphere and they've got music pumping through the dining area. The crowd is mixed, but more leaning toward the urban, trendy, cool and artistic types. But the staff is welcoming to all. . . I tried the Hot Link and it was delicious! The Hot Link had just amount of heat and the right flavor. And I split the "duck with jalapeños" sausage and the large fries with my friend. I was expecting the duck sausage to taste like Peking duck with jalapeños but it tasted more like those hamburgers they used to serve in school cafeterias. Either way it tasted familiar but I couldn't pinpoint what. And it wasn't that spicy, unlike the hot link, so I don't think I'll order the duck thing again.. . I'll definitely be going back for my Hot Link, and the next time I'll try the green chili &amp; cilantro sausage.. . BTW, parking can be a pain but if you do find a meter it's .25¢ for 15-minutes so bring lot's of change.
