ReviewID: u8jfapiUkOxdVc3UWybQNw
ReviewerID: XhnK8ABBHQNZGaoZueJccw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
I'm pretty sad that they raised the price for the lunch special (used to be $12.95). . .but it is still a GREAT deal despite the price hike.. . When I didn't have work, or while I still went to UCLA, I would go home on a Thursday night and have my daddy take me to Sushi Gen for lunch on Fridays.  We'd wake up early, leave the house around 10:30AM and get there before 11AM.  The place doesn't officially open until 11:15AM (sometimes 11:30AM), but already, there would be a line 20 deep.  So no matter what, you'll be waiting a minimum of 30 min.  for this place.. . The wait is absolutely atrocious if you arrive after the place opens.  If you do have to wait, go shop across the street at American Apparel or go to the bakery next door to buy some sweets to kill time.  But let me tell you, the wait is worth it.. . They give you a couple of small dishes to whet your appetite before the show:  miso soup, this sweet and sour seaweed thing, warm marinated tofu, and pickled cabbage.  Then the main event:  the sashimi lunch special.  They give you SO MUCH FRESH sashimi.  I can't even name all the fishes on the plate. . .I only recognize tuna, yellowtail and maybe mackerel.  All the other ones are mystery fishes to me.  But delicate, thick slices of mystery fishes. . .as soft as tofu. The only sad thing is that they don't give you any salmon sashimi (they usually give a piece of cooked salmon) :[  But that is okay.  It's still worth it.  I don't even have to pair it with the rice to be full (by the last piece of fish, I'm kinda uncomfortably full, but being a glutton and being a cheap Chinese, am horrified at the thought of wasting such good, fresh fish, I shove it down my gullet anyways). However,  I have realized that the boys still needed the rice to get full.. . Parking is somewhat annoying, especially when it gets full.  Sushi Gen does validate, I think the price for parking comes out to be like 60 cents or some weird number like that.  So worth it!!!
