ReviewID: u99FfGP__dcMm80zcCPN5Q
ReviewerID: Ws4LCg0yVyObDoniesOU-A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Wakamono
Category: Sushi Bars
Whoa!  Hi.  So, what's with all the hype?  Man, I feel weird when I'm a dissenting opinion, but I've got to say, this place is not that great.  The service, I have to say, was great - attentive, nice.  But it pretty much stopped there.  . . The salmon teriyaki was alright - the salmon was cooked perfectly (just barely raw in the middle) but the sauce was SO cloying and thick, it overpowered any fresh, wonderful salmon flavor.  The rice to accompany it was so heavy with vinegar, I couldn't eat it, and I'm a girl who has grown up eating rice with at LEAST two meals a day.  I love my rice, I LOVE RICE!, but I couldn't eat this.  . . The rolls - kani chung and rainbow - have to be rated separately.  The kani chung rolls were off the hook.  Yum, perfect, will definitely get those again if I ever have to go back.  The rainbow rolls, unfortunately, were not that great.  I think the creator was not thinking thoroughly when he/she was dreaming up this particular roll, because, while the flavor was okay, the roll just turned into mush in my mouth.  There should've been some cucumber, carrot, something with crunch to give the roll an even balance.  Not just lots of mush put together in a pretty way.  The other downside to lots of ingredients in a roll is that the flavors all roll together... I couldn't tell you what I was actually eating even if my life depended on it!  What a waste of good fish!  . . Oh... and the jalapeno miso soup was alright.  I love spicy food and miso soup, so the two together should've been good, but I left feeling ambivalent about it.  Meh.  Two mediocre dining experiences within the same week.  Save me from my neighborhood!  . . One thing I have to note... what is up with all the really loud club music pumping through the restaurant?  Ping Pong does that, too, and I'm not a huge fan.  I like to hear my companions speak... can't they turn it down a little?  I sound like a curmudgeon, but I'm okay with that.  If people really want to feel like they're in a club, go to a club.
