ReviewID: u_gAQ1a4TrFfU8qgbdW0QQ
ReviewerID: 1pzP58PeWictHQzctMU0nQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cafe 28
Category: Cuban
MEATY!  If you like meat, you'll probably like this place.. . SERVICE:  We were greeted the minute we walked in and were given a nice little table by the window (we beat the rush by going at 6pm on a Thursday night).  The waiter was great by giving us time to think about our order and coming back when we needed him.  He gave us a basket of bread with seasoned butter.  The butter was pretty good, I tasted honey and something spicy.. . MOJITO:  $8 for a large glass (see photos).  I was buzzed within 5 minutes (yes, I am a light weight, but it was strong!)  It was too bitter for my taste, but that didn't stop me from having every last drop.. . DINNER: . 1.  Ropa Vieja - Flank steak slowly simmered in a garlic tomato sauce until it falls apart. Served with white rice, black beans and sweet plantains.  This dish reminded me of pulled pork.  It was pretty tasty and the sauce was good with the rice and black beans.  My favorite part was the plantains, mmmm...sweet and delicious.  . . 2. Honey Jalapeño Pork Chops - Marinated, grilled then baked to perfection. Served with sweet potatoes.  This dish was too sweet for me (I like my main course on the salty side).  They were the largest pork chops I've ever seen.. . DESSERT:  They do have a dessert menu, which I didn't see on the website so I'm not sure if they change it often.  I took a picture of it in case you are curious.  I only finished half my meal but was too stuffed to order dessert.. . AMBIANCE:  Very nicely decorated and soothing Cuban music softly playing through the speakers.  The bar area by the entrance looked cozy and inviting.. . BATHROOM:  For those of you that like to read about the bathroom, this place has a one toilet room for each gender.  The Ladies happened to be out of order while I was there, so I had to use the caballeros.  Nothing to write home about.. . WHAT'S NEARBY?  The Whole Tooth is right across the street and I could see the Irving Park Brown Line stop from my seat.. . PARKING:  We parked on Ravenswood where there were tons of parking.  The sign says Permit 57, but that's only from 8a - 10a.
