ReviewID: UBmv8nY85LvHqDUkQ-O69Q
ReviewerID: AXgPRrA1dy47_Vlj0543iw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Came here last week with some yelper friends per the suggestion of uber yelper Anh T. (Friend &amp; Fan her if you haven't already - . http://www.yelp.com/us.... ).  Although there was a solid line of people waiting, our group of 5 was seated right away as Jiaming had arrived about 20 minutes ahead put our names on the wait list (thanks Jia!).. . Some may say that ramen is nothing to blow bubbles about, but being that the extent of my previous ramen experiences was limited to "Top" dehydrated noodles and flavor packets I was anxious to try the real deal.  And while I obviously cannot vouch for or offer analysis to the "authenticity" of the grub Daikokuya serves, I can say that I came away fully satisfied and quite impressed.. . Everyone in our party went with the standard ramen which consists of a bowl filled with deliciously steaming broth, noodles, a slice of pork, ample portion of green onions, hardboiled egg, and a few other various ingredients of which I am unfamiliar.  I often prefer my food spicy, but evidently ramen, unlike pho, is to be consumed as is with no sriracha or other additives.  However, with the robust and hearty flavor of the broth, this ended up being just fine by me.  Our party also shared 2 orders of Gyoza (Japanese pot stickers per Juma) which although tasty, were something I'd probably be indifferent to in future visits.  For drinks, Jiaming and I split a pitcher of Kirin.. . I must confess that due to a combination of my whiteness, lack of experience with Asian cuisine, and fat fingers I'm clearly not the most proficient chopstick user on the planet.  Matter of fact, I find forks to be far superior in terms of effectiveness.  But alas, when in Rome...Uh oh, there goes that Rome word again.  Expect the talk threads and website to spontaneously combust in 3, 2, 1.... . We still here?  Ok cool.  Anywho, my lack of skill with the sticks has led to a bit of a complex, in which my self-conscious insecurities manifest into paranoia that everyone is watching me.  In surveying the landscape for gawking, laughter, and finger pointing I came across a young female patron who was tightly clutching an infant doll.  Later, when she and her party were seated, she placed the doll on the table, legs dangling off the edge.  Although the doll didn't have a place setting nor did she offer it any food, school project or not, this still struck me as pretty odd.  Please leave your dolls and mental sicknesses at home.  Another individual in the same party, whom I will simply refer to as The Beast, also caught my attention.  Not only was she the type who could make onions cry, but as she raised another overflowing spoonful towards her mouth I swear I heard the noodles scream.. . Aside from the horrors I witnessed at the adjacent table, I couldn't have been happier with Daikokuya and its contributions to my burgeoning Asian food fetish.  Lastly, it was great meeting up with friends and fellow yelpers to share in the experience.  Because, contrary to all the soap opera drama and negativity that rears its ugly head at times, tasty food, stiff drinks, and good conversation and laughter amongst friends is what this site is truly about.
