ReviewID: uc6m-0kVC_FDY-l4YiLl-Q
ReviewerID: AT0ScaQTAyKln6IwklvpuA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
OK...OK...another review for Craft.  But it was really that good!!!. . In the marathon of fun-filled food destinations in Los Angeles, I finally feel like I made the finish line with Craft.. . Love it.  This experience, and I call it that based on all of my senses being hit, was phenomenal.  Let me first start with the atmosphere.  What a great layout!  The tables are spread around and you feel as if you are very private but not too far off as you can't help but eye what other people are ordering.  Comfortable booth and spacious table.  The colors are nice and soft.  Music, a little elevator-esque but who doesn't love Zeppelin elevator music?  Now...on to food and drink.. . I ordered a Marker's Mark that had some kind of cherry "concoction" mixed in.  Now I know you are thinking sweet but it was just perfectly balanced and a little too easy to drink which makes for the best kind of drink hitting the palate just right.  The other memorable drink was a Ginger Mojito that someone else got.  Very good.. . Amuse bouche: Spanish mackerel with ginger.  I really don't like mackerel as it reminds me of fishing off the pier in Seal Beach with my dad as a kid but it was very good and a nice start.. . First Courses - all delish.  Japanese Hamachi &amp; Tuscan Melon, Oysters (Kumomoto &amp; Malpeque), Baby Spinach salad with Smoked Bacon and Grilled Octopus with chickpea cubes and yoghurt.  I would order all of it again.  We did order the mozzarella ravioli for one of our diners who has a very picky, non-foodie palate and that was forgettable.  The flavor wasn't really there but when you're up against some tough competition, it was still good.. . Main Courses - Organic chicken, halibut with bacon broth and short ribs.  I was very surprised at how much I liked the chicken.  The skin was crispy and the flavor was spot on.  The halibut as well.  I am not the biggest fan of short ribs as they are very rich for my palate but again, the non-foodie loved it.. . Sides - flowering squash, potato puree, heirloom tomato gratin and mixed mushrooms.  All heavenly.  I would get all 4 again and they were exceptional.  The puree is just how I like it, a little runny but very creamy.  The texture on the squash was tender but not overdone and the flowers on top were delicate.  Very hard to get both right.  The mixed mushrooms had just the right amount of all different kinds and were perfectly cooked.  The tomatoes were a nice mix of natural  sweetness which balanced the cheese's creaminess.. . Dessert - Chocolate Soufflé with buttermilk ice cream.  Perfect.  There was also a sarsaparilla soda with vanilla ice cream as a starter followed by a raspberry macaroon and some type of rhubarb.  Both very good (macaroons are my favorite and that was a nice surprise!)  Of course, the customary take home muffin was blueberry corncake.  I gave that to my husband, who couldn't attend, and he liked it but it was a bit on the drier side.  . . The service at Craft is extraordinary.  They work in teams of 3 with a Captain, First Runner and Busboy.  Our captain made sure everything about our experience was superb.  The Busboy was also very thorough and had a lovely disposition.  As for the runner/order taker, she sucked.  That was the worst part.  She didn't know what a purslane was, as our non-foodie diner had asked, and was like, "Oh, that came up earlier and it's some kind of green..he he...I still don't really know."  Ehhhh...wrong answer.  Besides that, she spilled one of our bottles of Showket on the table, with no make good, and when asked if they had vanilla ice cream, she said no.  That was before we got our sarsaparilla WITH VANILLA ice cream...hmmm....She needs to brush up on her sales skills at this fine dining establishment but we're not there for the service as much as we are for the food.. . All in all, I will be back again.  This was a fantastic experience and Bravo! to Tom and his team!!!
