ReviewID: UC6pxpPlYJeUifUcva7H6g
ReviewerID: f9yPZLvgNi6FI0SpMxq5Rw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Green Zebra
Category: Vegetarian
Though expensive (and I mean expensive, $145 w/ tip for two people, no alcohol), Green Zebra has to have been the best dining experience I've had in years. Other reviewers have mentioned the inattentive wait staff. I respect their opinions but felt that rather than inattentive, they were largely going for a more European style dining experience. In Europe, servers don't frequently return to a table after an order has been taken as it is considered rude to interrupt diners' conversations. I felt more like that was going on here, especially since the one time our server did come to check on us, she apologized for coming at an inconvenient time (it wasn't, really).. . The decor, as opposed to 80's or extremely hip, I felt was a moderately successful attempt at relating back to their theme and name. The restaurant is decked out in greens, browns, and stainless steel. It's supposed to be a melding of contemporary style and natural decor. Up to you how great an idea that is, but I liked it. The seating WAS a little uncomfortable, but that may just have been the fabric of my dress being a little slippery against the fabric of the booth, leading to sliding down the seat repeatedly.. . For me, though, Green Zebra is about the food. It's expensive. The service is good, but not what Americans expect. The decor is nice but not to everyone's tastes. These things are true of most fine dining establishments because quality and style are matters of opinion. The food, however, is amazing. Like many other patrons, it was suggested that we each order 3-4 items from the menu. If you're a heavy eater, definitely go that route and order 4 and dessert. This is what we did, but I was honestly feeling a little stuffed after. I think 2-3 and dessert would really suffice for your average person.. . For my meal I had the beet salad w/ goat cheese, onion and garlic soup, mushroom risotto, and fig pasta. My partner had the fresh burrata cheese, onion and garlic soup, poached egg, and gnocci. For dessert I had the ice cream tasting (fig and honey, carrot cake, blueberry swirl, and chocolate lavender) and she had the malted chocolate pudding with roasted bananas and sugar beignets. Everything (except the blueberry ice cream, but I hate blueberries so the opinion is highly biased) was fantastic. . . Particularly good were the fresh burrata cheese, beet salad, onion and garlic soup, and the chocolate lavender ice cream. In these I thought the flavors played particularly well off of one another and were perfectly balanced. Everything else was still great, it's just that the first two courses set such a high bar that anything as simple as risotto was bound to fail in comparison. I would definitely focus on the top half of the menu in the future simply because those items seem to be fresher, lighter, and more flavorful.. . Since it was a birthday celebration for my partner and I had warned them in advance, they also sent out a serving of their sour cherry streudal with a candle with our desserts. This isn't an expensive item, but it was better than some restaurants do for birthdays, and the dish was a lovely complement to our much sweeter traditional desserts. . . Also worth noting at the non-alcoholic drinks. I had the bitter lemon soda while my companion had the pink peppercorn-thyme soda. Both were amazing thought the herbal, sweet, peppery flavor of the pink peppercorn really impressed. All in all, a wonderful evening well worth the splurge.
