ReviewID: ucBuAUyXtYlb8kAQ-NPJzw
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Shaun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
OK  gave it some thought and I hate writing bad reviews.. especially when I had a descent experience the first visit.. but here goes!!. . Well I have been here before.. and my first experience was fantastic.. the 2nd time.. it was how might I put it? Horrible.. My boyfriend and I came for a brunch special they were offering.. 1/2 off on brunch.. he had never been and I was very excited to share this place with him. I initially called and made reservations- but later found on-line that at open table I can make it and get my points. So being courteous I called and told them hey cancel my phone reservation cuz I made one on . http://opentable.com. .. not rocket science.. Anyhow when we came in- they had no reservations at all. The lady canceled both the reservations. Well she told us ok.. she'll take care of it don't worry.. Alright.. off to brunch we went.. I ordered the eggs, grits, and country bacon.. my bf ordered the chicken and waffles.. a piece of thigh and a breast fried southern style..served with corn syrup... The drinks were fanstastic.. I had a lavender mimosa, he had a very good spicy bloody mary. Well my food was OK.. but my bf had a very raw piece of thigh.. that was only battered cooked. Of course we told our waitress- and though she said sorry ( she didn't really sound sorry- but rather she sounded uncomfortable) she didn't give any other options...at all.. no manager came..- nothing was compt.. NOTHING!!.. I mean my bf said to them- hey we wanted to tell you so it won't happen again.. But at a nice place.. if you are handed raw chicken.. you don't have to ask to be compt.. it should be automatic OR atleast drinks on the house.. NOTHING!! . What better slapped me in the face was the fact 2 weeks later I still didn't receive my open table points. I called Shaun's to get the manager whose name starts with a C and is the Chef's girlfriend.. who I am sorry to say was curt and VERY rude on the phone. I had explained what happened.. and she basically said she didn't  have anything to do with Open table- can't help! She was NOT polite- rather rude and acted like I had a free meal with them.. she didn't even care.. After such behavior from a Manager.. i felt this place is a crapper.. I VOW to NEVER return. The food is OK.. I can get better service else where.. . Shaun if you're reading this.. it's best to fire the broad who answered my call..even though she's your wife.. don't mix business with pleasure. heck tell her to never open her mouth.. or answer the phone at your establishment!
