ReviewID: UCV9PXfV72DqPomC0lUxbQ
ReviewerID: R-g0F6N3ROTdAONBAJpY0A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
So funny I didn't even realize this place was featured on the Food Network. My friend Jasmine took me here for Breakfast because in her opinion (and apparently countless others) it's the best coffee in LA. I have to agree.. . I would have given this place 5 stars just for their caffeinated beverages but the food brought it down one star. I think all of the ingredients on each plate are well chosen but in my case not well executed. . . Sofia Panini - My friend got the Sofia Goat Cheese Panini (with olive tapenade, tomato compote, basil) on Ciabatta. The Ciabatta gave a really good crunch but they sparingly applied everything but the Goat Cheese on the Sandwich. So all you got was this overwhelming taste of Goat Cheese. I think that if they had put more of the other flavors on it would have been a hit.. . Bacon Mushroom with Scrambled Vegetarian Hen Eggs - These were super yummy! I love mushrooms and bacon but for $10 bucks I would've expected a whole lot more. Without the bread on the side I don't think I would have left full. . . Iced Coffee - Apparently the way LAMILL functions is with 2 different cash registers for the sit down half versus the cash register in front for to go orders. The coffee we got while dining in was $3.50 and it comes in a tall skinny glass so you don't really get that much. When I ordered an iced coffee to go it was only like $2.65 (don't quote me) and it came in a regular coffee size (think Starbucks grande) versus the mini we got at the table. I'm not sure if the grade of coffee was different and thats why we got more and it was cheaper?. . Cappuccino - Look wise this was the prettiest little cappuccino I ever saw. It was a little on the smaller size so I think next time I would get a double. No complaints really.. . Our total for 2 came out to like $20 bucks each. . I'm definitely going to come back here the next time I'm in the neighborhood. Next time I do I'll get the House Made Brioche Doughnut Holes or possibly the ABLT
