ReviewID: uEE6tfgy_Ubmr6fc6fTEWw
ReviewerID: 7NnyLLX1bNVVEB2tFXsOww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bar Celona
Category: Wine Bars
Oh, man is this a popular spot....to bash on, I think. Well folks, here's my story.... . I came here on a Tuesday night, after a hearty meal at Cielito Lindo(Review posted). The place seems nice from the outside, but at first wasn't too excited about going in, but my brother and his better half where making a bee line straight there. Ok, so I guess I'll go in too.. . No cover...so that's a plus...thank god, I'd probably jet if they pressed for that Lincoln (as Ms. Yelp Stephy S.mentioned). Being that, at that moment, I didn't even have two nickels to rub together. . . So once inside, I like the decor and setup. Very modern, "Right Now" kinda style. The place isn't all that packed, well actually, you'd be pressed if you said there was 15 people in the lounge area. The music coming over, is pretty much a hip hop mix. We sit, and the server is pretty prompt and helpful at selecting our drinks. We get them in pretty good timing, again there is only 20 people in the place...so take that w/ a grain of salt.. . Well the company is pretty good, my brother and I are entertaining his lady and a friend of hers. The music, in my opinion is so so, but thank god it's not blasting so that we couldn't hear our company. Anyways, the DJ sees that no one is having any notions of dancing, so he switches up the tempo. He starts to throw a little old school rap in the mix. This gets my brother's attention and starts to dance w/ his lady, I'm still like meh.... . The ambiance of the place is super chill, the music selection got a little better as the night wore on. He mixed some Spanish rock, some regeton(is that how you spell it?) some old ass Kroq mix and some Van Morrison's Brown Eyed Girl...huh...???(which quickly killed any dancing he had going on before...what a jerk)   . . Our server was cool, he checked up on us and was refilling our water consistently. So no gripes there. I really got to come back to this place I guess during peak hours and check out the vibe then. Maybe, it'll be a little more livelier and hopefully a better mix of music. But until then...I'd probably check another place out to go hang in. . . Hey...what the hell am I doing...Jake's is just down the way...shoulda, coulda, woulda. Next time, I guess.
