ReviewID: uElhSzoHFrYyg_qsbdOnlQ
ReviewerID: ZD84600Tw1WqeKpVuNiKzg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Baohaus
Category: Taiwanese
I had high hopes and high expectations for this place. I love Taiwanese food and can probably tell you if a place makes it good or not. Although I don't consider myself Taiwanese, I have been to the beautiful island many times and I have eaten at places all across Taipei. . It seems like lately that NYC is going through an Asian sandwich craze (ie banh mis everywhere, num pang with their cambodian-inspired sandwiches, peking duck stall). It is now hip and cool to eat asian sandwiches, but seriously they have been around for a long time. I grew up eating banh mis when no one ever dared venture into "exotic" foods.  Peking duck wrapped in chinese bread had been a family staple from since I can remember. And when I recently told my mom about "gua bao," she stated, "wow gua bao is an old-style taiwanes snack, what's all the fuss?" So now you see, my expectations have grown exponentially. . I met a friend here for lunch on Saturday. The place is located in the basement of a building, so you have to walk down. Once inside, you realize that the popularity of this place has outgrown its space. There are way too many people for not so many tables. There is a line and many hungry eyes. That is a good sign right? I remember in Taiwan that people always seem to flock to the snack line that was the longest. The perception is that if the line is long the food must be good. Must be some psychology/sociology BS. LOL.. OK...so we are hungry. We order the royal frush which consist of 6 baos (3 beek, 3 pork belly), a plate of bao fries, and also a plate of pickled peanuts. After waiting about 10 minutes, the food arrives. The baos are good. Tasty, fatty, with just the right amount of pickled mustard. We both really didn't enjoy the bao fries with sesame sauce, too sweet, and just really too gross. The peanuts were good, a hint of vinegar and soft. . But what really gets me about this place is the price. You can not seriously charge $4.50 for a bao that is smaller that your fist. That is a total rip off! And $3 for the drink? I think I will pass and go to the supermarket and get a drink for 75 cents. . This is a great idea, but unfortunately, I don't think I will be back. With rising cost and the recession, my budget serisously can not handle this kind of dent. And besides...you can go to Roosevelt Food Court in Flushing and get the same thing for less ;-)
