ReviewID: UF2CtJ_CFL_LEUvB03Momg
ReviewerID: PPEisXw1rYsknEz4WfNaGw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Oinkster
Category: Burgers
I learned about Oinkster from reading Jonathan Gold. He said this was where you could get the best cupcake in town. I love a good cupcake. Oinkster is also in nearby Eagle Rock, not far from our favorite Target store. Location, location, location.. . Oinkster is fantastic. It looks like fast-food, but that's where the resemblance ends. You've never had a cheeseburger this luscious and good. The pastrami is out-of-this-world. Do you like a Reuben Sandwich? OMG you will just die. You probably WILL die sooner from eating all this rich food but your shortened life will that much sweeter for it. . . The one thing I didn't care for was the Carolina pulled pork. The pork was very good but I expected a sweet, Kansas City styled sauce. I couldn't relate to the vinegary stuff, the only sauce that was offered. Is that how it's served in the Carolinas?  I am not going to deduct any stars like the haters who bag on Pecos Bill's for not being what they expected, although offering a separate, Kansas City sauce for  people like me would be a plus. . . I love the Belgian Fries with the garlic sauce. Incredible. Unfortunately they do not travel well. They are only good eaten fresh and hot, there, on the spot. . . The cupcakes are brilliant, as are the lemon bars and brownies. Jonathan Gold knows a good cupcake when he sees one. . . Happy Hour is the time to come. $4 burgers  is a fantastic deal. . . Try the Oinkster Mustard with your pastrami sandwiches. Trust me.. . Service is usually good. Some of the counter-staff are very friendly and helpful while some are not-so-nice. There was one guy who looked just like Weird Al who was smug and treated me like sh*t. I haven't seen him since, which pleases me. . . There is an outside eating area, where smoking is permitted. People bring their kids and dogs. The vibe is very casual and welcoming. You can kick it with a pitcher of beer and enjoy the day. Its a wonderful Sunday afternoon kind of place.. . Yes, Oinkster is full of hipsters. They are indeed  annoying, with their little hipster glasses and bad hipster hairstyles. But one must feel compassion for them, as their former enclaves have gentrified and now they have to live in Eagle Rock full-time. Hipsters have to eat too, and as long as they Keep Oinkster going it'll be there for the rest of us to enjoy.
