ReviewID: UFFqeWDqlcLi0gx8gHVpTA
ReviewerID: pFMEqX7pn0QU8Z00bTOfuA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kyma
Category: Greek
The husband and I ventured out on our first date as spouses to Kyma. A BLG card initiated the experience.We stylishly arrived at 4:30pm on a Friday...much too early to be seated, but were welcomed nonetheless to sit and have a drink at the bar. The drinks were well poured and enjoyed. . . I imagine that the place is gorgeous in the evening hours,and fabulous in the dark...very sexy nooks and what not, but with the summer sun shining in...let's say white hides not age. I feel the pain of attempting to have white anything in my life...I can't imagine trying to keep that place immaculate...but that said, it should have been.. . The service, while attentive, was appreciated though the staff in general were a bit tiresome as a whole as they were grouped about canoodling and texting and whatnot. This place is not a diner, so I would have hoped for a more refined approach to the atmosphere. (Canoodling is okay pre-opening...I realize we were early, but after 5pm on a Friday, a no-no...especially in Buckhead!). . The food had its high points and low. I loved the option to have a series of meze for the meal as I love to taste everything...that is a high point. Now onto the food itself.. . Spreads. Melitzanusala (eggplant, mint, walnut). Good, loved the hint of mint, but think I like babghanoush better with its smokiness.. Htipiti (red pepper, feta). A-ight.. An unnamed bright yellow spread (yellow split peas, lemon). I really liked this one, super bright flavor.. Grilled pita that accompanied was warm, delicious and retained just a hint of grilled tste - very good.. . Dolmades (grape leaves stuffed with bulgur, tomato, onion. mint, cumin-yogurt). We are a huge fan of dolmades, and every culture makes them slightly different. These were quite lovely and different. Plump, fresh and the cumin-yogurt I think really was beautiful with it.. . Baby Maine Calamari. These were very good. Similar to the kind I make at home...super light with only a hint of crisp - no heavy breading, the squid itself, meltingly tender. Well done.. . Saganaki (pan fried cheese). This was overwhelmingly salty, rich and warm. I loved it. The build up on our palates from the meze in this order peaked here.. . Braised Rabbit mousaka . And the crescendo descended. This dish was light and creamy...but that is kinda all you could taste...there was a nuance of nutmeg floating about, but by this time in our dinner, our tastebuds had been focusing on bright, acidic lushness...and this dainty lactic dish could not compete. I would serve this earlier in the meal if one hoped for proper praise of it.. . Lambchops (3day marinade, wood grilled, oregano, tzatziki and greek fries). Very good. Cooked perfectly medium rare. Mine was better than the husbands. It was smaller and burst with flavor. I admit I gnawed the bone a bit (I NEVER do this, not even with ribs). He gave a piece of his thicker chop, and sadly it contained not the herbal boost of mine...understandable, as it was a thicker cut..but avoidable. Still good though.. . Overall, a reasonable evening. Reasonable price. Not our favorite of the Buckhead Life Group restaurants.
