ReviewID: UG9adEjGFOMdVNrRfquzfQ
ReviewerID: znLTHBddnqHCAoZBbV40oQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I'm downgrading my former 5 star review to 2 stars. Service as of late has deteriorated, tremendously. . . First off, why do they insist on seating small parties at those long booth-style tables that feel so much like the school cafeteria tables of my youth, only covered with a white tablecloth? Why? I hate having the nosy people sitting on either side of me stare at me all glazey eyed and slack jawed while I eat. . . And worse than that, it is impossible to have a private conversation at these tables. Say something even remotely interesting and your booth neighbors practically freeze like statues to get a better listen. Ugh. On a personal note, I have even requested to NOT be seated at these tables when making a reservation. And what happens when they lead us to our table? You guessed it, they try to squeeze us into those hellish 10 ft. long booth seats. *To be fair: the last time we went, after I complained to the woman seating us, she promptly reseated us at a "normal" table.* . . Secondly, I am not a complicated orderer (no, that is not a word but just go with me on this). I don't make special requests. I order straight off the menu, as is. So why in God's name is it difficult to provide me with my correct order? Never mind the fact that there's not even a chance for my order to get lost on the way to the kitchen because the kitchen is a rolling cart an entire 3 inches away from my table. Seriously annoying. I ask for spinach, I get corn. I ask for corn, I get spinach.     W T F.. . Less annoying to me, but very annoying to those in my party, last night we ordered a side dish and an after dinner drink that never showed up on our table but DID show up on the bill. Were we not paying attention, we would've paid an extra $25 for nothing. . . I fear that our love affair is over, Lawry's. It was good while it lasted. I now find myself more attracted to your cousin, Tam O'Shanter.
