ReviewID: uGAj1VX1a9Ztnfg3mh0tzg
ReviewerID: y0lutE4Wl0xYSrKQrBGvIQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
five stars for the service and atmosphere, three stars for the food.. . everything about craft really surprised me.  the hosts up front are very down-to-earth and friendly, and have none of that weird snootiness that their counterparts at other gourmet restaurants have.  when my date asked about the painting on the wall, one of the hosts even looked up who the artist was!  a few minutes after we were seated, another host brought a card with the correct artist's information on it, which i thought was admirable.. . the waitstaff was also unusual for an LA restaurant.  surprisingly young, eclectic, knowledgeable, and upfront with their recommendations.  i've never been to tom collichio's other restaurants, but i'm a firm believer that the staffs' attitudes at any company are a direct result of the owners/management.  nice owners hire nice people, and vice versa.  it makes me feel like tom collicchio and i could hang some time, and really gives the restaurant a very comfortable vibe.. . so you can imagine my disappointment that the food wasn't more impressive.  the flavors were tastefully simple and rustic, but unfortunately nothing particularly memorable and didn't have the innovation to justify the price.  . . our arugula and parmesan salad was very simple and could have come from the refrigerator at ralph's.  my braised beef short ribs and root vegetables had a tough outer layer from the searing, and then alternating layers of somewhat more tender but still rather tough meat and fat.. . my date had the niman flatiron steak, which was probably the highlight of the main course, but wasn't exactly inspirational.  our side vegetable and potatos were similarly good, but nothing special.. . in between our courses, we were served three amuse bouches which were actually a bit more innovative and definitely reinforced the high quality of service and attention to detail at craft.. . the highlight of the evening?  the decadent glazed donuts with strawberry jam, vanilla custard, and chocolate pudding, which is the real reason we went to craft in the first place.. . oh, and we sat next to a table where uber-producer brian grazer, mayor villaraigosa, some billionaire investor, and willie freakin' nelson were just chilling over a casual sunday dinner!. . maybe if i were a billionaire too, expensive counterculture a la carte restaurants like craft and cut would make more sense.... . i'll let you know when i get there.
