ReviewID: UhXj-kVs2aE-PbrUmyySfw
ReviewerID: _m3SyztWE_ji0wLxsL2Ycg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
Arrived at Porto's @ 2pm on a Saturday afternoon for lunch.  Parked on the back lot and got lucky enough to get parking.  Awesome.  Went into the store and noticed 30 people standing in line for the deli sandwiches.  Not cool.  Grabbed the ONE table that was empty in the whole store while the bf stood in line to get our food.  Cool.. . Bf stood in line for a good 15 minutes  and finally ordered our lunch.  Surprised and but not really surprised that he brought over enough food to feed 4 or more people.  I guess cool.  . . Inside the box were 4 potato balls (4 stars), 2 Guava cheese Danish (5 stars), 2 Cheese rolls (5 stars) and 2 Ham and Cheese Crossiants (5 stars).. All fresh and piping hot.  . Total:  $26  For all this food, ONLY  $26.  VERY COOL!. Our sandwich and drinks were brought out within 5 minutes of ordering them.  Very fast and Very fresh and most importantly...AWESOME!!. . I got the tuna crossiant sandwich and the minute I bit into my crossiant, I knew this is how heaven must feed their angels.  Wowsers!!  It's yummyinmytummyliciously crossiant on crack!!  SO flakey and soft and melts in your mouth!    I would rank Porto's crossiants to be number 1 out of all the crossiants I have tried so far. . . The bf got the Cuban turkey something sandwich which was their top selling sandwich.  I would order that sandwich next time.  All the meat used in that sandwich was very flavorful and not your typical deli meats.  It tasted like they hand carved their turkey and ham!  Highly recommended.. . Oh, and we can't forget about the dessert!  I asked him to order the same chocolate cake this girl was eating right next to me.  She said it was their chocolate cake and I couldn't resist not trying it.  The cake base was very fluffy and I loved how the frosting tasted like they mixed the whipping cream with their butter cream.   Very light and not overly sweet.   . . Overall ,everything at Porto's tasted like they have really improved on their products.  I remember coming to Porto's a lot as a kid growing up in Glendale and when Porto's used to be a small bakery.  It was good then but now I see why they are always  very busy.  Cheap but GREAT food with high quality ingredients you can really taste!   IT's worth the wait and hectic parking.  If I can go here every weekend, I would!  And so will you after you've tried Porto's!
