ReviewID: UIAsErQU1-wuRKVWB6nQ2A
ReviewerID: FRFAiLyVAVXPXOU6BBb6qg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I went with two friends and between us we ordered eight dishes, and shared them all between the three of us. We ordered many of our dishes by the suggestion of the waitress (which I usually do not do). . . Overall: nice classic LA restaurant ambiance ( a Tuesday night), clean, attractive, not terribly pretentious, kind service staff for sure, good respectable food. An amazing selection of unusual Italian liquors at the bar too.. . One of our party of three arrived about 35 mins late, so my friend and I sat at the bar to stall time during the interim. After this, the maitre'd seated us without a shred of haste or frustration that we were taking our sweet time. It was appreciated. I hate it when people try to rush you...fuck them, I'm paying your rent.. . Anyway...the sommelier made a good suggestion for a catch-all pleasant and sophisticated white wine which was good with all the courses.. . Course 1: fresh mozzarella with beans. Good, strange combination to me...not the sexiest, but it worked. Balanced well with the saltiness of the cheese and the beans overall.. . Course 2: Mussels; and intense dish which was rich, and delicious. I could not say that I remember the flavor of the mussels really popping out at me, but the dish was still satisfying.. . Course 3: Grilled octopus. What a sexy dish. The most tender octopus I have ever had! They must use enzymes to tenderize or something. It had a down-home kind of comfort food sort of elegance to it. Tasty and big flavors.. . Course 4: Giant raviolo with ricotta cheese filling and a browned-butter egg yolk sauce. My favorite dish of the evening. Soft, creamy, rich, silky, savory, sexy. Loved it. I still taste it. Always a good sign.. . (This is where they brough in some kind of lousy red house wine that was remniscent of Chuck Shaw to me, for $7 a glass, It would have been better to skip it).. . Course 5: Some kind of white fish with caper berries and tomatoes. Grilled skin was crispy, vegetable melange beneath was lovely and flavorful, it went all together pretty well.. . Course 6: Salmon with sweet peppers and strange little fried bread croutony thingies. My least favorite dish of the evening. Flavors were nice (especially the peppers), but they did not go well together to me. Salmon was moist, but more overcooked than I would have liked. Overall, kind of a cacophony of flavors.. . Course 7: Warm chocolate cake with some kind of burbon or nut ice cream.  Chocolate was too rich and heavy for my taste...even sharing it with two others! I love dark chocolate, but it was kinda overwhelming to me. Good ice cream though.. . Course 8: Panna Cotta with Frutti di Bosco. A nice antithesis of the other dessert...light, elegant, delicious. I wanted one for myself. . . +2 cocktails, one cappucino, and two espressos, tax and tip = $324 for the three of us. Not bad.. . Good Italian comfort food with a hybridization of refined elegance. I like their style. I'd go back, and order my own courses. Probably may even give them 5 stars then.. . ---Anthony
