ReviewID: uIT7iAPpW9nXmKTdHPpO6g
ReviewerID: Pw3vnLJ19OjT3tARRKeMYg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
THE GIST: Extreme sausages galore freshly grilled to order with some great beers and other nonalcoholic beverage selections! We see this place going well over 1000 reviews on Yelp soon! It's a must try for all sausage and beer lovers! . . OVERALL: After having this place in our bookmarks for months and with sausages that have meats like duck, rabbit, buffalo, alligator, and rattlesnake we just had to come and try this place! . . WHAT WE TRIED AND HOW IT TASTED: . 1) BELGIAN FRIES (Small: $3.50, Large: $5.50  get the large you will thank yourself later) : SUPER HIGHLY RECOMMENDED esp. if you are enjoying a beer or three!: These fries are DEEEEELICIOUSSSS!! Try them with the Chipotle Aioli dipping sauce (our fav). These fries are thick, fried and seasoned perfectly! SO GOOD! . . 2) AUSTIN BLUES ($6.75): HIGHLY RECOMMENDED! We enjoy lots of flavor and spice in our sausages. This one has a great peppery taste, spicy but not too spicy, and a hint of sweetness..pork never does you wrong! . . 3) BUFFALO, BEEF &amp; PORK W/ CHIPOTLE PEPPERS ($7.75): RECOMMENDED! Well compared to the Austin Blues, this one did not have as much as a robust flavor but it was still good for different reasons. It had a very meaty taste and the chipotle complimented the meats. Now if you are dying to know what buffalo tastes like, this sausage doesn't really answer the question since it just tastes like a beefy sausage! It's cool to try once, but we prefer the spicy or more flavorful sausages! . . 4) DUCK &amp; BACON W/ JALAPENO PEPPERS ($7.75): This sausage was a little disappointing... couldn't really taste any duck or bacon or jalapeno. It tasted like a bland and a little-too-dry sausage really. It was fun to try once but don't think we will order this one again. It may have been bland because we were already down one Allagash White (see BEER ME! section) so maybe that affected our taste buds. . . BEER ME! . We love the selection of beers here! Our recommendation are: . 1) ALLAGASH WHITE: if you like Hoegaarden or Blue Moon or Blanche De Chambly-- we recommend this beer (one of our favs on tap). It's smooth, light tasting, slight floral and goes great with the fries or sausages! . . 2) KONINGS HOVEN/LA TRAPPE: At 10.5% ABV (Alcohol By Volume) you would think this beer will leave the worst after taste ever and will truly give you the bitter beer face... well you haven't tried Konings Hoven then! This is a must try for those of you who love the perfection of having high alcohol content yet still having a great taste to the beer or if you are just trying to get a fast buzz ;). . . SERVICE: This place is quite hip with a mid-20/early 30s staff and the customer service was excellent and very friendly. Matt the Bartender was exceptionally great in suggesting specific beers and allowing us to taste a couple before purchasing them. Now this was during lunch time so things were a little slower so don't expect to taste test all the beer on tap during the busy hours! Keep up the friendly service guys, it's much appreciated! . . ENVIRONMENT: Located in the Arts District of Downtown LA and a 5 minute walk to Little Tokyo, Wurstkuche is located i in a warehouse turned cute urban-chic gastropub. Spacious, plenty of seating and very clean for a sausage and beer place. . . SUBSTITUTE PLACE FOR ORANGE COUNTY PEOPLE: Now Downtown LA is a super fun place but with traffic and a 40+ mile drive we cannot make it out to this wonderful place all the time. When we are craving a fast sausage/ beer fix and can't make it out to LA we head on over to VALHALLA TABLE in Costa Mesa, CA (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ) which is very similar but can never compare to WURSTKUCHE! . . LAST WORDS: Why can't there be some type of bullet train from OC to LA?
