ReviewID: uJWCbQWRJNI5Lt7UIZzo7Q
ReviewerID: VNkM5LH4eKrmVP8mBiUcdg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Grand Lux Cafe
Category: American (New)
Why am I up right now? I still feel drunk and my throat is dry, I hope I'm not getting sick. Well I'm craving a BLT like I was when we were looking for ANY open place in WeHo that was open on New Years Day. We looked down 3rd, down Melrose,  Beverly, and all the little streets in between, and we finally gave in with a big sigh and came here.. . I always drive by this place, but never come in. People told me how a like it was with Cheesecake Factory, but I didn't realize how much. I like the Cheesecake Factory, even though this place has a bit more pizazz in terms of the design of it. . . It has the swirls on the wall, and the dim mood/ novelty lighting.  We valeted our car, $7 and right in front of us was the garage entrance to the Grande Luxe. The waiting area makes you feel nervous because you can't see the rest of the place and don't know what attire to expect out of the people who are eating. . . We waited a few moments, laughed at some whatever girl in a red plaid shirt who obviously didn't know what size shirt to wear, and got stared at by some chinese tourists. . . We were seated with a basket of bread which I asked for some more of, yet did not receive until the end of the meal. . . My friend got a hamburger which was in big portion and my other friend got the Weinershnitzl something something which is Veal. It looked dry, I craving my BLT as I am now, yet now I really just want a soft and fluffy one after the one I got at this place. The bread was pretty hard and kind of hurt my gums, I know I sound like an old person saying that LOL. It was overstuffed with dry lettuce and a minimal amount of bacon. . . I also got their "Spicy Mary", which I don't want to think of alcohol right now. It wasn't very much of a "spicy" mary as it was a "mild" mary. It came with asparagus on top which fell to the floor as soon as they put it on the table.. . The bill came out to $70 somehow, Ehh I'll stick to the cheesecake with the advertisement menu.
