ReviewID: UKEgx3sgYGyG95WwUFHkDw
ReviewerID: a5aAfojhrYjlTdwi3-cFAg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
i decided i wanted to do something low key for my bday this year and have a nice dinner with my girl friends. the website says for parties of 6 or more to call in for the reservation. so i call in for our party of 8, and as soon as i say 8, the tone of the lady's voice changes to biyatch. hm. . . the day of the dinner, they call to confirm our reservation but leave a message since i was at work. so i call back a few hours later and again, as soon as i say 8... biyatch! that kind of bothered me but several of my friends tried to reason with me and say "maybe they're busy..." but seriously, thats no excuse. especially for a restaurant like yamashiros. this was going to be my first time and its not quite starting out on the right foot here. . . so when 6/8 of my party gets there (and the other two are getting off the freeway) we tell the hostess that we are here and get a buzzer. maybe after a half an hour we get seated. we got pretty good seats. it was facing the front of the restaurant, right behind the patio type area. by the time we sat, the rest of our party showed up. . . our waitress came and took our drink orders.. paying special attention to MY date. who just happen to ask a simple question about an item on the menu. after that point, she seemed to ONLY talk to him and ONLY make eye contact with him, FOR THE REST OF THE NIGHT. wtf, git yo hands of him!?! each time after she'd leave the table, my girl friends and i would make dumb comments and laugh out loud. maybe she heard us talking shit because after a while, she didnt come by as often. hahah . . after we ordered our food, it felt like it took an hour or so to get our food! hm. my date and i split the Reclining Buddha (shrimp, chilies, cilantro, peanuts, cabbage, soy paper, spicy ponzu) to start. it was okay. it reminded me of a spring roll from Noodle World haha. so nothing real special. it was pretty fresh and refreshing, so it was okay. i ordered the American Wagyu (shishito-brocollini hash, crispy onions, tomato-ginger salsa), as per the waitress' recommendation. i ordered it medium rare (how i love my meat) and it was a bit tough still. the salsa was really good though and gave a good taste to the meat. my date ordered some seafood mixed plate or something (lobster, shrimp, etc) (must have been a special that night because i dont see it on the menu) he seemed to really enjoy that plate. my girl friend next to me got the sweet and spicy shrimp (bok choy, snow peas, scallions, steamed rice) i tried one of her shrimps which was pretty good in flavor and nice and plump. . . after we finish eating, we order dessert and while we were waiting for our desserts, the waitress brought a complimentary dessert for "the birthday girl while you wait". it was some vanilla bean light custard on top of a light short cake or something. it was okay, but nothing i'd order again. our desserts came, and the date and i split the ice cream cookie sandwich (Warm peanut butter-chocolate chip cookies, dulce de leche ice cream, caramel &amp; chocolate sauces, candied walnuts) this was actually pretty good. i couldnt really eat too much of it since i dont have much of a sweet tooth. it wasnt super sweet but just the whole combination of peanut butter, chocolate sauce, dulce de leche, caramel, candied walnuts. thats a stomach ache waiting to happen haha . . after we finished up, we decided to check out the infamous view. we walked down towards the pagoda, where the outdoor lounge area is. that was a pretty chill area. they had little couches, heat lamps, nice music, dim lighting and a little bar. . . overall... im going to have to lean towards a bit overrated. i honestly think it would have been a better experience if i had gone on a date and it was quiet and you can just enjoy the ambiance and make it romantic. the food was okay, but nothing to die for. service was okay. my girl friend commented it wasnt the kind of service you'd expect for what you're paying. the view was nice, yes, but nothing like looking out at the ocean in hawaii... i digress.
