ReviewID: uL6zSLdWpSRXgD27VXzL5w
ReviewerID: RclKVs5XTI_8BX6ivwXLCA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tito&#39;s Tacos
Category: Mexican
Tito's Tacos... coming from a native of NorCal (where places like Tito's simply do not exist), you gotta love this place. I went there for the first time a couple years ago and I must say, it was taco-surrealism. The first things I noticed about this place were the long lines (they move fast), and patrons walking away from the place in all directions with boxes full of tacos!. . When I tried my first Tito's Taco, I wasn't blown away to be honest. Then again I had just eaten somewhere else and wasn't too, too hungry (I tend to do that alot in LA). All of the elements for a good (American-style) taco are there for sure though. Crunchy fried corn tortilla, tasty stewed/braised beef, fresh lettuce, that bright orange grated (cheddar?) cheese, fresh salsa... Sounds pretty good, right? And you know, it took my second visit with some other friends for me to get it. Tito's tacos ARE pretty damned good.. . Sure the tacos aren't authentic Mexican cuisine, but I don't think Tito's is claiming to be so. Come on, Mexican-American cuisine has been in California forever. How can anyone be so quick to label Tito's as non-authentic Mexican? How can anyone complain about getting three big, tasty tacos and a soda for around six bucks?. . The ingredients are so fresh at Tito's, it almost seems like you're eating something healthy (okay, that might be a stretch). Plus they give you (a lot of) chips and salsa with every order (the chips are better than at most taquerias too).. . In addition, there's that weird, neat vibe that comes from the kitchen full of people preparing all that food for the masses of patrons. Bubbling cauldrons of deep red house-made chili, stainless fryers full of taco shell tortillas, the blur of hands filling boxes upon boxes with tacos...  It's a fast-food spectacle. If anyone tells you they've never stopped to watch that kitchen in action for a few minutes, they're lying.. . Another thing that stands out to me at Tito's is that practically everyone eating there just seems kind of... happy. The first time I went, it was crowded and there was nowhere to sit. Before I knew it, strangers were scooting this way and that to make room at their picnic table (Okay, that was kinda gay, but I'm from the Bay Area where that kind of communal-dining experience doesn't strike... often).. . I understand why people aren't crazy about Tito's Tacos. I understand why some people think it's all hype. I sometimes think it's not such a great taco, but often enough I think to myself "Damn, I want one of those tacos right now!". And I am DEFINITELY jealous that tens of thousands of Angelinos have childhood memories of going to Tito's!!! Who could argue with that? You COULD argue, but it'd be arguing with one HELL of a lot of people. Just look at the lines at Tito's.... . Tips for Tito's Tacos: 1.) When it's your turn, place your order and then step aside. You pay once your food is ready. 2.) Ask for the (free) picante green chiles salsa (in addition to, not instead of the red). If you like things spicey, you'll find the red salsa too mild. 3.) Think twice before ordering the Guacamole. It's not what you're craving. 4.) Turn down your speakers on your computer when visiting the Tito's Tacos website!
