ReviewID: uL9jdEv1QvdM9dN1Inoazw
ReviewerID: V7up8nHZ62olEq42b6LhUg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Maison Akira
Category: French
This review is strictly for Maison Akira's Sunday Brunch ('cuz that's all I've tried).. . I've been here 3 times for Sunday Brunch, and the very first time, I was fairly impressed because they have a bunch of stuff that you just don't see on a typical brunch menu.  On subsequent visits, however, I realized that I was just impressed by the novelty of their menu and not so much by the food itself.  I mean, it all looks pretty impressive with a table dedicated to just desserts, selection of sushi (although limited), salads, cheeses, salamis, roast leg of lamb, prime rib roast, etc.  However, regardless of what they say on their website, their brunch menu never changes, not seasonally, not ever.  And the quality is definitely not bad, but it's nothing spectacular either:. . Sushi:  They were typical buffet quality sushi with very limited selection.  Just because the dude is Japanese, it doesn't mean he's qualified to make sushi (I'm Japanese and I'm barely qualified to "eat" sushi :-).  Bottom line, you should eat sushi at a sushi bar, not a French restaurant.. . Cheeses/salamis:   Probably similar in quality to what you can get at Whole Foods Market.  They were good, but I have a Whole Foods less than a mile from where I live.. . Salads:  Nice selection.  The soba (buckwheat noodle) salad was surprisingly good.. . Roast leg of lamb:  I don't eat lamb, but my wife said it was good (and my wife is always right. . . she told me so herself).. . Prime rib roast:  Good, but can be somewhat fatty at times.  Aus jus was nicely flavored.. . Basil chawanmushi (egg custard):  WTF??  Once was enough.. . Desserts (for some reason the dessert table is at the very beginning of the buffet line):  Nice selection of flan, cookies, petit fours, etc.  But for the most part, there was nothing too memorable.. . Service:  Attentive and efficient.. . The one thing nice about doing brunch at Maison Akira is that Chef Akira actually stands by the buffet tables and serves you the lamb and prime roast himself.  He's all smiles and personable, so, it does enhance the experience.. . At $38/person, it's not a bad deal at all, but unless you really can't get enough of the stuff they serve, one brunch visit should be plenty.  From reading other reviews, it sounds like their lunch and dinner are completely at another level.  I guess I'm going to have to make a trip out to Old Pas some evening and find out for myself.
