ReviewID: uLsP89vP6GGOIjn8EduCig
ReviewerID: h02t1zNqvg7uUC39WxzN2g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
The food here is perfect remedy for those of us with cold hands and feet who are coming off of a golf course on super chilly day as the ones we are having this early winter.. I'm not saying the food here is great, because it's not. It's pretty good. Heck, it's better than some ramen places that I've been to, but I feel that the food is much better at the Fountain Valley, Shin Sen Gumi. Maybe the cooks at Fountain Valley have more experienced with the menu? Isn't that the original location?. Regardless of that, we all felt revived and a whole lot warmer after our meal of : hakata ramen, gyoza, pork-belly and kimchee, asparagus-bacon &amp; corn, and tanaka fried rice. . All totaling 50$ for 4 people.. Not bad.. . Now. Here's where my Shin Sen Gumi experience is less than favorable.. Our server just happen to be also the host, which totally sucked ass. Big-fricken-time!. Every time he'd ask one of us what we wanted, he stop us from ordering to greet the people at the door or bid farewell to those who were leaving.. After the first 2 times, I was wondering W? T? F?. I was ready to break him off a piece.. As you can tell, I was irritated.. Cold, hungry and very irritated.. Look, I'm ALL for greeting and thanking the customers for their business, but how retarded is it to sacrifice the service of the customers that you are suppose to be handling at the moment, for the ones that are already fed, content and leaving? He stopped us 3 more times to greet other and what-not. Shit, put a sign up or let someone else handle them, but don't fuck-up our experience, or you get write-ups on Yelp, like mine!. Also, the food was comparably slower getting to our table.. I see 2 server, one runner/busser and...1 cook? There are about 30 people having dinner and the the place isn't emptying out and there is only one cook?. Yeah, it was gonna be a long night for everyone.
