ReviewID: UNbswLQcf0IX_0FBMoqnfg
ReviewerID: GKvNaZsjY46086gsVslf3A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Was talking to a friend a few months back and he mentioned the opening of Mozza, a collaborative effort between Nancy Silverton and Mario Batali. Just from hearing that, my interest was immediately piqued and it finally culminated in my first trip here just this past weekend.. . In a word? Wow.. . The place is crowded, but being a pizza place that has both tables and bar seating, the atmosphere seems right. I showed up with four other friends, and as soon as we sat down, there was not a single moment where our bottles of water were empty.. . The food is really the highlight here. We started off with the brussels sprouts antipasti, and while I was skeptical as I don't usually like brussels sprouts, all doubts were immediately gone as soon as the first bite. The sprouts were incredibly soft and tender, and the balsamic vinegar gave it a nice tartness that really took away the bitter flavor that I am used to from brussels sprouts. It is also topped with breadrcrumbs to give an added texture to the dish, and it worked out very well. This was definitely a choice I didn't regret.. . The pizzas were delicious as well. We ordered four: the "standard" margherita, the pizza alla benno, the wild spinach, and a meat pizza with fennel sausage. All of them were top notch, though I especially liked the pizza alla benno. The layered flavors of spicy, sweet, and salty made for one of the best pizzas I have had in recent memory.. . As a few of us were still hungry after the meal, we decided on trying another antipasti dish I had been seeing on other tables all day: the bone marrow al forno. I was not dissapointed in the least. This was my first time having bone marrow, and to describe it, it would be like a buttery, beefy gel that made for a delicious spread on the slices of grilled baguette that came with the meal. Add to that some roasted garlic and some sea salt, and this was one of the most delicious things I've ever eaten. I can now see why Anthony Bourdain says that he would like bone marrow to be his last meal. It's that good.. . If you show up early enough, street parking is manageable, but in a pinch, there is a valet available for $8.50. Reservations are recommended, as this place gets packed!
