ReviewID: UNdd7X4ly4Nx4KlPUL9Z4w
ReviewerID: Oi8xpbeGownHuA68_8NsZg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: El Cid 2
Category: Mexican
I have been frequenting El Cid in Logan Square for some time... mostly because it's near my house and it's hard to find good fish tacos in Chicago (not fried). The food is average here, but the service has always been good and the patio is really nice when we are fortunate enough to have nice weather in Chicago.  The patio has always been a great place to hang out with friends. . . Since the upstairs has been added to this place... my friends and I have really had real problems with the management at El Cid. The upstairs is nice, and when we first saw it, we were excited that our casual little "let's grab some tacos and talk" place seemed to be turning into a cooler place. Unfortunately, there are some major machismo issues going on with the management - and a ridiculous "No Pitchers Upstairs" rule. To make a few long stories short - there seems to be at least one particular male manager will argue with you endlessly (at least if you are female) until you are so insulted you walk out and leave. Once, a group of 14 of us left after complaining about the "no pitchers upstairs" rule. The manager scoffed at our questioning of the rule and offered us no solution/alternative. In my opinion, if, as a manager, you have an attractive and successful group of young women who come in to spend a lot of money at your establishment (also, most of us frequent the joint), you do what you can to solve the problem - and you don't talk down to the customer. We walked out after we realized we were talking to a macho-man. We decided to get pitchers of margaritas and food down the street and we all got to talking about how many of us have had bad experiences at El Cid ever since the upstairs opened. Seems that this has been a problem with a lot of people. . . WATCH OUT for the rule "No Pitchers Upstairs."  It is really unreasonable.  They are trying to act like the upstairs is a different restaurant than the downstairs - it's not. It's the same exact food and drinks. They just want groups to spend more money on individual drinks, when upstairs. They say it is an issue of carrying the pitchers up and down the stairs - they have nowhere to keep the pitchers at the upstairs bar. The bar upstairs is BIG and they carry ALL of the food up and down the stairs, as well as the dishes, so there shouldn't really be an issue. They also say that they only have premium taquila upstairs... ok... so, charge more for BETTER pitchers of margaritas. Yeah right. The management is very stubborn and will not bend.  . . I'm disappointed that El Cid management/ownership doesn't feel that their customers deserve to be treated with more respect. They obviously assumed their customers wouldn't realize that they were being ripped off by their "no pitchers upstairs" rule. My friends and I miss our little sweet dive, with the patio. Even though the food isn't amazing, we felt like management was pretty down-to-earth and everyone there cared about pleasing the customer. Now, it feels like some guy just wants to make his upstairs the "cool place" and rip off people who don't have enough sense to walk out and complain about the unreasonable rule. . . My friends and I are tempted to go to the patio when it's nice out, because it's easy and close, but then we remind ourselves of the macho-man who talked down to us for ten minutes and we quickly regain our senses.
