ReviewID: uneipe4ctP-b__NwHskD5A
ReviewerID: fkWSaho-ueYc84AxapmRbQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Opera
Category: Chinese
This was the worst place I've dined at in terms of service and value. . . Our waiter was totally full of himself and we would have to flag him over several times and wait forever to order food, request a fork, or request a beverage refill. Their drinks are not worth it, as they can't even get carbonated soda drinks to taste right.... . The food was okay, but seriously, I could pay one-third of their price for orange chicken near my house...AND get double the helping WITH way more flavor. I was expecting to fine dine and be impressed by fancy chinese food, but all that was fancy was the decor and layout of the restaurant.... . The meals come with rice, and the waiter tried to give us one small plate, with about 1 cup of white rice for 4+ people to share. Was he REALLY SERIOUS? We asked for more rice and he seemed disturbed to give us each more than what he thought was an adequate portion.. . Also, the waiter convinced someone is our party of 6 to order the "duck special" that was not on their menu, but was the best of the house, and what "the restaurant was known for"...our friend obliged to his hard sell and did not like the meal at all...worse yet, it cost twice as much as other entrees...the poor duck, cooked 3 different ways, was left in its platters...hardly untouched...Our waiter boxed up the duck with an attitude after being told that it was not enjoyed at all...Our friend did tell the waiter to take it away and that he did not want it, so the duck was left at the table for the waiter upon our exit. . . I would not go here for a nice dining experience. I would rather go somewhere that has nice decor AND great food. This place has below average food, and the whole point of going to a restaurant is to eat good food....not to look at the pretty design on the walls and ceiling. . . We were so disappointed to have taken four of our friends to this restaurant, especially with two of them being from out of town!
