ReviewID: uNRLHltTTILsjG4LOgesDA
ReviewerID: TsCsb9v3wVce048puy7LBg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chateau de Saigon
Category: Vietnamese
This place causes and satisfies the deepest of cravings. I had been thinking about it all week and when my dad called me and asked me to go out to dinner, this was the first thing that came to mind. He just had surgery and as a result is on a pretty strict diet of lean foods. We ended up both getting dishes with so much seafood, I felt a little guilty for not consulting my Monterrey bay aquarium sustainable seafood pocket guide. His was shrimp, scallops, squid, greens, mushrooms and noodles in a light but flavorful sauce. I had the combination hot pot - very nice warmly-spiced brown sauce with lots of ginger, tofu, pork, beef, chicken, scallops, shrimp, squid, and more. All of the meats were tender and enjoyable, the scallops in both dishes were especially nice, and the squid was never rubbery. The servers are all super nice and competent, food arrived quickly and very very hot (except the perfectly chill papaya salad of course). I even shared a reassuring eye-roll with one of the servers when my dad drunkenly and embarrassingly tried to pronounce the Vietnamese names of the dishes. With two entrees, two apps, iced coffee, avocado shake and two glasses of wine (against doctor's orders) the check came to just over $50 ...The cheapest dinner I've ever asked my dad to take me to. And very, very satisfying. . I've been here twice before, and both times were with my roommate who is vegan, and since we usually share food, I ended up getting tofu dishes both times: first, the lemongrass tofu, second the salt and pepper tofu. Both are delicious wedges of silky tofu breaded in the most crisp and cellophane-y panko-or-something-like-it I've ever experienced. Both are also very salty, and perked up with lots of fresh peppers and green herbs. . The craving which to me represents hunger in its purest form is also very well satisfied here: beef jerky and green papaya salad is incredible. I have dreams about it, and in the dreams I am always frustrated and lost and broke and all I want is my dang green papaya salad.  Fortunately, the papaya is always waiting in my waking life.
