ReviewID: uO0FyvpLaOXf29jrhLvL0w
ReviewerID: n_3K79RfWI9x7QHW4Di7qw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
So I heard about this place from my best friends who were ranting and raving about the Sha-bang sauce, and pounds of shrimp. They were so convincing that I decided to drive out 40minutes from Northridge to Alhambra on Sunday night just to try it...It's hard to find good, cheap sea food out in the Valley. I get there at around 7:40pm and 6 ppl are ahead of me on the waiting list. I end up waiting for a little over an hour. But it's all good because the super bowl is on and bear is only 2 freaken dollars! It's so refreshing to see everyone around you digging in to there cajun smothered crawfish and shrimp. And yes, my boyfriend and I were the only people who weren't Asian in the whole restraunt. I thought that was interesting. We finally get seated an hour and 4 beers later and I order what is now my favorite food as of now.. 2 pounds of shrimp,  mild spice, Sha-bang. 1 pound of crab, mild spice, garlic and butter sauce. Gumbo, medium spice. fried catfish and cajun fries, . . 1) Ok, so the first thing I will describe to you is the shrimp. While I do not often eat shrimp wit the eyes still attached, and that has not been unpeeled, this particular shrimp, smothered in the heavenly concotion was dEElish eyes and all! (Just pull off the head, peel the rest and enjoy) Occasionally I dipped it back into the sauce after I peeled the skin. . . The mild spice was just right for me. I had just enough spice to be considered spicy, but not enough to disrupt the taste or make me pant for water. . . 2) Second thing I will describe to you is the crab, which is my favorite. i'M Glad I got the garlic butter sauce for this because it did not over power the delicious natural taste of the crab, but it gave it much flavor. Do keep in mind that it isn't  simply garlic and butter...there is a tomatoe base of some sort-- or something that makes the sauce red. Anywho, the crab legs were only $17 per pound and they were MASSIVE and MEATY! Oh and the lobster was cheaper than the crab...the reviews on Yelp were WRONG about lobster being freakin $45-$52 per pound. They are insane. But, I didn't get the lobster because they just serve whole lobster and not lobster legs...the crab was sold with crab legs. Anywho, it's important to not get everything in Sha-bang because you will get tired of the taste. Variety is the key.. . 3) Gumbo is not all that great...the taste is nothing special and it's also served in a really small bowl.. . 4) I thought the fried catfish was nasty..bread just doesn't belong on fish to me. And when you dipped it in the sauce it got all soggy and nasty. And even if you peeled the bread off the actual catfish had absolutly no flavor or seasoning on it! Ugh. That was a waste of $9. Anywho, everything else was good.. . I just wish I had ordered maybe 3 pounds of crab and perhaps  3 pounds of shrimp. Next time I come I will do take out because I hate waiting for freakin 2 hours. I will also order like a HUGE amount so I don't have to drive 40min to Alhambra again...it's just way too far. I don't know why they don't make one in the valley.
