ReviewID: Uo2Qib4m00JslM20GI-c_Q
ReviewerID: zc_sA7qcaVV43zSM2ENwEg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Eleven City Diner
Category: Diners
My heart was set on the Bongo Room this morning but there was a 45 minute wait.  I'd remember seeing a diner just up the street but had never stopped in.. . We walked in a found a pretty big crowd waiting but it seemed like they were moving through the list quickly.  They told us 30 mins for 2, but it was closer to 20 BONUS!. . The Bloody Mary was AWESOME.  Fresh celery stalk, great salt and spice mix on the rim, giant olives, I don't even like Bloodys but this was unreal. It was $9.50 (This part is RIDICULOUS) but almost worth it.  If it were $7.50 you'd feel like you got a deal.. . Our meals were great, I went for the breakfast and the GF did lunch. We were both really pleased.. . Two complaints that prevented me from going with 4 stars (and honestly would make me think twice about coming back, or at least consider a time when it weren't so busy).... . Ordering drinks while you're waiting for a table.  So get this.  I go up to the bartender, who has no customers and looks kinda bored, and order a Bloody.  She says she can't serve me one if I'm waiting for a table, I have to go see the hostess.  I go to the hostess and let her know I'd like a bloody mary.  She checks my ID then directs me to a cashier's station.  Another guy comes up and takes my order and money.  He then gets a runner to go get my bloody and come track me down.  So to recap, if you want a drink while you're waiting you've got to have the ID checked by the hostess, the order taken by the clerk, a runner delivering the order, and another dude bringing it to you.  I'm not sure what Rocket Surgeon came up with this plan but it's absolutely idiotic.  What could have been a 3 minute exchange with the bartender turned into a 10-12 minute wait and a scavenger hunt throughout the restaurant to get a drink.  BOO. . Issue 2 - The ridiculous, and unfortunately non-stop, shtick of servers yelling "hot soup" when carrying anything through the diner.  I'm not kidding, NON-STOP.  Single cup of soda... "HOT SOUP!!  HOT SOUP!!  HOT SOUP!!"  Tray of Bloody Marys "HOT SOUP!! HOT SOUP!!"  Bagels and lox? "HOT SOUP!!  HOT SOUP!!"  This got little routine got tired right quick.  Forget having a relaxing meal with your friends or uninterrupted conversation... not gonna happen.. . Overall it was a decent place, and if I'm in the neighborhood I'd probably go back.  I definitely WON'T be back if there are any crowds that a server might have to wade through.  I'll probably have "HOT SOUP" ringing in my ears for days.
