ReviewID: UPVq4_0ePzjpeltsNOXV6w
ReviewerID: C1AebaLdwqjOpZRaHKWKAw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
Okay I've never had to wait more than 10 minutes for a hot dog so I'm flabbergasted at having to wait almost an hour for one at Pink's and it was pretty late when we arrived here and there was still a huge line of people ordering hot dogs.. . First of all, there's a little lot next to the pink's but with so many people standing in line you can imagine how fast that fills up. Your only option other than that lot is street parking which isn't too bad since there's a lot of spots along the street.  But, just be careful where you stand since there's a lot of critters running around like roaches, spiders, etc. Yuck!. . Okay, so once we parked, we stood in line and the line sometimes seems like it takes forever.  Too bad people take forever to decide what they want to order because they either haven't been there before or they keep changing their mind about what they want to order which holds up everyone else behind them.. . This was the first time I had been here but I already knew what I wanted after standing in line for so long.  After almost an hour of waiting in line I ordered my chili cheese dogs (I ordered two) and was good to go. My food was made almost as fast as I ordered it.  The line was the longest wait so be mindful if you are planning to come here.. . Ugh, the worst part about standing in line is seeing the critters and bugs walking around and getting closer to you.  You almost feel like getting out of line and going somewher else but you keep your composure and wait patitenly while trying not to pay attention to any bugs that may be crawling your way. eeks!. . While everyone else was waiting for their meals, I decided to look around the place.  There are pictures of celebrities all around this place but it didn't make me want to come here any more than going to costco or any other establishment that had the same products for a short wait time and maybe a better neighborhood.  . . If you plan on eating here, there's really not many places to sit.  There are some places inside but a couple tables outside.  IMO, I wouldn't sit outside unless you wanted the critters to attack you or you wanted to get bit by all the mosquitoes swarming around.  Your best bet would be to go back to your car and drive or just eat your meal in your car.. . The guys who were working that night were quick and nice and didn't mind that some people were rude.  They kept their composure and did what they needed to do and even greeted people with a smile as they said hello and goodbye.. . The meal wasn't that great but it wasn't too bad either.  At least I can now say that i've had a Pink's hot dog and not have to worry about being a first timer every again when it comes to Pink's. haha
