ReviewID: Uq8tzTCv0zStJrT9h6kI8A
ReviewerID: 6GxTMYZikTZxgBeOPCmsJw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
I certainly wanted to like Fraiche. I love the "new" Culver City,  people walking around, easy parking,  casual vibe with an emphasis on food...I count Beacon as one of my favorite restaurants, and like, despite some flaws with noise, Ford's Filling Station. So I was excited when I made my reservation for 4 at 6:15 (the only available time) for Friday night. . . My initial impression was strong- inside/outside already buzzing with people despite the early time, and the the angles of the restaurant are great- jagged walls with a high ceiling. Also an open kitchen (seems to be the new thing these day- see, The Foundry- a way better dining experience). The bar was also angled into the corner, with warm tones- again, I was feeling jazzed. My friend is already there, although his girlfriend is running late, but we sit anyway- the manager lets us pick a four-top that we like (again...a nice touch and I am pleased). I will say at this point, that we are well-dressed, twenty-somethings who go out to dine quite a bit.. . We sit and the waitress comes over- she is pleasant and we tell her this is our first time at the restaurant.  She tells us that this "is single-handily the best restaurant in the country" and "the only better place she has ever had a meal is in Boston". Um...okay, strong words although Chef Jason Travi clearly has worked at some well known restaurants including Spago and Le Terza. A bit of an oversell but I appreciate the pride she has. She laughs when I told her I had read and heard good things about the restaurant, telling us  people either loved it or hated it. These two comments were the first things that made me nervous.... . We put in some drink orders- a bottle of wine (a nice Vermentino, which she recommended), a whiskey for my friend and then three appetizers: a wild mushroom salad, a boudin noir (blood sausage) and a beef tartare. Another ten minutes, we drink and at this point, its creeping closer to 7 and my friends girlfriend is still not here. The manager comes up to the table, pointedly looks at his watch and says, "You had a reservation for 6:15." We say we did (though truth be told, we weren't seated until about 6:25) "Okay, well, we have a bunch of people coming in at 8:30 and we are going to need to clear the table by 8:15 or so." Wow...I totally understand, if we are sitting there, eating bread waiting for the late arrival...but at this point, we had ordered about $100 dollars worth of food and drink. We were clearly proceeding with the meal....I think to myself, maybe he doesn't know we had ordered already...but wait- he had served us our wine. We say, "okay, thanks, our fourth will be here any second.". . The three of us look at each other, surprised. The apps come up, a minute or two later...with the waitress. As the food runners are putting the food on the table she says, "Hey guys...just so you know, you have to be outta here at 8:15" WOW!!! Okay, I was in the restaurant industry for 3 years and yes, you want to move tables..but this is ridiculous. . . I steel myself..okay, service lacks a little something but the food is gonna be awesome- but it's not. The beef tartare reminds me of a finger foods passed at a wedding, and despite her promise that it was chopped prime rib, there is a real lack of richness or flavor. The mushroom salad is oversalted and the dijon-creme fraiche was nowhere to be seen on the boudin noir, which is insignificant, at best. The plating is terrible. The mushroom salad, a mess of endive and arugla and the beef tartare just sooo plain on toast.. . Our fourth gets there moments later and we order entrees. We were boring- three Monkfish and the Lamb Spezzatino. The entrees at least gives Fraiche my second star. The plating is again boring, surprising me, considering the restaurant design. The lamb is basically a lamb stew, with SUPER-bleh plain white plates. It's good, certainly good but nothing great. I liked my monkfish a lot [three-filet type cuts on spinach, in a white-wine with shallots] but my girlfriend's is way buttery. Side of fries were crispy good.. . My favorite part of the meal- we have finished eating (its now 7:45), there are 5 empty tables we see in the rest of the restaurant, and the waitress comes up with dessert menus. My buddy looks at her and dryly says, "oh, do we have time?" Needless to say, we did not get dessert. Final cost: about $70 a person. . . As we leave the restaurant, I introduce myself to the manager and tell him my concern about the rushing out of the restaurant, including the fact that I had worked in the restaurant industry for about 3 years. He barely looks at me in the eye as he fusses around with the Open Table Machine at the host stand, and tosses a "Ya, sorry...I didn't realize we had both said something" to me. . . RIiight. Basically, the helpful bussers and runners along with the design gave this two stars..going to Culver City- don't go here.
