ReviewID: UqKa0LS23YQ5b3pDUyov5Q
ReviewerID: 4SJS_m-JXc0oASx6x5Mjkw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Goddamn, I have no idea how to rate this place because I was simply too distracted during the meal to concentrate on the burgers. Let's just say the food is a 3 but atmosphere and service is 4 so I'm just going to say it's a 3.5.. . I met the vivacious Namella K at Umami last night. I found street parking but they have a $2 valet. She utilized this as she had her little doggie in the car and the valet guy was very nice about it. Everyone we encountered at Umami was super nice. Various people helped us throughout the night including the guy who wedged something under the table to keep it from moving (side note, why do restaurant tables always wobble?) to the hot guy who opened our wine and described desserts to us.. . We ordered the Triple Pork and Stilton burgers along with the house spread and garlic aioli spreads. We also got french fries and onion rings. . . The Triple Pork was way too chorizo-y for me. I was kind of bummed out the bacon was barely discernible. I would not order this again but others might like the flavor.. . I did enjoy the Stilton burger with the onions. But like I said, I was a bit distracted. I was listening to Namella expound on life and love and every now and then, some brilliant flash of FLAVOR would explode through my mouth. Ah, good burger. . . As for the size of them being too small. They're not. However, they're not huge like regular American burgers but I would say they're just a bit smaller than 8 oz's burgers. We split the burgers and I was quite full. I ate the bulk of the sides though and we did have dessert. . . The fries were fine. I liked them better than the onion rings which were very greasy. They left a pool of oil in the bowl they were in.. . Of the dipping sauces, I liked the house spread best then the garlic aioli. The Umami ketchup was too sweet and vaguely Asian-y. Namella said it was better the first time she had it. Last night compared it to canned tomato sauce a la Chef Boyardee.  Hmm. Since I don't eat ketchup anyway, I was happy to skip this other than the first taste.. . For dessert, we had the two Cake Monkey cakes available; Raspberry Red Velvet and the Chocolate Peanut Marshmallow. Both went really well with the Barolo wine I brought in. . . The restaurant is fairly small and they don't take reservations. Luckily, we beat the rush and I would recommend going in smaller groups as it would be hard to get a table for a large party. There's only one unisex restroom which seemed to be constantly occupied. . . Umami is close to Little Bar so it might be a fun burger and wine bar night.
