ReviewID: Ur07mfKBapdfUWMONQai0A
ReviewerID: huayr-WjhExgJPIZcRhZIQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Busy Bee Cafe
Category: Soul Food
i hope this does not come out racist, as its not meant to be.  But when i go eat soul food in the south i want to be a minority at the restaurant.  I'm sorry, but thats just how it works.  And thats exactly how it was at Busy Bee.   The place was absolutely packed and all of this pointed directly to the fact that this was the perfect place to get fried chicken (I guess i should give Jeff W. props for choosing it,huh?). . We waited about 20 minutes and were seated and served drinks very promptly.  Since we were in the south, of course i ordered the fried chicken special.  Within what seemed like seconds we were served sweet tea as part of our special.  Well i learned i dont like sweet tea...  weird but i dont.   However i gave it a shot and passed it on jeff.   So then came the basket of bread and cornbread.  Well the bread was soft and warm and perfectly complimented by honey butter.  And the cornbread was also warm and the perfect balance of sweetness and cornness.   Also perfect with the honey butter.   As soon as we were done, we got our meals.   I opted for the the white meat  which was a wing and big old chicken bosom.   And of course i got the mashed potatoes which reminded me exactly of how my mom would make them.  I really wanted the fried corn, but they were out so i settled for the broccoli caserole, which again tasted like it came right out of my mom's kitchen.  Awesome.    We got additional sides of fried green tomatoes and fried okra which were good... but its hard to mess up something that is fried.   . . As for the chicken... it was not too greasy, perfectly crispy and had great flavor.  It really tasted like they had put a lot of work into making the flavor great.  While maybe not as cost effective, it was way better than hitching post (my only other fried chicken experience).  I didn't feel greasy at all. . Of course we had to try the peach cobbler for dessert (we were in Georgia!) which was great.  More nutmeg than i normally have, but still good.. . Everyone was friendly and the food was great.  Exactly what i would expect out of a southern food restaurant!
