ReviewID: uRh1LecbWJOnfs9GukLpsA
ReviewerID: op8FmScVlXFkVcqmyAlD3w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Its hard to live up to the expectations that have surrounded Osteria Mozza since we first heard about Mario Batali's impending arrival in LA.  And those expectations were raised even higher into the stratosphere after everybody took their first bite into those perfect pizzas next door at Mozza.  I'm glad I made a reservation the day the lines opened so we could experience Osteria for ourselves.  I made the reservation for 6 and gave them a few weeks to work out any potential kinks.  Other than our table being occupied 20 minutes later than our reservation service was excellent.  The sommelier and waiter had opinions on dishes and were able to provide good insight/answers to our many questions.  The menu vascilates between Italian and English.  I didn't know what some of the ingredients were in some of the pasta dishes (burro e salvia) while there were many more recognizable ingredients (ragu bolognese).  . . We had a really nice reasonably priced super tuscan to start off the night.  The bottle was about $55 which is very reasonable as far as super tuscans go.    The kitchen sent us out rolled mozzarella with basil, pesto and olives.  A very lovely way to start off the meal.  We ordered 4 appetizers for the table.  Rank from my favorite to least  . 1.  Grilled octopus - I love grilled octopus so this may be biased.  The salad of potato, lemon and celery offered the perfect compliment to the dish.  Some nice acidity and crunch.  I didn't think the octopus was chewy as others have noted in their reviews.. 2.  Burrata with bacon/onion/mushroom ragu on crostini - the burrata was creamy and excellent.  I took all the toppings off the crostini and ate the cheese with bacon and ragu.  Great combination of flavors and big piece of bacon to anchor the bite.. 3.  Gnocco fritto with affetati misti - nice pillows of puff pastry.  Well seasoned and great crunchy texture.  . 4. Scamorza panino - the best part about the dish was the salami and lardo.  I am a sucker for sliced cured meats but I always regret ordering it because this is something you can get on your own at a nice deli counter or butcher.. . Now on to the pasta and main dishes.  . 1. Garganelli with Ragu Bolognese - I would highly recommend this dish.  The pasta was very delicate and took well to the sauce and ragu.  The ragu was spot on.  Perfect pasta dish.  If I was on death row this would be one of the dishes I order.  (the other items would be Double Double animal style no lettuce and extra pickles, porterhouse medium rare from Peter Lugers with sides, strawberry cheesecake from Juniors, my mom's Korean style pork ribs, linguine with peas and proscuitto in cream sauce from Elio's, brocoli slice from Gino's, a gyro and a snapple Orangeade.) . 2.  Lamb Chops - well seasoned and cooked to my liking.  Charred on the outisde and red/pink in the middle.  . 3a.  Orchette with sausage and Swiss chard.  Again the pasta was excellent and a little al dente.  The sausage was broken up into little pieces.  The swiss chard provided a little bitterness.  If you don't like or not accustomed to Swiss chard I would not recommend. . 3b.  Linguine with one pound Maine lobster - I actually may have liked this dish better than the orchette.  There was a little bit of a kick to the sauce and lobster is always great.. . In closing, go with a lot of friends and order a lot of dishes to share.  Don't leave out the garganelli and the lamb chops.
