ReviewID: ushYvSW9i9NClwUlha2_BQ
ReviewerID: n2UsVjISE1nOow63cm3auQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bin Wine Cafe
Category: American (New)
Despite what I thought were a lot of pretty lackluster reviews, I dropped in at Bin Wine Cafe tonight with a friend and was very impressed.. Granted, I would have been happy to stumble into a warm stable with the current weather conditions out there, but Bin was a welcome upgrade from quality time with the horses.. . I got there around 6, and there wasn't a crowd at all (just how I like it). There was very pretty, kinda jazzy bossa nova playing over the sound system, and just enough buzzing conversation to make the room feel alive. Even though my friend and I were just drinking wine, we were seated at a real table (!) and got our wine menus, with cheeses on the back. All I needed, really.. I settled on the "Habla Espanol?" flight of Spanish/Chilean reds, and Sam got the "Bubbles" flight of sparklings. I was especially pleased with the Tempranillo in that flight, but each 2.5-ounce pour, served in a very sleek stemless wine glass, was satisfying in its own way. Varying flavors but nice all the same.. . I had a six-year aged cheddar and some Stilton, and Sam got two cheeses as well, so our server (also Sam!) brought us a cutting board with our cheeses, some crostini and very thinly sliced apples with toasted almond slivers and a homemade wine jelly (fairly unimpressive).. We ran out of apples fairly early on, and no one should have to eat a blue without accompaniments, so I asked Sam if I could sneak a few more apple slices, and he obliged with no problem. Very sweet and conversational with us, even when we got a little tipsy and stupid.. (I am still slightly tipsy and stupid, by the way.). . I've been pretty adamantly against Wicker Park (yes, all of it) on sheer principle of its vomitorious semi-hipster crowd, but I'm gradually warming to it as I learn of some of its charms. Bin Wine Cafe is definitely among those, and I'm looking forward to discovering more in the near future.
