ReviewID: usRAz9Da-OH6fzKCc-ABKA
ReviewerID: epd-I5vN4KUGTWCa9oBkyQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zed451
Category: Steakhouses
I went to the opening party last Friday, and while I left this restaurant happy and completely stuffed with delicious food (and shots of Patron!), I'm going to hesitate on a 5-star rating until I go back on a night that isn't the opening. The experience was incredible, and every single staff member (of which there appeared to be thousands) was attentive and pleasant, but I can't help but wonder if everyone was trying extra hard to please the opening-night crowd.. . That said, wow. . . I like good food. I especially like good food in abundance. . . The "harvest table" is gigantic, and it's so loaded with food that you could easily forget about the meat and fill up on fruits, veggies, pasta, hors d'oeuvres, and desserts. I'm moderately obsessed with the red-wine poached pears (with crumbled cheese, candied walnuts, and balsamic vinegar sauce) and I plan on trying in vain to recreate them at home. Other favorite harvest table selections include the pineapples "Madagascar," the spicy apples, the sweet potato bits, and the chilled ravioli with pesto sauce. I'm not a big dessert person, but the tiny fruit tarts are excellent.. . As far as the churrascaria element goes: the meat is tasty, and the sauces/marinades/spices are very well-selected, but I felt like there were fewer options presented at any given time than at other similar restaurants. My friends and I went up to the carving station at different times, and rarely got the same kind of meat. While variety is great, I missed out on some of the meats because of bad timing.. . Definite must-trys: goat-cheese-encrusted lamb (heaven!), blue point oysters, garlic steak, roast lamb.. . The outdoor terrace is quite nice - there's a delightful outdoor bar and a little area with fresh green grass and benches that smell like cedar. I wonder how long that grass will continue to look nice?. . My friends and I left Zed451 extremely full. I felt compelled to taste everything, and re-sample my favorites (those poached pears? on every single plate I had), and I almost had to be rolled out the door. Next time, I'm going to have to learn about moderation!. . I'll definitely be back, and it will be interesting to see how different (if at all!) Zed451 is on a normal evening.
