ReviewID: UtftS-AYcPDHv0U168GKRw
ReviewerID: My_QOhWb-9NDIFq60XgGsw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Taco Mac
Category: American (Traditional)
So I've now been to this Taco Mac about a zillion times, since I live within walking distance now.  I'm convinced they just don't want me as a customer.. . The past FOUR times I've been there, there has been a problem.  First, they mixed up my friend's passport with mine, so I now have credit for beers I haven't had but WANT to drink, and he ended up losing credit on 2 or 3.  The next time, I didn't get credit at all for 5 beers.  All of that was squared away after having an email conversation with someone at corporate.. . The third time (this past Sunday), I ordered a Kenmore burger no mayo, and it came out drenched in mayo.  I sent it back. 45 minutes later, as I was literally about to walk up to the Vortex to get something to eat, the bartender told me someone else had taken my burger from the kitchen, and they were making me another one.  In all, I finally got my food an HOUR after I ordered it (but at least they were smart enough to comp it).. . This evening, I tried again, and failed.  I spent most of the afternoon there, drinking a good amount of beer.  At 7:00, I asked them to put the Islanders/Rangers game on (which started at 7), even telling the barkeep what channel it was on.   The manager, Justin, apparently couldn't find it, so he put it back on ESPN (which had been showing the same hour of programming over and over for the past 5 hours).  At about 7:15, I asked for them to just put the Thrashers game on.  The bartender came back and advised me Justin said the game didn't start until 8:00.  Oddly enough, I had just checked the NHL's website and it said 7:30.  There were no other games on at the time, so I didn't know what the issue was with going ahead and putting one of their 50 TVs on a different sports channel 15 minutes early, but apparently Justin had an issue with it.  Since I wasn't going to get to watch hockey at Taco Mac, I just paid my tab and left.  I got home a little before 8 and turned on the Thrashers.  What do you know... they were fifteen minutes into the game already.  So much for starting at 8!. . Taco Mac is a great football bar, but it's certainly not a sports bar.  And having a problem four visits in a row is too much for me.  I won't be back to the Metropolis location, and since none of their other locations are close to me, I won't make an effort to go to any of the other locations, either.
