ReviewID: uTRVFSPw9Vh9H8jU082LDw
ReviewerID: oVomceBgCbXiEFx1z94DRw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kyma
Category: Greek
We waited 15 minutes past our reservation to be seated.  Just as we were starting to get frustrated with the delay, the hostess led us to possibly the worst table in the house (the corner of the kitchen entrance and hallway for the bathrooms).  Not to be deterred, we began to peruse the menu in search of the evening's fare.  After a few minutes, we decided on the Mezze dinner, which is a tasting of several appetizers and a shared entrée.  The only problem was, we had yet to see a waiter, busboy, waterboy, runner, manager, Greek God, Cherub or anyone willing to help us out.  After another fifteen minutes or so, we were approached by what appeared to be our waiter in spite of the hallowed out cheeks, sunken eyes and myopic stare most commonly associated with heroin addicts and psychopaths. . Lee Harvey Waiter informed us of the 86's, one of which happened to be something we wanted to order.  It was 8:15 on Saturday - you would think they would have planned ahead, no? After rearranging our menu, we decided on the following for dinner:  Wood Grilled Octopus, Calamari Steak, Sardine filets and Bakaliaros (fried cod meatballs on top of garlic potato puree) with the Rack of Lamb served with Greek Fries.   . This was the absolute best Octopi I have ever eaten. Rather than the chewy, rubbery shoe leather that I'm used to, it was soft, tender, flavorful and simply divine and balanced perfectly with the acidity of pickled red onions and red wine vinegar. Close on its heels (or should I say tentacles) was the calamari steak.  My first impression was shock, as I had never seen a piece of calamari this large before.  It was as if Captain Nemo sailed the Nautilus directly from the Bahamas to deliver this freakish squid to my plate.  It was seasoned perfectly with a hint of lemon and olive oil and cooked very well.. Next came the sardines. Let me tell you something about sardines.  They are a greasy, stinky, dirty, foul little fish.  I forced down 2 of the filets just to make sure the first one wasn't accidentally pulled from the trash.  It wasn't.  Next to come out was the Bakaliaros. While not quite as good as the Baccalo that I had in Brazil, they were probably as good as I will ever find in Georgia.  The cod was light, flaky and fried to perfection with the perfect amount of salt and complimented nicely by the garlic potato puree on which they were served.  I never thought I would use cod to cleanse my palate, but it did a surprisingly good job of getting rid of the sardine taste in my mouth. . Finally, the rack of lamb and greek fries were delivered.  The lamb was tender and flavorful, but swimming in lemon marinade.  The meatiness of the lamb was totally overwhelmed by the tartness and acidity of citrus, and in my mind, ruined the dish.  On the other hand, the Greek Fries were flawless potato gems worthy of a spot in The French Fry Hall of Fame. Unlike traditional fries, they were discs rather than javelins and fried to a perfect golden brown - crispy on the outside, soft on the inside and topped with shredded Kefalograviera cheese.  Truly stunning.  . We plowed through desert and by the time we got and paid our bill, we had been in the place for nearly three hours, which I guess you could say added to the authenticity of a Greek restaurant.  . Good, but not sure it was worth the 3 hour experience.
