ReviewID: UU5f5yT8sMaUpxUCxct7pw
ReviewerID: GON8Ynfiro1jxnFoWD5jwQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
I made a reservation exactly one month prior to my Saturday evening dinning experience.  Any guess what time they fit me in?  9:30pm!  I usually eat at 7, so I came with a voracious appetite. . . The place was packed so I was willing to accept the idea that I should have been happy with 9:30 reservations.  The hostess at the front was very friendly and pointed me in the direction of my friends who were waiting at the bar.  The bar area was very crowded and not so easy to get a drink, I can't blame Mozza for being popular, but it was a nuisance.  The bartender made a special plum martini which was very tasty.  I also enjoyed an ice cold Moretti beer.  While crowded, it was an amusing spot to people watch.. . I was seated promptly at 9:30 which was good because my body was being fueled by vodka and beer.  The dinning area is open air and fairly loud, as you might expect from an Italian place  My group of 4 sat against a back wall, which was also home to the wine collection.. . I had only one demerit for my experience, our server Anthony was seemingly too busy for our table.  When we had his attention, his knowledge was good.  This problem was remedied by the server working the next table over, she was fantastic and became our sudo waitress when Anthony was not around.  Somehow this negative became a positive.. . Now for the food... it was outstanding on all levels.  It really depends on what you want, the variety is plentiful: fish, past, meat, etc.  Unless you have something specific in mind, don't hesitate to throw yourself at he mercy of the server.  My group ate family style, the portions are small so each option is about 1-2 bites per person, assuming 4 people.. . -  Order a few things from the mozzarella bar, all the cheese is good, just look for the description that makes your mouth water the most.. . -  Little Gem Lettuces (antipasti) were very good, they have green beans and noci on them.  Good flavor if you are looking for a salad type option. . . -  Fresh Ricotta &amp; egg raviolo (primi) delicious!  The brown butter was good, very rich and creamy.. . -  Goad cheese raviolo (primi), sooooo good!  That about says it. . . -  Orrechiette (primi), my absolute favorite!  It's VERY rich and has a strong sausage taste with a salt top note.  I could have made a meal out of this!. . -  Grilled Beef Tagliata (secondi), bravo!  The beef was a perfect medium and the sauce was amazing.. . -  Grilled leg of lamb (secondi), personally I didn't love it.  It is served cold on a mint &amp; yogurt sauce, just OK for me.. . The wine selection was extensive and expensive, no surprise.  My overall experience, unlike Avitar, completely lived up to the billing.  You will enjoy several cooking deviations which will make you smile.  Make a reservation well in advance.  Enjoy!
