ReviewID: UuVtbf2HnrhnXqUa2S1xDA
ReviewerID: MMx2ntZfRkMpyh0Z7vjMQQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
My sister has been raving about this place for a while now so I had been really eager to try it out and see what's so special about this place.. . I really liked it. The interior has a warm modern atmosphere that is sophisticated without being uptight: wooden floors, stone brick walls, and an open layout where you can see all the tables, the bar and the kitchen.. . The staff was well trained and seemed knowledgeable with food and wine pairing. It always impresses me when a waiter can speak intelligently about why he thinks a certain wine will pair with a certain dish. I was thinking of ordering chardonnay for my date who was eyeing the monkfiish dish thinking that it was probably a little richer, fattier type of fish and could use the extra body from a chardonnay... ended up with the white burgundy (which is chardonnay) based on his suggestion... which she liked.. . We had the raw oystesr, which were very fresh, slightly briny seasalty and came with a mignorette, cocktail sauce, horseradish sauce. I liked the mignorette.. I ordered the lamb dish which was delicious. I think it was more of a braise or stew and had just the right amount of seasoning and spices to make it interesting. My date had the monkfish which was tender and moist and very good, though I don't think it was quite as good as the lamb or the oysters.. We skipped dessert as we had just come from a pastry shop beforehand. Can't say there was anything on the dessert menu that was really screaming "eat me!" Maybe next time.. . Couple of downsides: even at 6pm it was already getting busy and the noise level though not excessive was a definitely clear and present distraction. The tables for two along the wall are tightly spaced and I felt like I was having dinner not only with my date but also with the two couple on either side of us. Especially when the elderly couple next to us spilled her water and it landed on my date.
