ReviewID: uVi78WHwaBtGPetOFxfEKQ
ReviewerID: HpTh_M7R47tymlgl7YZiUQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Had the worst service of my entire life at Bottega.  Here is the list of all the ways our server, Daniel, was incredibly rude to our table:. 1.  The BF ordered a limonata (a drink on their beverage list) and was treated like an idiot by TWO waiters who thought he wanted to sip a glass of limoncello (and so what if he did?). 2.  After ordering a caprese salad and the sausage pizza, we waited 20 minutes for 3 slices of mozzarella, 3 scalped tomatoes, and 3 sprigs of basil.  It was 4 PM - not exactly a peak hour for restaurants.. 3.  Our salad was served without our waiter providing us with any utensils to eat it with.  . 4.  By this time we had both emptied our drinks - they were left on the table with no offer of any other beverage.. 5.  Then we finished our bottle of water.  Again, left empty on the table with no offer of any more water.. 6.  Our plates that we used to split the salad were not cleared before the pizza was served.  It's bad enough when a restaurant won't give you fresh utensils between courses.  But clean plates?? Come on!. 7.  Our pizza was served w/o cheese and peppers, a courtesy extended to every other pizza eating patron.. 8.  My empty diet coke glass was moved so that the waiter could put the pizza on the table.  Did he clear it?  Nope, He just shoved it closer to me.  Was I supposed to chew all the ice to indicate I had finished???. 9.  Our waiter, Daniel, never once came to our table to see if we enjoyed either the caprese salad or the pizza.  The impression I got was that I was to be grateful I had been served their food in the first place.. 10.  Every time my boyfriend flagged our waiter to the table, all of 2 times since Daniel refused to make eye contact with our table, our waiter left before my boyfriend could even finish asking for all the things we needed.. . If that's your idea of a pleasant afternoon, head on down to Bottega Louie.
