ReviewID: UvmkYD_PeqiH_ZdAroA04g
ReviewerID: NLVPdcAVIJmYyIRssDc6zg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
I've never actually had the opportunity to really check out Downtown Culver City.  The area is fantastic.  Lots of restaurants with outdoor seating for people watching.  Everyone's really chill, some out with their dogs to join dinner with their friends.  . . Back to the restaurant, service was great.  We got of course a table outside, primo table I thought, right in the inside corner facing street.  The perfect, perfect, table for people watching and not right at the entrance.  (I think if you got a table inside or the patio to the right of the restaurant towards the back, your entire dining experience would be a completely different one.)  It's been a while since this girl went to a restaurant where you order the traditional 1 appetizer and an entrée each.  It's so boring; especially knowing the portions are probably going to be large.  I was hoping maybe I could convince friend to do several appetizers or sides instead but friend was the traditional kind.  So order for the night was: . Appetizer - Washington Mussels w/ pea tendrils, tomatoes &amp; pickled fennel. Entrée (Me) - Polenta Cake sits on bed of pearl onions, mushrooms and tomatoes.  On top was mascarpone cheese drizzled with truffle oil.. Entrée (Friend) - Kobe Beef Cheeks served with cracked rice risotto and veggies. . Verdict: . Appetizer was Bleh! I didn't consider the mussels fresh.  What pea tendrils? Maybe a smidge of pickled fennel was detected.  Thinking back I think there were much better choices of appetizers to pick from like Smoked Trout Brandade (ok....maybe this is too heavy &amp; creamy for a summer night) or the Kusshi Oysters (is it fresh?) or maybe one of the flatbreads (Towards end of meal, next table ordered a special version of the flatbread 'cos they were friends of the chef. Dang that thing look freakin' delicious!! Wish I was chef's friend 2).  Ya, should have taken more time to pick instead of listening to waitress' recommendation.  Ya, lady how could you have recommended this.. . Entrée Polenta Cake - Very good.  The polenta was nice and golden brown on the outside, moist not soggy on the inside.  Love the mascarpone with the truffle oil.  Absolute creamy deliciousness. . . Entrée Beef Cheeks - Eh, it was aw'ight....but maybe this girl isn't an expert on beef.  The piece came pretty large.  It was fork tender but the piece I tasted was full of just large chunks fat.  Maybe they didn't trim it or something, which is why it was so large.  Beautifully marbled wagyu I think shouldn't taste like that.  Cracked risotto was good though.. . So, I'm giving extra points for vibrant location, being seated at a great table, tasty glass of '06 Pinot Noir, not getting hassled or dirty looks from other chill patrons even if I was the only one busting out a cigarette.  Yes, you may ask for an ashtray from the wait staff if you need to smoke.  One last side note, Tender Greens had a huge line going out the door.  I was watching all night......dude, maybe we should have gone there.
