ReviewID: uvPtYNqVoc68VZiLtl-PTg
ReviewerID: jEvaosGfFGBNCr3DE-CUbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Well, Bottega Louie is going to need more than one visit to determine how I really feel about them.  But I'm going to try a review for opening day below.. . Entering through the 7th and Grand door, the first thing you notice are the delights in the Patisserie, croissants, pastries etcetera.  A bar is to the left with mini tables and chairs.  . . A greeter walked up to me and I asked if they were still serving breakfast.  She said yes [it was just before 11 AM] and walked me over to the dining area.  At the desk I again asked about breakfast and was seated and presented with the breakfast menu.. . The server arrived and mentioned they had flat or sparking water both of which are served in clear glass bottles and poured by the person who brings it to the table.  I also had a glass of grapefruit juice [$4.00] which arrives from the bar with a huge head of foam.  I was told that they have a special juicer's whose centrifugal force causes the heavy foam. . . I ordered Eggs Benedict.  Several slices of baguette arrived wrapped in white paper and placed on the table.  At that point, a woman in a suit arrived to apologize and tell me that breakfast service ended at 10 AM, a hour earlier.  I was a little taken aback as I would not have ordered the juice or the coffee.  Oh well, I had to switch gears.. . A lunch and dinner menu appeared.  Flummoxed, I barely looked at it but ordered something from the pasta column merely described as "Trenné - Braised Prime Rib-Eye With Tuscan Black Kale".  The dish arrived and it was indeed beef cooked to a ragoût, black kale and pan fried trenné pasta.  Although the flavors of this dish were good, the trenné was pan fried until golden rendering it too chewy to be fully enjoyed ... at least by me.  I finished off with a semi-freddo with almonds served with Amarena cherries and their syrup.  . . I am anxious to come back to try the breakfast I was geared up for and examine some of the delicious items on their dinner menu.  . . Service was simply overbearing but I'm chalking it up to opening day jitters.  The ratio of diners to servers was one to one the whole time I was there.  There were few diners although lunch hour was ramping up just as I left.  . . Regarding service, I watched a man dining alone two tables from mine.  Three servers in less than three minutes tried to pour his water glass.  Apparently he wanted sparking water so fourth server brought the right water and poured as yet another server brought another sparking water only to be rebuffed.  A few minutes later, yet another server came to pour his water again.. . Before leaving I took a spin through the takeout area.  Many of the items on the menu are available for takeout by the pound here.  The standouts for me were the many fresh breads and rolls.  The sandwiches to go looked good.  The ones behind the counter looked better but I didn't want to stand in line to find out what they were.. . Did Bottega Louie live up to the four stars I'm giving it today?  No, but my enthusiam for this type of food/dining emporium leads me to give it the rating I did.  I do hope it does well.. . Parking in downtown, as you may well imagine, is a hurdle.  Bottega Louie is on the south-east corner of 7th and Grand.  If you are going south on Grand you will notice parking meters ... all of them $3.00 meters meaning bring a roll of quarters.  None of the meters appeared to be the kind that take credit cards.  $3.00 buys one hour and they are all one hour maximum.. . I opted to park in a lot.  All of the closely surrounding lots are $6.00 if you are entering before 10 AM and $8.00 after 10 AM.  It is a flat rate for all day.  Pay in advance.  Some displayed a $3.00 flat rate for all day Saturday and Sunday.
