ReviewID: UVVrKAkwLePuZ1tuuTE7bQ
ReviewerID: yRfEDG5xYCDCRbCkMvJH3g
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Gioco
Category: Italian
I cannot remember when I have had a worse experience at a restaurant. I generally am extremely happy with my experience at KDK restaurants; I love Marche, Red Light, and Opera, but I have been consistently underwhelmed by Gioco and my most recent experience was icing on the cake. . . First, the waiter intentionally misrepresented the prix fixe menu. The advertised menu was for a five course meal including a mortadella course, a pumpkin pistachio soup, a LAMB ravioli, a striped bass, and a date desert. We received "everything" except the Lamb Ravioli. . . It is impossible to concisely describe how the server misrepresented the menu to us, but please feel free to send me a message and I will be more than happy to accurately describe his "tactics." In short, he made it seem that since he ran through the revised menu quickly at the beginning of the "meal" that he was free to deliver anything that he felt like to the table.. . Second, our server did not see it fit to deliver anything to the table except our drinks. I know that servers are often not responsible for actually taking food to a table in a decent restaurant, but he did not even describe the food to us, ask us how it was, or show any interest in it, until we complained about being served a course not on the menu.. . Third, while our server did disclaim to us that the menu was different from what was advertised, we thought that he misspoke and did not think anything of it. The table next to us told us that the CORRECT course was significantly better than the course we were served. (Despite our server's representation that the dish we were served was "significantly more expensive than the intended course." I don't know about you, but I would much rather have the better dish than the more expensive dish, and I would always rather have lamb than  shiitake mushrooms; I still have the shiitake taste on my mouth and I left the restaurant over an hour ago.). . Fourth, all of the food was incredibly salty (except the "pumpkin" soup which tasted like watered down cream with crushed pistachio on top) and I just got the impression that at every corner the restaurant was trying to screw us. . . In short, I will never be back to this restaurant in the foreseeable future. I know that this is my first review but I am more than happy to describe more details about my experience to whoever would find it useful.
