ReviewID: uVw2Vwgk1NUOuQvawPR0lA
ReviewerID: ib-eTBL3Sl4kuBB7txtl1A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Los Nopales
Category: Mexican
I live within a block of this place, but when I am itching for some good tacos I go to El Asadero on Montrose, and when I am itching for a great giant burrito I head to Garcia's a little further north on Western. As such, my fiancee and I probably don't visit Los Nopales as much as we should. The chips and salsa here are excellent, and the green salsa is simply amazing. But like I mentioned earlier, this isn't really the kind of place you would want to go if you are looking for something greasy, or if you are just trying to get filled on tacos or burritos. I'd stick more with the "authentic" type dishes here, as you'll get more bang for your buck.. . The place itself is pretty classy - I really like the dining room. I hear there is also a room in the back, but it's funny, we've never been seated back there. Maybe some day! Anyway, you can't argue with the carne asada dish here, or any of the dishes that include nopales. The tortillas are excellent and they will bring out more if you run out. Also, it's BYOB, so you can save a little bit of money that way.. . Last summer, they experimented with an outdoor patio on Western (no booze on the patio though). It appeared to be an utter failure. I think everyone envisioned the trucks and buses and fly down western kicking dirt and rocks all over the place. Over the entire summer I never saw a single person sit out there. They might have been better off spending that money on remodeling the bathroom or something. Oh well!. . Every time we have gone to Los Nopales we have had good service. The staff is friendly and helpful, and you will usually see them with a smile on their face. That goes a long way!. . I didn't go for the full five stars, but the more I think about it, I really need to go to this place more. I'll still go elsewhere for my greasy takeout needs, but when it comes to sit down Mexican dining, this is a great establishment.
