ReviewID: Uw2d3TyBWWO44Z8msNH3bg
ReviewerID: cBrXXLUvACzsI4Y02x9cJw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
My friend made reservations 3 weeks ago and we got a wacky time slot of 2:30pm on a Saturday.. minus 1 star for having such a wait. . We get there at 2:30pm and we're seated right away. plus 1 star for prompt seating. . Valet was $7.50...kind of outrageous....even for L.A. . minus 1 star. . Sat down, took at look at the menu, and you can't figure out half the stuff on the menu.  I mean afterall I did graduate from a University...but I don't know why they have to have fancy dancy names for all the different items on the list.. minus 1 star. . We ordered the fried squash blossoms...it was better then I thought.. we also got the aracine alla bolognese (see what i mean by the freaken names?)  that was good...basically some cheesy meatbally thing in marinara sauce.  . appetizer plus 1 star. . My friends had salad...but since i'm not into salad, so i passed, but seemed like they enjoyed it as they ate it all.  the salad oil/dressing seemed to be pretty good.. plus 1 star. . Pizza's:  there were four of us, so we ordered 3 and shared.  we got the Bufala mozzarella, speck, blk olive, tapenade and basil  (yes thats just one pizza freaken eh).  This one was ok...but had a strong taste to it.. Fennel sausage, panna, &amp; spring onions was another one.  It was pretty bland....the fennel was strong....the best part of this pizza was the sausage...yum. 3rd pizza was the gorgonzola dolce, fingerling potatos, radicchio &amp; rosemary.  shrugs, didn't try it.. . the crust was kinda thin, crust was ok....pizza's were pretty blah.  maybe im not sophisticated to enjoy this type of pizza but i just don't get the whole hoopla.. pizza minus 1 star. . Didn't order dessert, although the gelato's looked ok.. . If you order coke (couldn't really drink wine at 2pm! although i saw some people doing so).  coke comes in like a 8 oz. bottle...and it's like $3.50  WTF. minus 1 star. . Service was pretty good at our particular table...but I saw a ice cream (probably gelato) dessert come out and the server didn't know where it was supposed to go.  He drops it off at one of the tables...and then about 5 minutes later he comes back out and figured out where it was supposed to go.  Instead of getting a NEW dessert for the customer...he takes the old dessert he took to the wrong table to the correct table.  Obviously the person who ordered it, didn't realize it was sitting at someone elses table for about 5 minutes.  YIKES!!!. minus 1 star.. . Ambiance was ok...nothing spectatcular.. plus 1 star. . I ended up going to hot wings down the street immediately after. and then to the kettle chicken.  :P. . so if you want overpriced, unsatisfying, snobby pizza this place is for you.. . i think it came out to negative 2 points haha. . out of the 3 others that I went with...none of them plan to come back.
