ReviewID: UwKA-Ll7jxyQ6zUc19FhCQ
ReviewerID: EJgM5rUBQ-mZA85VYGqMzg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
When you eat so much that you want to puke, but yet you can't stop eating, that's when you know a place is worthy of accolades and Cut makes the grade.  Keep in mind when making reservations for the weekend that the waiting list is about 2 weeks to a month long and that they have two seating times - one at 6pm and another at 9pm.  I figured out after dining here that this is because dinner is at least a 2 hour affair so make room in your schedule, as well as your stomach...and your credit card!!!. Cut is hidden in the the very chic Beverly Wilshire Regent Hotel so you have to pass the hotel and turn right on the next street to access the valet parking.  My boyfriend and I got there 30 minutes before our 9pm reservation hoping we'd get to sit earlier.  The hostess was very nice and said she'd try to seat us earlier if possible.  In the meantime we sat in the bar across the way called, Sidebar and had some drinks and little appetizers of wasabi peas, olive medley and something similar to rice crackers.  I must comment that the olives were unbelievable.  We couldn't stop eating them!  Within about 20 minutes the hostess came to tell us that our table was ready.  . I noticed the decor was very minimalistic with pretty abstract art on the walls with the light wood tables that matched the hardwood flooring.  The chairs reminded me of office chairs because they swivel, but were very comfortable even after 2 hours of eating.  We munched on the delicious parmesan crusted breadsticks that seemed to refill on their own and disappear when the appetizers came.  We were also served these small warm cheese bread muffins, which were to die for and in addition to all this a guy came by with a tray of assortment of breads, which included pumpernickel (my fave) and onion foccacia.  Even the butter that accompanied it was amazing.  My boyfriend asked the bread server about the butter and to my surprise, he actually knew that it was a French butter with toasted onions on top.  Every single person who waited on you was very professional and knowledgeable about everything that was served.  . The sommelier came around to every table to recommend complimentary wines so my boyfriend had two glasses of the Leroy Bourgogne Rouge, Pinot Noir, Burgundy France 1999 , which he thoroughly enjoyed.  Next the menus arrived and the waitress explained all the different cuts of meat and then came around with the cuts of Japanese and American Kobe for us to see.  My boyfriend and I decided to indulge so we started with the Petite Filet Mignon "Carpaccio" with Celery Hearts, White Truffle from Alba, Italy.  This dish was savory perfection, except our only complaint of the night was that the truffles were actually black truffles and they had no smell and no taste.  Usually you can smell truffles a mile away, but not in this particular dish.  Next we split the 6oz Filet Mignon of True Japanese 100% Wagyu Beef from Kagoshima Prefecture, Kyushu, Japan.  We ordered it medium rare and they brough it to us already sliced and split for us to share.  This was by far and away the best steak I have ever had.  The waitress told us that this cut of meat was genetically predisposed for perfection and that the meat is massaged daily.  It literally melted in your mouth!  Next I ordered the 6 oz. Petite Filet Mignon of American Wagyu / Angus "Kobe Style" Beef From Snake River Farms, Idaho and had it prepared medium.  My boyfriend had the 8 oz. New York Sirloin of american Wagyu/Angus "Kobe Style" Beef and had it prepared medium rare.  Both of us agreed that my petite filet was better than his sirloin, but his sirloin was also amazing.  Every cut of meat we had was so tender and juicy that we did not need any extra sauces or rubs.  Every bite we took had our eyes rolling to the back of our heads in pure delight.  We didn't leave a single bite on our plates as we polished off every bit of perfect steak accompanied with a side of winter greens (kale and escarole) cooked in garlic.  We didn't want anything too heavy or too hearty in taste to distract from the steaks and the winter greens did just that.  Even though we were ready to roll over and go to sleep, we had to try dessert...or at least I did!  The chocolate souffles that kept going by were much too tempting.  It came with a side of dark chocolate sauce, creme fraiche whip cream, and gianduia ice cream.  OH. MY. GAWD.  My boyfriend also had a glass of Marenco "Scrapona", Moscato d'Asti, Piedmont, Italy 2006. This is when we lost consciousness and my boyfriend happily turned over his credit card for a $500+ bill (including tip).  This isn't a place you'll dine often, but go at least once for this amazing experience!  You won't regret it and you'll even get to meet Wolfgang who goes around to every table to shake your hand!  Then of course he went to sit with Sidney Portier and his crew...
