ReviewID: uWwXhfyQ0V_shNiLuN3URg
ReviewerID: w2mghTRdP5THiUPSpxVl9g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
I'm just going go ahead and say that if I want good (I'm talking mind blowing Asian food) Chicago wouldn't be my first stop. Aside from the countries themselves, you'll get the best Asian food on the west coast. There I said it. I mean find a person that will tell you that you'll find better sushi in Chicago than you will in LA or better Chinese in Chicago than you'll find in San Francisco's Chinatown. I highly doubt that you'll find someone. . . With that said, basing everything just in the state of Illinois, Sun Wah Bar-B-Que reminds me of the Chinese restaurants I grew up going to in Vancouver's Chinatown. First and foremost, the bbq duck, chickens, etc hanging in the front window of the restaurant is how all good Chinese restaurants should be. Either that or they have a giant fish tank with lobsters, catfish or crabs in the front. Either way, I take one of two things to be a sign that a Chinese restaurant will be good. . . The menu had every one of my favorite childhood dishes like salted fish fried rice, pan friend noodles (extra crispy of course), white fish with black bean sauce and more importantly roasted duck that is served as multiple courses. Based on reviews, I definitely didn't want to go and not try the duck. I ordered the roasted duck and bbq pork over rice and it was everything I dreamed of in Chinese food. My husband ordered the duck over pan fried noodles and it reminded me of Hong Kong style chow mein with the outer noodles so crisp and the center noodles drenched in the amazing sauce that covers mixed veggies, as well as your choice of meat. But the best part of it all was that not only were the portions well beyond an individual serving size (and my husband ordered a small), but the menu items were SO amazingly cheap. My huge heaping pile of food was only $4.50 and the small pan friend noodles, which covered the entire dinner size plate from edge to edge, was only $5.00. The 2 entrees, one appetizer and my Tsing Tao beer the grand total with tax came to.....$19.05! . . I was truly amazed/impressed. The service was great, and I was expecting it to be bad based on reviews, the food was delicious and the individual servings are big enough to take left overs home. All in all, I finally found a good Chinese place in Chicago that didn't feel Americanized or a glorified version of Panda Express....More importantly, I finally found a place that didn't rely on orange chicken to be on their signature item.
