ReviewID: uxDZcbITs2jVGpx1Of_pSQ
ReviewerID: s-SL8juJKBI8CIS16DZH3A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Big Star
Category: Mexican
Salsa in squeeze bottles and a bar made of laminate flooring. That pretty much sums up the vibe in this misdirected taco joint. When you realize that this is the same team behind the fantastic Violet Hour, you lament what could have been.. . First of all, it's cash only. It's 2010 and I'm not riding in a rogue taxicab. Get with the plastic already. Find another way to pick-up the exorbitant $3 ATM fees. . . The drinks are actually not all that bad. Some strange flavor combinations, but overall not too bad. The draft beer selections could use some serious infusion of small craft and latin beers. Enough with the Schlitz and PBR bullshit.. . On to the squeeze bottles. The three salsas that are available are sitting around the bar in old six-pack carriers. Still not sure why I get charged $2 for someone to slide one of these containers within my reach. None of them is really that remarkable. They're just satisfactory. The handcrafted aspect of these is lost by being packaged in cheap squeeze bottles.. . The guacamole isn't too bad, though it could use a bit of lime and salt. Accompanying chips are fresh and crisp, but also lacking in salt. (Interestingly, when asked for salt, the bartender returned with a cocktail napkin rolled up with sodium magic. Were salt shakers outside of the budget?). . To be honest, we only tried one taco, the pork belly. Pretty good flavor, but not really discernible as truly succulent pork belly. It could have been a fat hunk of garden variety Oscar Mayer. Not impressed.. . The real missed opportunity was the atmosphere. During our 45 minute stay, the only tunes to be had were d-list mariachi songs cranked out from a turntable. For the love of God. You've gone so far as to associate the name of the place with Texas and create this Austin roadside vibe. Why in the hell wouldn't you embrace the vibrant music scene, i.e., South by Southwest? Ditch this overdone hipster crap; make the sounds enjoyable. A good jukebox would go a LONG way to improving this situation.. . So, would I go back? When the weather changes and the huge patio opens, probably. It sure as hell beats that filthy hipster dump the Pontiac.
