ReviewID: UXk8H8t7ENOP90uhwoaGVg
ReviewerID: OLsivAKzZHZ8g5IyzRYM-w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sun Dial Restaurant
Category: American (New)
I think I'm a terrible orderer. Seriously, whenever I go to a nice restaurant my fellow diners are blown away (as am I by their meals) and I am always disappointed. I think it's because I tend to order meals that are slightly out of the ability level of the eatery I'm frequenting. . . The Sundial is a perfect example. I went for lunch with a group of ladies (as in my mom and two other older gals). Rather than go with sandwiches and soup like two of them or a steak dish with potatoes like my mom, I opted for a strange concoction of sweet potato ravioli with kale and duck confit. I think I was still flying high from my encounter with duck confit at Portofinos, so I was antsy for more. . . I should note that the waiter highly recommended my dish...or is that simply a rationalization I am using now to justify my strange order? . . Well, the bread was FABULOUS...it had an asiago baked into the outside and a nice whipped butter. I tried a potato soup my cousin had and it was pretty good; the potato salad my other cousin had was awesome...it had a really grainy mustard covering it, and wasn't at all heavy on the mayonnaise. My mom's steak was decent, but she was raving about it, so I guess kudos for that. . . And of course the ambiance was awesome. The sundial, for anyone who doesn't know, is on top of the Westin Peachtree Plaza hotel and it is on the 72nd floor I think. And it spins!! Exciting, right?! Well, if you get at all motion sick, I suggest either sitting in the direction of movement (like facing forward when driving) or sitting in a booth that faces out. I had to switch seats with someone to prevent a little rotation sickness. One other little damper on our lunch was the sun. I know the whole point of going up there is the view, but we couldn't even see because the sun was so glaringly bright at a few points. So bring some super chic shades if you go during lunch.  . . So my dish. Nice concept those sweet potato ravioli, but executed horribly. It wasn't even that they were too starchy. They were just bland. Tasteless. The kale that came with it was very tasty...in fact, it was the only thing that was completely ravaged from my plate. The duck confit might has well have been kernels of chicken...it lacked the requisite fattiness that duck confit must have. . . So I gave the place an A-OK because the other diners were happy with their steak and their salmon sandwiches. I, however, will have to start letting other people order for me or just learn to deal with lame sweet potato ravioli from now on.
