ReviewID: uxZrf6kLzDN1yzyQaIywGg
ReviewerID: LN1qieJgWzssjosdjK_QtQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Lala&#39;s Argentine Grill
Category: Latin American
LaLa is the evil twin of Bossa Nova.  The offering is similar (South American that looks a lot like Italian).  In all aspects, Bossa Nova is a bit better, but sometimes you want variety, even at the expense of quality.  Ask any married man in Vegas about this phenomenon.. . Back to the lecture at hand:  The service is more than a little weak, but the food is generally pretty good.  The last time I was there it seemed like it took longer than normal to get our food (I was dining with my good friends who actually live in LA, not just in hotels in LA, as I do).  My friend Clea is a food Nazi, and generally has specific requests for food.  Usually these requests are specific, but simple to accommodate (a side of balsamic vinegar, for instance).  This particular night, she was given Italian salad dressing instead, which for some reason is not acceptable.  In any case, its total lack of attention to small details like this that make LaLa a little "off" in my mind.  Sometimes my drink would sit empty for several minutes, and I would have to flag down a waiter to get myself quenched.  Keep the drinks coming, it's easy to do, and it keeps me happy.. . On this night, we had finished our meal, and were waiting for the check when a woman came to our table and literally smashed dessert menus in front of our faces.  I thought for a second she was just a crazy homeless, but apparently she worked there.  Maybe ask us before you interrupt the conversation to slap me in the face with a menu?. . The valet is a total douche.  The car could be 5 feet from where you are standing, and he will insist on pulling it 10 feet from where you are, and probably spouting some rude shit in the interim.  Not a good way to both start and finish a meal.. . LaLa, I want to like you.  You're like a cute girl who needs to lose a few.  I'll probably still scope you, but only when no one is looking.
