ReviewID: uy5BwodB1d06Nc5tNBPb4g
ReviewerID: rclzCXt0-poSyyQGLTp7lw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Hand in Hand
Category: Pubs
As a half-Irish, I enjoy good drink and mediocre food served in wooden . surroundings. It's written into my DNA. After my friend guzzled down . four Sparks in thirty minutes and left his earlier meal on a bench in . Candler Park, I decided the most effective way to restore his . constitution was fish and chips. Instead of Limerick Junction, which . will deep-fry microwave food and only charge you a dollar convenience . fee, I decided to take my very incoherent friend to Hand in Hand in the . Highlands. Luckily for both of us, I managed to grab a small can of Axe . and sprayed him down before entering the establishment. He fell on the . curb getting out of my car and tore his elbows, but he smelled great..    . The best way to describe the experience of entering hand in hand is to imagine you're going into a steak and ale, but with a more expensive menu. Whoever listed this restaurant as under $10 was either Mormon or meant, "under $10 if it was 1972 dollars.".    . After I helped him onto the bar stool, my friend asked for a Boddington's. They brought this out and I took it from him. I told him Sparks and honey beer don't mix, so he opted for a Stella instead. I spent the better part of a half-hour trying to figure out why every so-called "Irish pub" in Atlanta served anything else but Irish whiskey and Guiness. What kind of tool buys a British beer in an Irish pub? Probably a yuppie with an Anglo-Norman heritage. I noticed several over-priced pitchers of bass everywhere, and lots of striped shirts..    . They brought out the fish and chips in a timely manner - I could tell, because I checked my watch before we entered and as we were leaving. Since it only took them 44 minutes to realize we were liabilities, and it takes me exactly 12 minutes to finish a plate of fish and chips, I suppose the food arrived after a half-hour. I can confirm this, because by the time food entered my mouth, I had already called it quits on trying to figure out what kind of bar I was in..    . Our bartender was a friendly mute who merely nodded at our requests. He wrote things really fast and pressed hard into the pad he was holding. It was clear he wanted to get our order right. At one point, when he sat down my third beer, I saw his knuckles were white, which indicates he was determined to get me my beer. Such passion is rare these days..    . Meanwhile, my friend couldn't hold down the fries. He coughed some half-chewed fry matter onto a woman next to us and she recoiled in disgust. Some of the fries landed her in church hat.  Since she looked to be about 19 and shouldn't have been there anyway, we escaped the situation and the bartender kept us on the tab, which after a few shots of Jameson was adding up very quickly.  We fully intended to return, but it suddenly seemed appropriate to take a small jog down to Limerick..    . Which brings me to the fish, which was noticably absent from the fish and chips. Like separated brothers, our plate was a tragedy of soggy fries. Since the bartender did not speak, and he removed the plate of fries before we were finished with them, I took it as a sign of magnanimity and gave him a quick salute. He went over to a phone and dialed a number, which was confusing because I couldn't figure out what he would be doing trying to communicate over the phone, as a mute, of course. The discrepancy between imagination and reality hit us hard, and my friend had the prescience to leave hand in hand and go elsewhere..    . We left with arms around our shoulders, laughing and shouting cockney accentuated nomenclature. I suppose it was under $10 because of the generosity of the bartender, but nonetheless, it's a pretty big calamity to expect fish and chips and get a bunch of soggy fries. we did the best we could, and I believe the fact we left in tears and laughing was a sufficient way to accept the apology of the management that approved of the mute bartender buying our meal. Thanks, Hand in Hand.
