ReviewID: UYde_QhXpDywPVYp4Kwuxg
ReviewerID: S5DGX7S0HsBw01a7R1ZAEg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
After reading Janet H's review, I figure I would drive across town to try it out.. I dragged colleagues and customers with me, of course. I'm always in the mood of sharing.....especially for good food. The food wasn't going to be unexpected, of course. I actually had Din Tai Fung once back in April, to my own surprise. I lined up with my sister to get into a Din Tai Fung in Hong Kong of all places, just to have a taste of the food that was ranked #1 by open rice ( . http://www.openrice.co....  ). . The food was amazing back in April, so I figure the risk isn't too high even though this branch is a few thousand miles across the pond.. So we each head for the location after work, and we ended up in different restaurants. It turns out that there are 2 Din Tai Fungs on the same road. In fact, they might even have their backs to each other. Both restaurants had pretty long wait. They were both promised to be 15 minutes. We got in after around 35 minutes or so.. . The food was worth it, as you can already tell from the 5 stars. The dumpling isn't my favorite just because I'm not a dumpling fan. The hot and sour soup was awesome. The best dish was the house beef soup. The soup was out of this world, and the beef was just unreal. It was so tender and juicy that the texture just didn't taste like beef. Next time you get offered STEAMED soup, take it. . . After driving across town in typical LA traffic and wait on the line to get in for 35 minutes, I was just ordering like a greedy bastard. We got about half of the items on the menu. I must say that we did pretty well. We finished 95% of the food we ordered. . For dessert, I ordered a steamed red bean bun for each person. During the course of the meal, I endured serious criticisms from the group. People didn't think they would take more than one bite. It got even worse because of the wait.. . When the buns came, I sent them back because they came too early. We weren't ready for dessert. When we were done with the meal, it took a good 20 minutes to get the buns. They probably steamed a new batch. This is the reason why everything here taste so fresh.. Here is what happened after we ate the buns.. . 1. There was no trace of any red bean bun left.....maybe someone licked the plate. 2. Some people were kicking themselves because there was just no more stomach space to order more red bean buns.. 3. I made them all eat their words (this may have contributed to them being so full.......). . The wait, was totally worth it.. Now, can we get one of these Din Tai Fungs in New Jersey, please?
