ReviewID: v1v7xWRASE3GvcXlhGhKbg
ReviewerID: pu1vffjaywFwgP3G8UCitA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Toast Bakery Cafe
Category: American (New)
I had several negative experiences with Toast in the past, but since I was driving west on 3rd street I decided to give them another try. I had my young son with me, but I have always seen other children there and they claim to be child-friendly, so I figured it would be fine. An important thing to note is that I have a physical handicap which makes it difficult for me to stand/walk and I require the use of a cane or wheelchair depending on the day. Today was a cane.. . First of all, I spent several minutes standing directly in front of the hostess who kept chatting with friends and taking the names of people she knew instead of helping me. After finally getting her attention I was greeted by a very huffy "oh do you need a table?" I said yes and she informed me it would be a few minutes. I had thought of leaving, but didn't want to pack up my son's things and put him back into the car just to get out again at another restaurant, so I stayed.. . After about 10 minutes the hostess informed me that I could "just have the table that was outside directly next to the hostess area because it was open." Her words, not mine.  A high chair was brought over for me and they took our drink orders. Due to being handicapped it took me several minutes to get my son unpacked from his stroller and into the high chair and to get seated myself. As I was ordering our food I was informed that I would need to move because they were expecting someone who needed the table. Confused I asked why and was told that they had a "very large group of people waiting out front" and they would be putting several tables together in that area so I would need to move. I was nice and accepted and was told that they would be giving me my drinks for free because of the inconvenience. I packed up my son's things and put him back into his stroller, which he was less than thrilled about, and was asked to wait on the sidewalk again. . . About 10 minutes passed and I was told I would be the next person seated. This turned out to not be true and several others were seated ahead of us. Finally after about 20 minutes I was seated outside adjacent to the table I was moved from for the "very large party that was already waiting" which turned out to be occupied only by two girls on cell phones and no one else. Over the course of the next 40 minutes that I spent there ordering, eating and getting my check, not a single other person showed up to the table I was bumped from and that was well over an hour from when I had been asked to move and wait again. . . I have never been asked to move from a table while in the midst of ordering my food before, even when I could walk, and to have it happen when I clearly have a physical handicap and a baby, was truly ridiculous and insulting. Especially considering it was to seat a couple of friends and not to accommodate a large party, as I was told.. . When I got my bill I asked my waiter about the free drinks and was told that he had no idea what I was talking about and I would have to speak to the hostess. I inquired to her and she claimed to have no recollection of any such deal. At this point the sarcasm dripping off her words was so thick I could have choked on it. From her attitude, I'm sure she was hoping I would have.. . All that and the waiter was not very friendly or attentive. I had to ask several times for my orange juice that finally came when I was about to leave and never got a refill on my coffee. . . The cherry on top was that shortly after I was seated for the second time a woman sat down next to me who kept blowing smoke at my son. I asked very politely for her to please not blow her smoke at him. Unfortunately I had to keep asking every few minutes as she would light up again. I was not made aware of the fact that the patio was smoking-friendly when I was seated. Even if I were alone, I wouldn't enjoy inhaling other people's cigarette smoke while I'm eating. . . This not the first time I've been treated poorly at Toast. I didn't write a review the first few times because I thought they were flukes, but this was beyond rude and insulting. In the past I have been given food I had already informed my waiter I was allergic to, treated rudely and was bumped down the waiting list for people who knew the hostess. The food is not nearly as good as many other great restaurants in LA. One is even across the street and I've had better service at a truck stop on the way to Vegas than at Toast.. . Toast truly offered me an original experience, but not in a good way.
