ReviewID: V2woOnESXXaXaC13IONU1A
ReviewerID: 9aZJMOox-6E0W_pBnaVZlA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
Joan's is fantastic for lunch and/or people watching on a gorgeous day. (Minus one star for being slightly overpriced...) There is a very interesting menu there which includes eccentric and delicious deli items (think Chinese scallion pancakes with hoisin sauce or curried chicken salad), several sandwiches on great bread and of course the LA favorite- salads!!! There is also a great variety of sweets to satisfy pretty much anyone. They have great cupcakes, pumpkin bread, banana bread, muffins, and "fancier" desserts in the back of the restaurant by the place where you order. This is a great place to go to pick up gourmet food items as well. It's a pretty random selection, but worth checking out (fancy honey, italian tuna packed in olive oil, preserves- that kind of thing). Joan's also makes great picnic baskets and has a decent selection of cheeses for its small space. Definitely a rite of passage if you're in LA. . . Update: I've been going to Joan's religiously a few times a week now and I can safely say that I've tried almost everything on the menu. A few words of advice: try the gelato (it's tucked away in the back next to the fancier dessert fridge) it's delicious and oftentimes overlooked, if you like strawberries- the crown cake is a must. It's a soft and fluffy white cake with layers of whipped cream and strawberries in between. It's amazing!!!! Do not, however, order the chocolate roulade cake. I'm a huge chocoholic but there was so much chocolate powder on this thing that I was coughing like a madwoman just from bringing my fork to my mouth. The cake is way too rich and the cream is also too thick.  . . In terms of the lunch items I would suggest staying away from the caesar- it's bland and very run of the mill. The soups are my favorite item on their menu and they also have a pretty good burrata. lt's served with a piece of prosciutto on top and a drizzle of olive oil. It all depends on the prosciutto really. Sometimes it's good and sometimes not as good. Almost all of the sandwiches are stellar. I really like the salami one (comes w/ olive paste and provolone), the turkey meatloaf on is pretty good (comes w/ chili aoili I believe) and the maple rosemary chicken breast is good too (you can order that on it's own if you're on of those Atkins types, but make sure you have them warm it up- it's way better that way). The one sandwich I've tried that I wasn't a huge fan of is the tuna melt. Their tuna salad is good, it's just that it's quite dry because it doesn't have a lot of mayo. When they make the melt, they only add a lot of mustard and it ends up being overly dry. Just my two cents!  . Last suggestion, avoid going here during the really busy hours if at all possible. It can be a real zoo inside and it's not the easiest system to figure out. Sometimes the register in the back is closed and it just makes everyone's life difficult. Do yourself a favor and come after the peak lunch hours. . Quick FYI: they're supposed to be expanding sometime soon and they'll be serving breakfast too. Can't wait for breakfast crepes and hopefully pain au chocolat!
