ReviewID: V6Em3zE8XQ4EWcZjPR-RAA
ReviewerID: J2bahWSmqSJ-gkOeO7FEiw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
My fellow Bears and I hit this place twice -- admittedly, there's a terrific entertainment buzz about the place. On a busy night in the hallway between Sidebar and Cut, there's a cluster of sharply dressed folks gazing at each other wondering who everyone might be, and trying to figure out if that person two tables away is somebody you've seen on the silver screen. On the night we visited, Tom Cruise slipped through an entrance off of the back driveway amid camera-zealous paparazzi. On the second visit, we saw the chick who's responsible for organizing the pussycat dolls. All of which, depending on who your with, is entertaining. However, the food and the service aren't worth the hefty price tag. Just about any cut of steak is ok, although the Nebraska cut was a little disappointing, so you have to stick with the kobe or wagyu to enjoy the tastiest cuts. The appetizers were completely hit or miss; the marrow was good, but so many other choices were average. The desserts were also only ok and the wine selection is good buy very pricey. The service wasn't great either. The first time we visited we had a large party and they basically put us at a table near the door and we sat on these bizarre conference room chairs that weren't comfortable. Second time was a much better table near the window, but on both visits, we Bears had the impression that the servers didn't enjoy the work, or us and at any rate, seemed to shoulder a heavy burden that made them unhappy and overly serious. Why did we go twice? Had to entertain friends from out-of-town who wanted to try it.  However, even if you've got the sugar for this kind of meal, we Bears suggest that if you have a taste for meat, you are much better off buying a ticket to Argentina, stopping by Buenos Aires, binging on delicious meat at the fanciest parrillas in town at 1/10th the cost (wine included) and washing it a all down with a late-night coffee at one of the city's totally kick-ass and chic cafes.  happy eating.
