ReviewID: V6ioMiaTi5ZzrTcLBiPHPw
ReviewerID: C-K-gIKrOZ87_8VwtyiTkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Wow, what an EXPERIENCE.  There were 5 of us and one of the people in our party had made the reservations about 2 months in advance.  We were visiting Chicago and had already planned a weekend of food - Taste of Chicago, that famous pancake place (I can not remember the name - The Pancake House maybe?? haha), and of course Alinea.. . We got pretty dressed for the occasion.  Men please remember jackets only.  The ladies wore dresses and it seemed to suit the night.  I was happy they sat us at a nice big round table.  The restaurant is very minimalistic which I liked and so clean and in order it really was a pleasure just to be there.. . The service was quite quite good....interestingly enough I was NOT impressed most by the TASTE of the food.  I was impressed by the whole creative dining experience thing AND the fact that they were able to tailor our 12 course "tasting" to some specific dietary requirements that I have.. . This means: no dairy, no eggs, no meat (except white meat chicken), nothing fried or heavily cooked in oil, no butter (minimal if any), no coconut.. . For each course I had something a bit different...something tweaked to suit my needs....if they had milk I had soy milk, if they had fried, I had dehydrated.. . One of the coolest parts was the beef centerpiece (I had himachi instead).  I really do not want to spoil it for anyone who plans on dining here but you will know what I am talking about when you get your centerpieces...... . In terms of taste I was wowed but at the same time I was not....weird right?  Two of the dishes had coriander in them and it really overpowered what was underneath it.  One fish dish in particular I did not care for the fish at all....i found it WAYYYY too fishy BUT in Alinea's defense I know that the fish was not bad it was simply a fishy type of fish....my Asian friends who we dined with loved the fish so I knew it was A OK just not my thing (I wish I could remember what kind of fish it was!). . The desserts are so different and a lot of fun to eat.  This is definitely the type of place you must be prepared to be spending anywhere from $200 - $400 a head (maybe more!). . All in all a great dining experience indeed!
