ReviewID: vaJNmRHbnvoeU4Mi9YYLdA
ReviewerID: HI7xBZRP-Jf_D14TKJF85w
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Nacional 27
Category: Latin American
Last night at ate at Nacional 27 for the first time after having ordered take out from them three times.  The take out was always satisfying, so I thought it was about time we tried the full restaurant experience (not to mention I had a lettuce entertain you gift card to spend).  . . I made my reservation online using open table.  We were able to get a 7pm Friday night reservation, which was surprising (I'm used to the good slots being taken by the time I get around to booking).  The restaurant requires a $20 reservation deposit, which I thought  was both odd, but reassuring that my table would be ready.  We arrived at the restaurant 20 minutes early and were promptly seated in the middle of the dining room at a small (but large enough for our food) table for two.  The ambience was nice, and the bar/lounge at the entrance looked fun.. . Our waitress was courteous and sincere.  She was fairly attentive and brought my drink promptly.  I ordered a coconut-pineapple mojito.  It was very tasty, but not very strong.  Also, while the glass was large, there was so much fruit muddled in it that there was hardly any drink.  If we go back I would like to try the giant sangria.  They have a variety of flavors (like sparkling and guava) that sound delicious.. . For appetizer we ordered the N-27 combo - shrimp, chicken empanada, croquettas, and pork taco.  The shrimp adobado was the best thing on the plate.  The taco had sauce on it that totally overseasoned it.  The pork is so tasty that they sort of killed it by drowning it in other flavors.  The empanada was pretty subpar if you've tasted other empanadas.  . . For dinner, my hubby ordered the pork special - pork stuffed with creamed spinach served with a side of creamed spinach.  He said it was excellent, though the side of creamed spinach was overkill.  Would have been better served with another side.  I love roast pork, so I ordered their roast suckling pig.  It was served with sides of coconut rice (delicious) and mashed sweet potato (also tasty).  The pork was again killed by being drowned in sauce.  I love roast pork (LOVE) - it's always so tender and delicious.  I picked at the pork to try to get to parts where I could actually taste the meat.  I would definitely order it again, but dry.. . For dessert: grand marnier flourless chocolate cake - it was ok.  The dulce de leche tasted like whipped cream.  Disappointing.  We also ordered banana ice cream.  It was very good and served in a double bowl on ice so that it wouldn't melt.  It was a nice touch.. . Overall, I thought the food was okay.  I would go back, but I don't think I will be craving it.  Upon return I would stick with our take-out standby: paella varieties.  Even though the minimum order is for 2 people, it's okay to order extra because it's nice to have as leftovers.
