ReviewID: VaQEJ9HDQ3N_WY1yp6Q90A
ReviewerID: BoUGdFkiU6EVsHGSvt-Uwg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Roscoe's House of Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
Overrated.  Disappointing.  What happened to Southern hospitality?  Loved the waffles.. . Pros: It's a destination.  Supposedly.  The waffles.. Cons: Prices, dry chicken, uneven service, limited menu. . This is a rare occasion where I had such an uneven experience that I highly doubt that I will return.  For many years, I had been wanting to go to Roscoe's.  Not only because it's a landmark and LA destination, but because Southern food has always been one of my favorites.  The quintessential home-cooked food. And the best combination of fried chicken and waffles!. . So my boyfriend and I arrived after a long drive from the Bay Area around 9 pm.  Parking is ample on the street, although it doesn't seem generally safe.  He had parked right front of the restaurant (which unfortunately has no windows so you can't watch your car).  Unfortunately, we had filled the backseat and trunk with tons of stuff (my fault for not realizing that Roscoe's is not in the best 'hood).  And checking on the car after 15 minutes in the restaurant, he saw several sketchy people looking inside his car.  He moved the car to a nearby brightly lit parking lot for safety.. . During this time though, our server had not even come over (even before he left to check on the car).  I already knew what I wanted and what my boyfriend wanted.  Finally, I ordered for the both of us...and the dishes came quickly.  He got the Lord Harvey (chicken lathered with gravy with a biscuit and grits) and I got Scoe's #1 (fried chicken with waffles).  I also got Linda's delight a mix of iced tea and freshly squeezed lemonade.. . The waffles were...amazing.  With two cups of syrup and the right amount of butter.. . The chicken?  Disappointing.  Perhaps I had ordered white meat, but it was dry and somewhat unseasoned.  I was given a huge uncut breast with multiple bones and a mini wing.  It seemed like they could have at least split the uncut breast in two pieces.. . The drink was as expected.  And it did taste fresh-squeezed!. . The server did check on us once while we ate.. . As we were hungry, we finished in 10 minutes.  Our waters were unfilled the entire time.  The table behind us got their check way before they had finished eating, which I consider a faux pas (it should either come after clearly finishing), but they waited nearly 20 minutes with a credit card in hand.  And worse of all, they were just sitting across from the kitchen/bar area.  Eventually one of them got up to find a server. (No signs for pay up front.). . The bf and I waited around politely for nearly 20 minutes for the check...and finally flagging down our server (who somehow disappeared).. . I walked out of Roscoe's feeling that I had accomplished seeing a LA landmark...but something that amounted to nothing and a negative feeling overall.
