ReviewID: VBi_5JTj0zF3uRtviWu7qw
ReviewerID: IMJWDqUlpy5h8OcdWXEQVA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
This place is a little overrated. The only thing I liked from this place is their bacon which is nice and crispy and their coffee which is above average.. . I know that this place is hyped up and everyone is going to disagree with me but here it is:. . I know a lot of people rave about their humongous portions. I love big portions and knowing that I'm going to be full. I DON'T, however, want to be eating THAT much. What's the point of serving a plate full of pancakes that you know no one can finish? I have never once seen someone in that restaurant finish their pancakes. They eat maybe a third of it and leave the rest. This is just a waste of food. It's gluttonous. It's also not good when you take it home and put it in the fridge. It turns into cardboard. And to top it all off, it's not even that good! Go to iHop and you can get the same pancakes but smaller and you get sides with it!. . Order the nutella french toast and it's like eating out of the nutella jar. Imagine if someone gave you half a chocolate cake and said "here is your breakfast." That's what this is like.. . Then if you try to order something besides their huge french toast or pancakes, you get crappy food. I've tried their chili and I have to say it was quite possibly the worst chili I've had. Even canned chili is better! I also tried their omelets hoping to find something decent and not as gluttonous as their pancake offerings. It's terrible. Eggs are served so dry here. It's like they've gotten used to the pancakes being on the burner the whole time they're open, that they forget how to make eggs and get confused. I've also had their cornbread. It was the size of a brick and I guess they thought "hey why not make it as hard as one." The expectation of fluffy buttery cornbread I had imagined was not met.. . This is obviously a very trendy place. It's really noisy and there is probably a requirement for the staff to be all young, good looking and able to dress themselves as if they work at American Eagle.. . Sharing food is definitely an option you might want to consider. Even then, I get really tired of only eating whatever it is; pancakes with blueberry yogurt, french toast, banana walnut pancakes, whatever.. . The best thing here is the coffee. The waiting and the lines for this place I feel is very undeserved.
