ReviewID: VDASWFzyhCr7LWVvrjEfpw
ReviewerID: 77nx6WwlORdESRd462igZA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Great place for a first date, girls' dinner, or a grown-ups meal.  I wouldn't really recommend for families or children.  Not only did I not see any children, I didn't really see anything on the menu for them nor did I see any high-chairs or the sort.  . . My BF and I visited Sola this past weekend.  Sola is located near Byron and Lincoln - although it has a Lincoln Avenue address, it is actually more solidly on Byron Street.  It has ample outdoor seating, and a relatively spacious indoor dining area.  The decor is contemporary, Zen-like, and simple with its boxy-square theme (the menus are square, the plates are square, etc.).   The place was a tiny bit more upscale than casual (you might feel a tad bit out of place if you wear shorts or ripped jeans), but I did see a couple of people in shorts (who  looked outta place).  There is a lovely little bar area. . . We were a tad bit early, but we were not seated until 10-15 minutes after our reservation's time.  Oh well, we enjoyed a drink at the bar.  Unfortunately the hostess sat us at a table right next to the fireplace at a table that I felt was "hidden" from view.  Plus, the smell of gas emanating from the fireplace was a little troubling.  I was ready to pull a Smokey the Bear routine and tackle anyone who was going to try to smoke near us.  . . Sure enough, our table location proved to be a problem as we received verrrrrry slow and forgetful service.  Our server didn't come by for about 35 minutes after we sat down.  Our drinks didn't appear until 20 minutes later.  I think we saw our server a total of 2 times.  Other servers brought our meals out, refreshed our drinks, and brought us our bill.  They forgot one of our dishes.  Our server showed up towards the end of our meal to ask us how the food was.  My BF was a little upset that I left a 15% tip (I usually tip 20-25%) and thought I should have left 10% to send a stronger message.  Although I felt that the sh*tty service primarily resulted from placement at such an odd location (like they shoved a table into this small space just to have another table), my BF is probably right that this reason didn't justify the bad service.. . The food was amazing!  Kudos to the chef.  Sola presents American contemporary cuisine with a pan-Asian twist.  The tuna was perfectly cooked with just enough flavor - I usually lament about seared tuna entrees as having either too much or too bland sauce, but Sola does it just right.  Tuna melted like butta in my mouth.  My BF's flat iron steak was soft and tender as well, cooked to perfection.  Our plates were nearly licked clean!  We also ordered mac-n-cheese, but they had forgotten to bring the dish out and by the time they did, it was soupy and a little bit undercooked.  . . Finally, don't overlook dessert!  I had a hard time deciding between the Thai iced coffee creme brulee, the banana cream pie and the chocolate cake, but we went with the chocolate cake dessert.  We were not disappointed, although it was a tad bit tiny for 2 people.  They have a decent selection of port/dessert wines, too.. . Breakdown of Rating (Almost 3.5 stars, but because the food was so damn good...4 stars):  . 5 for the food. 4 for the ambiance. 2 for the service
