ReviewID: ve_xKFEIjjkkOvxKw385FQ
ReviewerID: uZPiD1VSbah5GXUCeZKphQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
Yay - finally seizing the moment to relay a recent adventure on the day  it actually occurred!  An accurate date doth a relevant review make, so pertinent details can be found in each of the 80,000 back-dated posts to come - a travel note for you, my new companions, and a promise to care tenderly for our budding new relationship.  . . For now, on with the show.. . The Bear and I (he'll be around a bit) journeyed into downtown after an unguided attempt to grab some 5th of July brisket south of L.A.(another story, another day), and found that our east coast tastes met with our love of the good and new on the corner of 7th and Grand.   Bottega Louie, meet Amie and The Bear.. . Our relationship began sublimely.  Basically, we met cute.  Perfect parking (thanks, meter on Sunday), a nice, brief walk in the sun down 7th, excitement building to introduce The Bear to where I had the gut feeling would be a great spot, and general ease upon arrival.  I peeked to my right:  "ooh, cute boxes!"  French-inspired pink and white stacked hatboxes, strung with corn silk blue ribbon.   "Louie" it chimed.  We're here.. . Glass, light, marble, calm, and space, glorious space.  Yea, this is right.  The Bear adjusted quickly to our new surroundings, and began to eagerly inquire.  Make rounds with a cocktail?  Grab a table?  Stools at the bar?  Perhaps.  We settled on a slow, round-house gaze, taking in all of the land.   Now, this is new.. . Having mused on Dean &amp; Deluca all-the-live-long-day (4.5 years in D.C.), I wasn't so much surprised at its west-coast conjure in my reality as I was with my expectation that Kerri Russell would spring out of the kitchen for a time-warped taping of Felicity, only increasing my desire to accept their offerings.. . Babes and I, sans cocktails, toured the wall of foodie-stuffs, most of which would fit right in as gifts to warm-house or as members of Picnic Baskets, 2009.  Suffice it to say, nice stuff.. . After TBs sampling of the duck confit salad from behind the fresh case (sadly, he thought there could have been more fresh), we ambled over to check in at the host stand for further instructions/guidance.  What should I do with my life?  Do we look good in blue?. . A sincerely sweet doe of a girl confirmed that the bar was up for grabs, validating our initial desire to park at one of the super-cute Parisian style marble tables, lending views of people and pup-populated Grand.  We were off, cute brunch menus in hand.. . The rest was easy breezy.  Our server (the bar area indeed has table service) was chatty yet noninvasive, and we settled quickly on dishes:  mimosas (per usual), smoked salmon benedict for TB; potato pancakes, eggs, bacon, and toast with preserves for moi.  I can eat.. . Bear, a former sous chef , loved the balance of the benedict (on well-sized potato pancake, light on the red onion), but termed the hollandaise blaze' (sauce, you got served!).  Alas, he cleaned his plate, so blaze' sauce aside, enough won him over.. . I loved my dishes, yet recently remembered that the advertised apple sauce never met my potato pancakes (though I asked that creme' fraiche be left at home - naughty creme' fraiche), probably due to my pen-and-paper-hating server.  Dude, write it down.  However, the eggs were divine (usually served only boiled or poached, but I asked for over-hard), the bacon crisp, meaty, and salty, as it should be, and the potato pancakes moist, light, and hot.  I was pleased to be presented with thick points of  toasted dark rye instead of the usual sourdough or wheat, so smiles were saved.  Over all, my ala carte adventure proved a wonderful choice, and The Bear grinned slyly at his empty plate, signaling satisfaction.. . And the mimosas?  Crisp, light, well-balanced on both servings (what?  you think we stuck to one?  *chuckle*) and just fruity enough to validate church beforehand.  The Bear and I agreed we've made better in his apartment, but the glasses were chilled and the beverages cold.. . So, on we and Louie:. . Will we be back?  Oh yeah, we'll be back.  When shall we meet again?  Can't say.  Will you look pretty, love me as much when you return?  I guess we'll see.  For my part, I promise to be hungry and eager to be pleased.  Undoubtedly, we'll be just fine.
