ReviewID: vgiGUgeBZSRjxtA9JN-e_w
ReviewerID: Fmdfw5K4lUJ2YHtYchB3-w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sepia
Category: American (New)
I'm a little conflicted about Sepia. Couldn't wait to try it what with all the press it's been getting, and while we didn't have a bad experience there, it just wasn't as amazing as I'd hoped for.. . Our server was okay, although I got sort of an annoyed vibe from her. She seemed to think we were taking too long to decide and also that we weren't ordering enough. She warmed up a little bit (more on that in a minute) but I definitely wasn't blown away by the service.. . We started with the peach/bacon /blue cheese flatbread which was recommended as expected, and it actually was pretty tasty. Then we shared the rabbit appetizer, which was probably my favorite dish of the night. Oh, and the bread that came out at this point was really good. For entrees we ordered the salmon, the flat iron steak and the duck. Although, when they were served, my friend was presented with the skate instead of the steak. Our server quickly swooped in, realizing she had misheard my friend's order, and promised to bring the correct dish shortly. Having all waited tables, we understood the honest mistake, but at this point she seemed to drop a little of the attitude. I thought it was nice that she left the skate for us to try, even though the steak came out within minutes (my friend laughed, "they gave me someone else's food!"), and they even wrapped the leftovers for us to take home. I didn't try any of the salmon or the steak, but I did sample the skate and thought it was pretty good (my friend thought it was too salty). My duck was nice, but not like, mind-blowing or anything. I was hoping for the best duck ever, and it was just...you know, good. Although it, like all of the entree portions, was quite large. For dessert we had the bread pudding and the shortcakes, which we enjoyed. The cinnamon basil ice cream on the shortcakes was also up there for the best thing I ate all night.. . So I don't know, it was a good, maybe even really good dinner, but I just wasn't wowed. I had read about the chef and manager coming around to speak to the tables, but I don't recall seeing this happen. I sort of expected it after the mix-up with my friend's entree, but whatever. I just think something like that would have added to the quality of the experience. I still would like to go back and try some different things (the octopus, the veal, the pork chop?) to see if those are truly extra-special. Just need someone else to pay for it.... . I did think it was a beautiful restaurant, for sure.
