ReviewID: vGS28Yo6u9-a1dpxObYe3g
ReviewerID: HCtaslujHiD_j5St_FR5IA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Taco Mac
Category: American (Traditional)
So i had been meaning to hit this spot up for the last 6-8 months...and I really dont know why I had been so pressed, reading the reviews, it appears as if the food pretty much sucks...but that this actual location is nice.. . A midnight hunger rush got my azz out in the cold last week to check it out.  I have to admit the space is pretty nice.  Right off Peachtree, its in a pretty inconvenient spot if your not walking, you ideally have to pay for parking right in the back of the restaurant....that costs $5...$4.99 too much for me to spend, so I found parking on the street, and took a lil hike.. . I hit the place a lil after midnight on like a Monday.  There were probably 10 ppl in the damn restaurant, and it looked like it had gone through one hell of a Monday Night Football night...so I guess i was supposed to excuse the bar looking like crap.... . The bartender seemed a bit frazzled/impatient...and I know its the culture at places like these, but I tossing a menu at me, might get one tossed back at you.. . Anyways..i started with the Fiesta Chicken Nachos for the app, and also ordered 10 Wings Hot, wet, and extra well done as an entree.. . For someone that was starving, the nachos STILL sucked.  I hate when restaurants use that cheap azz dark meat in place of good white chicken breast when they think that you cant tell if its under mountain of messy cheese, refried beans, and wilted lettuce.. . The NACHOS WERE HORRIBLE.. . The wings on the other hand were quite the delight, and i have to admit some of the best wings that I have had in Atlanta...(they rank in the top 5 for sure).. . A tad bit expensive, but definitely, this place should be known for their wings...Ill admit to that.. . Service improved, as I think the bartender understood, that they were one more "toss" from getting a back hand.... . Go for the wings...seems like a great place to watch the game!
