ReviewID: vhP0DbsusMpNBvq8ofbCJw
ReviewerID: Tw7xJTcOYVDYdX8Y37lxGA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gato Bizco Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I love breakfast. I truly believe it is the best meal of the day. Omelets, Pancakes, French Toast, Scrambles, Biscuits, etc. You can't go wrong! After countless weekends eating Flying Biscuit, Stone Soup, and even J. Chris. we decided to go for something new this morning. I had always noticed Gato Bizco across the street from the ever popular Flying Biscuit. Of course what stuck out most was the people going in and out happy and satisfied while I was still waiting, and waiting some more, for my name to be called. . Upon entering the cross-eyed cat I put my name down on a waiting list with about 3 other names ahead of mine. The place is small, I'd say about 6 booths and a good size counter. Two women cook the food, one woman serves, and the owner, an older gentleman, seats and serves. I was immediatley asked if I wanted anything to drink while I waited, to which I jumped at the chance for a cup of coffee. We waited outside, looking at the mass of people outside Flying Biscuit and thanking God herself for not being one of them. Within ten minutes my name was called and we were seated at the counter. I was hoping for a counter seat after reading many reviews about being able to watch your food being cooked. . The breakfast menu isn't huge, but it seems like it is with every item enticing you. I ended up ordering the half-size bizco omelet which came with onion, spinach, mushroom, and cheese. On the side I got an order of soysage, potatoes, and a biscuit. To say the least, it was a TON of food! But this being my first time here I wanted to try an assortment of things. Our food was out in about 10 minutes and I enjoyed watching the two women throw it together. I slowly attempted to tackle the enormous serving of breakfast heaven in front of me, and failed. The omelet was without a doubt the best that I have ever had. Each bite was filled with gooey cheesey goodness and the vegetables were evenly distributed throughout. The potatoes were perfectly seasoned, the biscuit was gynormous, flaky, and buttery, and the soysage was perfectly crispy. . The service here was impeccable, not too in-your-face and not too layed back. . We will definitely be returning, and this may become our new favorite breakfast spot.
