ReviewID: vi0wZyla4n7TqLwpaYrscw
ReviewerID: LZwRtRSIR7Jv6LdBfqQyfA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
Back to Friendship we go! With this weeks Yelp Eats promo it opened the doors for all of us to get back into our favorite Chinese spot or for a newbie to discover their new favorite stand-by. And what a gluttonous evening it was!! Some participating restaurants opted to skimp on their prix fixe offerings, not Friendship!! We were given course after course of tasty and tremendous portioned dishes for a mere $25.00. You've gotta love that. . . I'm never disappointed by what Friendship has to offer and this night made for no exception. Our apps of coconut-crusted seafood lollipops and pork pot stickers were ahh inspiring with amazing layers of sweet and spicy flavor. We got a little greedy and added an order of crab rangoon to our apps (again with a huge portion) but those pouches of creamy, crunchy love were really some of the best I've ever had! . . We had a soup course which meant Won Ton for all - they were out of the lobster and corn bisque but generously offered to allow us to pick from any of their soups on the menu. With Won Ton being my fav, I ordered it up but was a little disappointed by the element of oiliness in the broth. Again with the portions already, I literally had a trough of soup in front of me, despite the value factor it's a little unnecessary once you realize how much food you're wasting because you simply can't eat it all. Friendship should be highly recommended on the competitive eating circuit, this joint brings the quantity!! Our entrees proved no different; we all chose the Grilled Hong Kong Steak... I was surprised to see it as a course offering (it's the most expensive item on their menu) and we each had a family sized plate of it plunked down in front of us. It was savory, perfectly cooked and I was very happy to have so much leftover to bring home. It reheats well and made a great lunch that all my co-workers envied. . . Dessert was a flourless chocolate cake (they were sold out of the fruit thingy which I wouldn't have chosen anyway). I missed their tofu cheesecake which I adore, but the slice of rich cake with raspberry sauce was the perfect sweet ending to our great night out. I would do it all over again in a heartbeat. Friendship is truly my mecca for a nicer upscale Chinese option, they value the Yelp business they get and it shows.
