ReviewID: vilXvJhKyPTB6uWbq5AiEQ
ReviewerID: 7HA5TjvlXtZoJBT1ce1WRQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Canoe
Category: American (New)
When I think of Canoe, I think about the Food Network show "The Best Thing I Ever Ate". I imagine myself being a guest celebrity and talking about how the mussel dish from Canoe is MY best thing I ever ate. I seriously never had mussels like this before. They are not on the dinner menu but based on another friend's recommendation (Tulie L.), you can REQUEST them. Yes, my friends, you can REQUEST them. You seriously don't need to order anything else; but definitely do because everything was almost as delicious. If you come for lunch, you're in luck since it is on their lunch menu. . . First, the mussels themselves are succulent and plump and melt-in-your-mouth scrumptious. They are swimming in an asian-inspired cream based broth (not too creamy at all), flavored with lemongrass, ginger, garlic and other fresh herbs. This broth was so delicious it could have been a soup by itself. You must have their sourdough bread for dipping. . . Next, I ordered their Caesar salad which was delicious. You can really taste the anchovies. . . My husband ordered their signature "Slow Roasted Carolina Rabbit with Swiss Chard - Bacon Ravioli, Sweet Potato Hash and Candied Garlic Sauce". The bacon ravioli really complimented the rabbit. We were both a bit hesitant to order the rabbit because the waiter told us it tasted like chicken. Which isn't necessary bad, but we seriously eat chicken almost everyday. At any rate, we went with the server's recommendation and my husband was so impressed. The rabbit was so tender and was finished with a slightly sweet glaze. His only complaint was that he could eat the rabbit with maybe three bites. They only serve the hind legs with this dish. So you can imagine, even a large rabbit, would produce fairly small hind legs.  Oh, and yes, rabbit does taste like chicken: very lean and can be boring, but when it's cooked right, it's out of this world.  . . Onto my dish....absolutely loved the halibut.  It was accompanied with a risotto side.  To be honest I went to Canoe over three weeks ago, and I can't seem to remember much about this dish. One may assume, it's because this dish was not good; but that is not true. It was delicious and I was so impressed, but I can't seem to remember anything past those MUSSELS! . . So, run to Canoe and ask for the mussels. You won't regret it. I also forgot to mention that this restaurant is on the river so it is absolutely wonderful during this time of the year. And of course...always need to thank the servers. My server was a sweetheart and very attentive to our needs.
