ReviewID: VjZ3CuDFGx0CBqokWazVGw
ReviewerID: QWwUFK1_oDruwSUqyUR5Kg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Yuca&#39;s
Category: Mexican
I mean, this place doesn't really need another review, but I just have to stake this claim - this is probably the best Mexican food I've ever had.. . "Whoaaaaaaa," you're probably thinking, "Who's this guy?"  Growing up in Los Angeles, Mexican food has always been a part of my life.  How can I forget, as a child, the local Marix that used to serve me while I colored the placements as an entry for the coloring contest and always won a free sundae!  Come to think of it...I never did lose, and my coloring skills were that good...maybe there were no losers in the "coloring contest."  Or that special time of year when my family would take me to El Cholo for the fresh green corn tamales.  Or, practically, every family event that happens in the private room of Antonio's on Melrose where mole sauce covers EVERYTHING in the most awesomest way (but not as awesome, in my opinion, as Mexico City . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ).  I've eaten in Mexico, I've eaten in Spain, I've eaten all over this goddamn globe, and the best Mexican food I've ever had is Yuca's Carne Asada Burrito.. . The fresh flour tortilla is a soft delicious pillow of hope (often still covered in some flour remnants) sets the canvas for delicious pinto beans, tomatillo and the reason why this stand exists today - the juice-dripping carne asada.  The compatibility between the sauce of the beef alone and the tortilla is enough, but the beans and salsa just ever so delicately round out the full taste.  Keep in mind, the beef juice, is just a fantastic combination of (what I assume to be) marinade, and the beef sauce.  I gladly accept it's drippings onto my pants when I'm too enraptured in the burrito to pay attention to the sauce's tango with gravity.  The burrito's taste is only outshone by its simplicity.. . Here's something that no first timer will try, but every Yuca vet will vouch for: the cheeseburger.  In a city dominated by burgers, egos, and egos about the best burger, few would suspect this little Mexican stand to harbor one of the city's best burgers.  Again, the simplicity is really where it all comes from, but it's something (be it the mayo, the beef, the lettuce) - something that makes this burger just SO amazing.  If there are bar-b-q's in heaven, this is what their burger tastes like.  Defy me.  Get the burger and tell me I'm wrong. I dare anyone to tell me otherwise.. . Will say, though I do give 5 stars to this place, the tacos and tortas aren't the best things ever. Not bad, just not worth your time.  The pork's fine. Nothing wrong with it. . . But the only 5 words that should leave your mouth when you order:. "Carne Asada Burrito and Cheeseburger". That, my friends, is the true secret to inner-happiness.
