ReviewID: vlFfxn9Roc5cQ67nDs6GmA
ReviewerID: TgxjE7GgFtb2tYvBeHMSxQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
EDIT:. . Went back and left even more impressed than before. Easily one of the freshest and best mojitos i've ever tasted, as well as the most delectable red snapper imaginable. The pea ravioli alone is worth a visti! Fraiche really is the kind of place you'll want to revisit every time they change the menu.. . ---------------------------------. . Oysters-- AND a specialty drink based on a classic Manhattan? Hot damn- I felt like I could single handedly father an entire army afterwards! Both items were sweet-- the drink almost to a fault, though the fresh blood orange saved the day.. . No complaints about the decor- it was warm and inviting without coming off as stifling or forced. if anything, the soft lighting, stone accents, and dark wood walls lined with their respectable wine selection is deceptively casual, considering the aim of the menu and pricing of some of the said bottles. . . Fraiche definitely does best in the appetizer department, with deftly handled dishes like the baby beets, beef tartare, and pumpkin soup-- aka things that are no stranger to ending up overly complicated and muddled. At Fraiche though, the above are kept simple, and the flavors are crisp and well defined.  . . I had no complaints about my lamp spezzatino- but as perfectly as it was braised (falling apart in the amazingly tart and layered sauce), I still caught myself eying the tender and moist  monkfish across the table. . . The only place where the menu lagged for me was in the dessert category. All of the options are fine- just not very innovative or evocative. There's definitely not much that jumps out at you at first glance. At least the port menu helps make up for it the lack of memorable treats, though (for me at least). . . Our server rocked, we had a great time, and indulged-- yeah, maybe overly so, but all in all, Fraiche isn't TOO pricey, and you get a decent bang for your buck in terms of the experience.
