ReviewID: vlgX7n8Xm2CJ1KswiTQuGA
ReviewerID: x2kIaq8x6Q2I6uJxmVg4cA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
I came here with a friend and she said the reviews were awesome online. So we came to this small place and opened the door to a room that was literally small. I swear only 15 people can actually sit at the tables there, and five at the bar area. I felt kind of claustrophobic. Since the place was so small, you could easily hear the conversation from across the room. (It wouldn't matter to me any way, since I don't speak nor understand Chinese. Most of the customers were, and I only knew that because my friend I went with was Chinese.). . Thank goodness there was outdoor seating. So that's where we sat. A lot more roomy for me, and I wanted the fresh air. The outside has their own waitress who gets the food from a hole in the wall. I thought that was really cool. I asked what's good here, and I first ordered the Hainan chicken. About one minute after the waitress took my order, I saw her take the beef curry dish to the people next to us, another recommendation she made. So I quickly asked her if I could switch my plate to that since it looked so good. She told the guy in the hole in the wall (I love saying that), and he quickly changed. One minute later, she had my friend's order ready and mine in another minute. Geez, service is quick here! Thank goodness I changed my order quickly. . . On to the food. I never had this type of curry before so I was excited since it smelled and looked so good. Did it taste as good as it smelled? Yes. Did I really love my plate? No. I say that because it had a few beef tendons that I'm not a fan of. I thought they were bamboo at first, but kept chewing and realized it wasn't breaking down the way my teeth would break down bamboo. (Not that I'm a bamboo expert like the pandas in China.) But if you like tendons, you'll like this dish.. . So over all, this place is alright. Perhaps I should have stuck with the Hainan chicken. But that's another yelp review to do. . . Oh yeah.. CASH ONLY!
