ReviewID: VliSH4UtuBMIhLw0uZRN5g
ReviewerID: DU2EqwCS5Szvvo-d_-kERg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
There are a few restaurants out there that can provide / serve excellent homestyle cooking from two different countries with distinctive culinary traditions. Well, Gloria's Cafe certainly can and does deliver with love. Our yelper group got together here to celebrate Nada's ROTD for this fine Establishment. . . We started off with chips, salsa, and the simple but delicious guacamole made with just avocado and tomatoes. Oh, and let me not forget the fantastic sangria ($16) that was shared by all. Once our orders arrived, we all started chowing down and sharing our dishes with everyone around us. It felt like having dinner at a relatives house family style where anyone or everyone would just get up and walk over with a fork and try a diff dish from a yelper in our party (Yuko).. . My meal started off with a pupusa ($2.50) revuelta made with pork and cheese as my appetizer. The pupusa was really good mixed with the tomato base sauce and the tangy curtido. I had the opportunity to try Erica's carne adobada which was tender, flavorful, tangy, and smoky due to the adobada sauce. Also, Yukos bistec encebollado which brought back fond memories of a similar dish my dad would make.. . Does it stop there? Hell no. I ordered the sopa de 7 mares ($12.50) (7 seas soup). Normally, im a slow ass eater but my soup disappeared within minutes. The shrimp, octopus, fish, crab legs, and the amazing broth was just phenomenal. I couldn't stop eating it and slurping up every single drop of the broth until it was all gone. I was given some water to drink, but what i really wanted was a glass filled with broth instead. . . We got nothing but love and attention from Chico and the rest of the staff at Gloria's. I saw some of the other non yelper patrons getting the same attention and amazing service as well. Even the rain couldn't stop us from getting together, enjoying a fantastic meal, meeting new people, and catching up with friends.
