ReviewID: vLiTWA57ppSxS1xdVnb2lQ
ReviewerID: qnF-Fo5VDP5Tp2PxFsBNkQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Elements Café
Category: American (New)
Elements café fails to deliver tasty food.   Everything my friends ordered tasty very plain and unsatisfying.  . . Came here with a group of 5 on Sunday to try their brunch menu.  We started off with the brioche donuts and warm buttermilk biscuits.  The brioche donuts weren't anything special, the dough was a tad thick, and there wasn't enough jam filling.  The vanilla whip that accompanied the donuts was good, but that was pretty much the highlight of this dish!  Overall this dish wasn't tasty, I would have prefer eating a jelly-donut from a local donut shop.   The warm buttermilk biscuits were okay, the blueberry compote and whipped butter tasted good with the biscuit...however I do prefer the biscuits at KFC more than these!  These biscuits were super thick and stuck to your teeth, but they did taste good with the jam.  . .  Tried the Ebelskivers, which were mini stuffed pancakes with fruit filliing.  These really looked nice, and we all wanted to enjoy the dish, but the pancakes didn't taste good.  The filling was strawberry and the pancake was lemony, which really didn't pair well.   The croissant with bacon/cheese/egg tasted okay, but this is something anyone can make at home.    I would have preferred that they didn't cook the egg well done, such that the croissant isn't so dry.  Plus, they overcooked the bacon!  This bacon was so lean and dry I could barely chew it!  Absolutely horrible bacon!  The smoked salmon sandwich wasn't anthing special, and my friend told me there wasn't any flavor in the sandwich.  The banana foster French toast was okay, I didn't like the brioche bread they serve, but the caramel syrup tasted good!    And last but not least we tried the lobster mac n cheese, the dish that everyone on yelp raves about!  I personally don't see why people rave about this dish, the mac and cheese isn't that good.  I prefer my mac n cheese to be more cheesy than creamy.  This mac n cheese was very creamy, almost pasta like.  The macaroni was a tad overcooked.  I expected a little bit more lobster meat inside the dish.  The taste was okay, but it isn't one of the best mac n cheese ive had.   It is a very heavy and creamy dish, reminds me of alfredo sauce.  The salad that came with the lobster mac and cheese is way under-dressed.  They need to add a little bit more dressing; it was basically plain spinach salad out of the cartoon from costco.  . . Overall, the food here is bland and could be better.  They need to work on taste, because the presentation was nice.  The sidewalk tables are also a good idea, but I feel like it's way too close to the curb...I really don't want some crazy driver zooming by.  Also, the place is very small, there wasn't many indoor seating, so if you don't like eating outdoors, then I suggest finding another place.  The food wasn't too good, so I don't think I'd come back unless it's a free meal.
