ReviewID: VNb44wxyg3Yls0zBm2atSw
ReviewerID: HI1Mjs8ME2eLFWX1Yz7KQQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Red Light
Category: Asian Fusion
The food here is okay but I had the most horrible experience that I have ever had at a restaurant here and it has forever left a bad taste in my mouth.  The last time I went to Red Light, I ordered the special which was a pork dish.  The pork chop that they served me was so undercooked that it was cold and jelly-like in the middle.  I never send back food but this was just gross.  After I explained the situation to my waitress (who even touched the middle to see how raw it was) she apologized profusely.  I asked her if they could just put it back on the grill for a few minutes and she said of course and said my entree would be "on the house" - a phrase she used several times during the remainder of the evening.  So my fiance and I decided to split his dish while I waited for mine to come back.. . Forty-five minutes passed and I still didn't have my dish back.  The waitress apologized again and explained that it was against regulations to put the same pork chop on the grill so they had to start the dish over and that was the reason for the delay.  I told her I understood and my fiance and I decided to order dessert while we waited.  I asked her to please box my dish and I would take it to go.  She was still very apologetic and assured me my meal would be taken care of.  Well, I didn't get my dish back until we were long done with our dessert.  When it finally arrived with the bill, I noticed that 1 pork chop had been taken off the bill but there was another pork chop on there.  I thought it was a simple mistake so I called the waitress over to explain that it needed to come off the bill.. . To my absolute amazement, she said "yes, the dish that you returned was on the house, but we had to charge you for the other pork chop since the kitchen had to make you a new one."  I was shocked.  I thought there was no way she was getting this right, so I asked if I could speak to a manager.  Mind you, at this point I had not so much as raised my voice or even been cross at all with the waitress - just utterly confused.  I thought surely the manager will straighten this out.  But as soon as she pointed me out to the manager, I watched him march across the room directly to our table and say "do you want the pork or not?"  At which point I spurted and tried to explain the situation and he cut me off with "look do you want it or not?!" so I just said "no, not if I have to pay for it".  He then reached across the table, grabbed my to go box, threw it in a nearby garbage and then walked away from me.  Apparently he would have rather that dish gone to the dogs than to go home with a customer.. . What a jackass.  And the waitress isn't too bright either if she actually thought she knew what "on the house" meant.
