ReviewID: VneJiFcNhV2WkQJBiFq6hw
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Honey Pig
Category: Korean
On a whim, we drove to a strange land filled with SUVs and Applebee's and littered with strange, exotic place names like Duluth, Lawrenceville, and Lilburn. That's right; we drove to Gwinnett County. We traversed roads whose names I only knew as landmarks mentioned during radio traffic reports. Who is this Steve Reynolds and why does he merit a Boulevard? Is there a new Norcross Road to match the old one? Whose beaver was ruined and did it hurt much? Questions upon questions abound in this far off land.  So what was it that drew us from our intown torpor and spend our skymiles on such an expedition? I had to try Honey Pig.. . Now in most contexts, stating "I had to try Honey Pig," is best left for lonely farmhands, but in this singular instance, it's something to be shouted from on high. "It's Korean BBQ!" I subsequently explained to friends.. . "Oh, okay, I know what you're talking about.". . No you don't. You know of bulgogi and grilled meats. You know of that trip we made to Hae Woon Dae where we ate ourselves silly and congratulated ourselves for being so open-minded.  This is different. This is samgyeopsal jip, where instead of a grill, meats (pork bellies, really) are cooked on a castiron helmet. Pork bellies and steaks appear, sizzling meat upon metal, They join kimchi and pickled bean sprouts where upon you're instructed to wrap everything in either rice or radish wrapper (or lettuce leaves) and eat away.. . Now some have noted the lack of English being spoken here. I didn't see that at all. Our server/cook, resplendent in fabulous J-Pop hair and hipster t-shirt, was polite, instructive and spoke perfect English. He appeared promptly when we pressed the call button (ok, the one time we pressed it) each table has.  We ate and ate. Just when we thought we were done, our server/cook brought out fried rice and cooked them with the remains of the day. (By the way, charred kimchi is spectacular.). . The space? Modern yet rough-hewn. The lighted bathroom sinks are hypnotizing. The fiancee enjoyed the bidet while I avoided using it. Sigh. While I won't go so far as to declare Gwinnett great, in this case, I'll definitely give them credit where credit is due. Four and a half stars. If the next meal I have is this good, it'll rate a definite five.
