ReviewID: vPMtwaLnfAIG0XxqeP_EWQ
ReviewerID: uQQcrGWtF70K5mNZ4lsGnQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
I never knew ramen, I mean really knew ramen, until tonight, when I went to Daikokuya. . . The broth is outstanding, and chock full of slow-cooked porky goodness. It's rich, flavorful, but also very subtle. There's a lot going on there, and sipping broth after all my noodles were gone was about as good as eating everything together. . . The noodles were cooked perfectly, not soupy from having absorbed too much liquid, or hard from being undercooked. They had that perfect bite to them. The pork, possibly made using divine secrets from culinary gods, quite literally melted in my mouth. . . The only thing I would have changed from the noodle dish was ask for the bean sprouts on the side. I like them raw, acting as more of a palate cleanser. Growing up my mom used them to stretch meals, and I really can't stand the taste of them cooked anymore. However, if you dig on the sprouts like in pho, they really infuse the whole dish with a light taste, almost on the edge of perception. . . The gyoza are excellent, and are probably the best I've had anywhere. They are fried just right with an excellent filling, and lots of wonderful, crunchy, green onions. . . I ordered the house bowl, with the pork cutlet side (a combo bowl, on the menu's last page). The tonkatsu was wonderful, with the breading really sticking to the meat, rather than coming off in places. It sits on a bed of rice, sauce, and onions, with an egg cooked over everyone. It made me long for breakfasts back at my parent's house. The combination of rice, fried eggs, bacon, and vinegar/hot sauce is deadly one, that everyone should try and this is a great variation on it. . . A bit of advice before I end this extraordinarily long review, we got there, and waited around forty minutes. Make sure you put your name down on the list by the door, and remember your number. It's a small shop, so while the booths are preferable, be prepared to settle for the bar. You'll eat sooner. Finally, keep an eye on the other folks there. We're pretty sure that some of our fellow patrons were dishonest, and snaked reservations that other people put down. . . You know who you are. You've brought shame upon this ramen shop. You have forgotten the face of your father.
