ReviewID: vQmABLNfGo8hI4EH8PBeWg
ReviewerID: MUGwM7EPiMhTXb8h_kFB9A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
I knew Tender Greens was getting five stars when my first and second visits to this place occurred within a week of each other.  . . Visit #1 (Wednesday): My friend and I came here, diverted from our original plan of driving to Brentwood, due to terrible traffic (due to a fire in the 405 Sepulveda pass--but I digress).  The first thing I notice is that it's a bustling place full of people, and that you order at a cafeteria-style counter (which moves the crowd along nicely so there isn't much of a wait).  The menu is very simple: chicken, flank steak, seared ahi tuna, or grilled veggies, served as a sandwich or plate, some fancy salads, a few soups, and a few specials.  Practically everything is $10.50 (yay simplicity).  I went for the steak sandwich, which was beautiful: served on a toasty and chewy ciabatta roll (and I'm not even a ciabatta sort of girl), with creamy aoli, and tasty roasted red peppers.  The steak was perfectly seasoned and cooked, and was so tender that eating the sandwich was no chore: none of that take-one-bite-and-half-the-meat-falls-out nonsense.  The sandwich came with a choice of side salad, and I got the baby spinach with goat cheese and hazelnuts, which was lovely, although perhaps a bit heavy on the nuts.  Delicious!. . Visit #2: Four days later, it was Sunday, and I wanted to go again, dammit!  This time my intrepid companion was my boyfriend, who got the above mentioned steak sandwich and agreed that it was indeed tasty, and I got the chicken sandwich (for variety.. I secretly wanted another steak sandwich!).  The chicken was a surprise hit: it was very moist and flavorful, and almost as delicious as the steak.  (A little hint: half the sandwich is thigh, and half is breast, so figure out which is which and eat accordingly for maximum enjoyment.)  This time my side salad was butter lettuce with tarragon dressing, which was creamy, lemony, and delicous.  We also split a slice of peach pie, which was very tasty except for the ginormous blob of heavy, unsweetened cream on top of it.  I would ask for that on the side.  . . I'm definitely coming back to this restaurant: I want to try some of their fancy salads (the Cobb looks particularly luscious), and of course get another one of those steak sammies.  Plus, parking is so easy (there are three of those two hours free lots within walking distance), and there's a movie theater right across the street!  There, I just planned your next Sunday evening for you!
