ReviewID: vSFMNEtW6FOMsP7le1V2bQ
ReviewerID: Ynu2Z2L8Wv2fbTwQ_8LFqQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Bar Celona
Category: Wine Bars
Despite the 1 star rating..I still had a good time so i'll explain why the 1 star rating.. Booked my birthday here because as you can see from my previous review..I had a great time.. The 1 star rating came because of the manager- Juan .. . My friend called to confirm the reservation for 25 people but they had us down for the wrong time and the wrong amount of people but the person on the phone said she sould change it for us.. . We get there at 940pm (because they charge a $5- cover after 10pm).  We walk in and they told us we had to pay.  The mgr (Juan) said we had to pay because everyone pays after 10 and I showed him my watch and told him that it was 945pm so we shouldnt have to pay.  (There were only 3 of us there at the time).. He then turned around and said that if we're making a big deal over $5- then he wouldn't let any of us in.  I told him to calm down and that I wasn't arguing over it being $5-..im trying to correct him on what the policy is.  If its before 10pm then its free..simple as that.  Maybe he didn't understand english!!. He then told us that he would let the 3 of us in for free (it was still before 10pm) but anyone in my party who arrived after 10pm had to pay the $5-.. I told him I assumed that is how it worked anyway.  . . -He then told me that the room we reserved was occupied and had to wait until they left .  I told him that we changed the reservations because someone screwed up (at the bar).  He said he didn't know what happened but he will talk to the "girl".  Whoever the "girl" was!  . He told us he would comp the first round and that we would be seated somewhere else.. . -The server took us to a different spot (that we didn't reserve) and as we were about to sit down..she told us that we had to order bottle service..3 bottles minimum @ $250 /each!. WTF???  Im not spending $750- on bottle service so we got up and went back to Juan.  (FYI..this is PASADENA..not Hollywood.  Charging $250-/bottle is ridiculous.  He's lucky people even party in Pasadena....old town that is!). We told Juan that we asked for no bottle service and his reply was "thats why I told you you had to wait for the other room to clear out!!".(complete attitude). I politely told him (as I restrained myself from hitting him in the face) that we would be outside and wait for the room we RESERVED to be ready.. . I called my friend who knew the owner and told him of all the issues I was having and Juan had the nerve to tell the mgr that we were causing chaos in the bar!!. Chaos??? Excuse me?  I  was nothing but polite to the dude. (well I gave him a little attitude about paying the $5-). . We waited for 15 min and went back in and saw the room was clear.  I asked the server if we can come in now and she said that she went outside 5-6 times looking for us to let us know it was ready.  Obviously that was a lie because we were standing outside right next to the door.. . So after dealing with the pain-in-the@$$ mgr.....my entire party arrived..25 people strong and we had our own server named..get this..Barbie!. Yes..it was Barbie.  . We danced...we partied...we drank....and drank....and drank....and drank.. . I don't think my birthday would have been great (because of the mgr Juan) if I hadn't drank so much and all my friends were there to celebrate w/ me.. . Unfortunately our server (who wasn't that great) received no tip from me.. The attitude and poor service from the mgr was the downfall.. So after a $250- tab..she received $0.00 as a tip.  My other friends who had tabs didn't leave a tip either.. . See what happens..JUAN!..when you're an @$$ to people!  Your place suffers! . I will never go back to Bar Celona again.  EVER!
