ReviewID: vsuD4cLDwHV3jQdxRQdy8g
ReviewerID: BHySTDCBln5JY7lbMK6FoQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Las Tablas Colombian Steakhouse
Category: Latin American
If you have an appreciation for art, and even more importantly, an appreciation for Latin American art, Las Tablas is a must see and must eat.  The cleverly done Botero-adorned restaurant will leave you wanting to see more of what this Colombian artist has chosen as inspiration for his pleasantly-plump imitations of highly regarded paintings.  . . Admittedly, we arrived without reservations and after this experience, I don't advise going without them, unless you can alleviate your hunger pains with oxygen.  We were told 20-40 minutes, and were seated after 55 minutes, though, what else should we really have expected on a Saturday night.. . If you want to begin the night and remember how it ends, avoid the caipirinhas and margaritas; though visually appealing were the sangrias and mojitos.. . In the winter months, request seating in the back left area of the restaurant, as the bitter Chicago winter winds will slap you every time someone walks in or out of the restaurant if you're seated within eye's view of the entrance.  Nonetheless, the romantic glow of the latin-inspired colors will fill you with warmth, as the rich Colombian flavors dance on your palette.  . . For a group of 3-4 smaller appetites, I highly recommend the Empanada Combination Plate as a starter and then the Picada Colombiana for an entrée.  Even though the latter states "serves 2 people," that would be two people with very large appetites or two people who really like leftovers. The entrée itself provided a splendid array of chorizo, ribs, entraña, rib-eye, chicken, yuca, potatoes, plantains, and arepas, while the opener of empanadas prepares your tastebuds for the flavorful Colombian fare to follow; and I must say all for under $50.00.  . . Overall, a great representation of Colombian cooking, with an ambiance that transports customers to the furthest corners of Medellin, where the comforts of socializing, romanticism, and family are ever-present.
