ReviewID: vTEAt11KlkN5xyAtTthXJQ
ReviewerID: j-hMlTnPgB8TsyFp4kRC1g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
What should one do when they are having a terrible day after their car gets broken into, and their ipod gets stolen? Go eat a buttload of food at Pizzeria Mozza, of course!. . Here's the lineup of food:. . Appetizer - Pane bianco with olio nuovo $3 - For those of you who aren't fluent in Italian, like I, this was a hot, delicious, and very salty piece of garlic bread. An excellent way to hold you over for the half hour they quote you that the pizza will take. And for only $3, it's probably the cheapest thing on the menu. GET IT!. . Appetizer - Mozza caprese $12 - The waitress recommended this, and I'm so glad she did. It was beautiful, and so good (esp. when you put a little bit on the aforementioned garlic bread - like instant bruschetta). Even the Man, who doesn't normally like stuff like that, was impressed.. . Main Dish/Pizza - Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage $18 - YES YES YES! I love cheese, and this was the pizza for me. It wasn't overpowered with cheese. It wasn't all thick and congealed. It was just tasty. There's no sauce on this pizza, just yummy cheese (sottocenere is some sort of truffle cheese ... um... yeah... you had me at truffle).. . The Man had the Fennel sausage, panna, red onion &amp; scallions pizza ($15), which was also tasty... but mine was better... so there.. . Stuffed as we were, I still had the lingering, bitter thoughts of my broken-in car that needed to be "sweetened", so we ordered the Butterscotch budino, as instructed by my fellow Yelpers. At first we were so bummed that we didn't order the also-delicious-sounding "Caramel copetta with marshmallow sauce &amp; Spanish salted peanuts"... But all those doubts were put to rest when we lapped up a spoonful of this delicious, magical, possibly crack filled dessert that caused to to have fluttering eyes and deep sighs. (unintentional rhyme) So yes, get that also. It's not a huge amount either, so even if you are full, there's always room for budino.. . Reservations can be tough, so if you're thinking of going, make one now.. . Pros: All Of The Above. . Cons: Very Loud (it's on the smaller side, and they PACK that place in), $$$$ Valet, You Have To Keep Asking The Waitress What Things Are Because 1/2 The Menu Is In Italian
