ReviewID: VTHE10kkI0jLbChJsHZaTQ
ReviewerID: lKUy2aJhDSN_BHr3bAaMvQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Despite it's prices for pizza and the wait, I have to say it was one of THE best places I have been to in a long while.. . I had gone on a date here and the ambiance was fun and posh. We waited probably about 45 minutes for a seat at the bar (you need to make advance reservations for an actual table... we learned the hard way). We finally got our seats and the waiter/bartender was so helpful with our selections. I made it a point to reward myself with a glass of Lambrusco for my drink (YUM) and ordered the baby artichoke hearts as an appetizer. They were cooked very well. They were also served with some other veggies and a slice of bread with a whipped cheese mixture atop of it.. . For dinner we had the meat lovers pizza, which sounds very ordinary, and something that you would get from Pizza Hut but... it was 10 times better than Pizza Hut. The dough is what it's all about! The bread was perfect!! It was a thin crust lightly crispy and doughy in all the right places (like where the toppings are). The pizza was topped with bacon that wasn't overly greasy and italian sausage CHUNKS. It was really good. It was probably about $15 for a pizza there and was just a bit larger than a personal sized pizza. About six slices.. . We also ordered another pizza, forgive me because I've forgotten the name but... I wanted to order the one with the squash blossoms but they were out of it for the night. So, our waiter suggested we try getting (I think it is) the Tomato, Sicilian, Oregano, and EVO pizza and adding burrata cheese to it. He said it was excellent with the cheese on top. He wasn't kidding! The burrata was so rich and creamy and just went heavenly on the pizza!. . We had the Butterscotch Budino for dessert. Again, another suggestion of our waiter. It was soooo decadent! I loved it! I usually eyeball all the chocolate desserts... but they had a lack of chocolate selection... but I actually was quite pleased with the choice we made. It was like a rich butterscotch puddind and not overly sweet. It was topped off with a nice light whipped cream and sea salt which at first I thought might be weird... but it was a nice refreshing pairing. It also came with two small pine nut rosemary cookies which were a little overpowering for me... but good when eaten WITH the budino in tandem.. . I would come here again if I didn't live so far...
