ReviewID: VVSSuDeWFz2pPGK1NBFFtA
ReviewerID: LX4BsaXflALTvTDnft_6FA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I've heard so much hype about this place that I had to try it. Came here for the first time for a friend's birthday and right at the get-go we could tell it was an upscale place. Our party reservations were for eight people but we were told to wait in the lobby until more than half our party showed up (maybe so the serving staff didn't have to waste breath repeating the daily specials and how the service works?). (-1) That was a bit annoying, but luckily we didn't have to wait more than five minutes for more people to show. The decor inside is close to breath-takingly NICE, presentation tables of wine selections in the walkways to the table, elaborate wall murals, comfortable seating, and booths still seemed private even though the dining halls had an open air feeling. (+1) We had a table in the center of the room, and even then it didn't feel very exposed with the tall-back chairs and elbow-space room in between. (+1) What I wasn't expecting was the waiting staff - our waitress was very patient in explaining the menu and making sure we received everything we ordered in a timely fashion (+1), but had a ye olde world almost French maid outfit on as did the rest of the waitresses, was a bit unsettling. It seemed like you paid more for the presentation of the meal rather than the meal itself - before taking our dinner orders, we were served a spinning salad, which was mixed and plated right next to our table. Very fun to watch. (+1) The same went with serving the steaks - the chefs would wheel the wall of meat around on a cart so he could cut and serve the meals fresh off the bone. (+1) The main disappointment actually came when tasting the meat, for such an upscale places that focuses on looks and presentation, the steak itself wasn't all that great. (-2) I also tried the lobster tail and creamed corn, which again, wasn't all that great, even though it was a steak restaurant. (-1) It was a decent meal, but not jump-out-of-your-seat great. What I really appreciated the staff doing was the birthday celebration - before bringing the bill (which wasn't that bad), she brought out an entire chocolate covered cake with our friend's name and birthday wish written on a piece of chocolate on the cake itself. It was very beautiful and a wonderful gesture! (+2). . So if you like being pampered and waited on without caring about the flavor or price tag, this is your place. It was an overall okay experience, but I'd prefer to be floored by the meal than by the people.
