ReviewID: VVvtIpfeoZK-mDXN-V152w
ReviewerID: YzjsknYAU95hM3mS0HJljQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Osteria Mozza.... . . because I love your food and adore your bartenders/servers, I will keep coming back for your Amaro Bar Menu.  Thank you for not being full when I arrived so I didn't have to wait 45+ minutes in the tiny entrance way you have or the cramped bar in the back nor sit in my car while I think about what I am going to order.  Your Amuse bouche is dainty and delightful and makes my mouth salivate for the next dish to arrive.  . .  Your appetizer portions are quite large and you covered my entire plate full of thinly sliced, perfectly smoked, and salted prosciutto with the creamiest buffula mozzarella I have ever had.  your burrata with speck and english peas and mint was a combination of flavors that burst in my mouth with the crunch of the peas, creaminess of the burrata, and freshness from the mint.  I like very much that you served us some bread even if I had to ask for you.  Today your bread was so fluffy, soft, and porous, it paired well with all the prosciutto you gave me.  . . My usual entree of orecheitte pasta with swiss chard and sausage was again a hit.  How do you make those thimble shaped pasta's filled with such salty delicious goodness, I have yet to understand.  And to top it all off with breadcrumbs that taste as though you baked a loaf of bread and browned it in the oven with some olive oil and Parmesan then stuck it in a blender or struck a baton at it until it crumbled into tiny pieces, I will never know, but that combination and concoction of flavors always leaves me wanting more and scraping my plate until it's all gone.  Today I also tried something new, which I have no idea how to spell nor pronounce.  It was almost like little tortellinis filled with ground veal and some kind of cheese and lathered in a brown butter sage sauce.  not drizzled, but drowned.  How you come up with such ingenious ideas I still can't understand.  Although the tortellini was a little dry and the inside is this almost weird grainy, creamy texture, it was still delicious.  . .  Then you brought me my dessert and i was in heaven...  . . The apple bombollini was to die for and adding that thinly sliced candied apple that kinda stuck in your teeth, was as good as last time.  The best part of the dinner had to be the mini almond croissant with gelato and blood orange.  The combination of flavors was ....as my bf said after he took one bite, " I have never tasted anything like this before", of course in a good way.  the sweetness of the gelato, paired with the fresh citrus, and the fragrant almond croissant was literally OUT OF THIS WORLD.  I hope you keep this on your menu, as you have swapped out some items every time I've dined with you.  . . Lastly, thank you Osteria for a wonderful meal that left me in a food coma all the way home.. . Sincerely,. .      Anita i.
