ReviewID: VvzRibnjXO6jjM_yN-sTrg
ReviewerID: Q4jSezcJ7MfU-Q7Ce1GRtQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bacchanalia
Category: American (New)
If you want to experience heaven only in the afterlife, then pass on Bacchanalia.   For years I have heard much about this restaurant and I was expecting great things, and was worried that no restaurant could live up to that level of hype.  However, Bacchanalia completely surpassed every expectation that I arrived with.. . We started with the crab fritter and local pork pate plate, both of which were amazing.  I was a little concerned about the portion size (the first course was rather small) and thought I may go away hungry when the meal was over, but was I ever wrong.  For the entree we tried the diver scallops and the aged prime New York strip.  The scallops were tender, flavorful and perfectly cooked and beautifully accompanied by delicate chanterelle mushrooms.  The steak, which was dry aged for 28 days, has to go in the books as the best steak I have ever eaten (and this means every steak I've ever ordered in many of the top steak houses in New York, Atlanta, and other major cities).  It was simply amazing with each bite bringing such unbelievable flavor that I couldn't help but smile continuously. . . For the third course we tried the watermelon/feta salad and the cheese cart.  The blend of flavors in the salad was bright and clean and very refreshing.  The cheese cart was yet another amazing item with 12 cheeses offered, of which we chose four.  If you pass up the cheese cart here, then you've really missed out.  . . Finally, the dessert course arrived with blueberry pie and caramelized fig tart, both of which were delicious and brightly flavored.. . The wine list is also spectacular but expect to fork out serious money for a decent bottle.  It's well worth pairing a good wine with your meal at Bacchanalia as a mediocre wine would have just sullied the experience.. . Overall, I'd give the service an A++ and the food is even better.  The pacing of the meal was fantastic.  We never waited too long for the next course and we were never rushed.  Also, the chef sent out several tasting items between courses that let us sample other unique and wonderful tastes.. . Hands down, this is the best restaurant at which I have eaten in Atlanta and it's easily one of the best in which I've ever eaten anywhere.  Expect to spend about $200/person for dinner and a good bottle of wine, but also expect to feel like it was worth every penny.
