ReviewID: VWiEHUzB5CnOdxZjEghhjQ
ReviewerID: KggSO_45w0sE7Cv-qZCFzQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Takashi
Category: Asian Fusion
I would like to be clear right from the outset:. . **** for the food.. * for the experience/service (it should be noted that the service was not the waitresses fault--more on that later).. . We had 12:30 lunch reservations this Sunday for a table of four.  We were running just a touch late getting there, but all four of us were seated by 12:35.. . Takashi is a very nice space.  We ate upstairs where the paint and the furniture are done in subdued grays and light-colored wood.  Every table was full.. . We ordered some appetizers and some entrees and settled in to wait.  And wait we did.  It took approximately twenty-five minutes to be served with the appetizers--the Asian pear salad, the pork belly snack, vegetable tempura and gyoza (pork dumplings).  The salad looked beautiful and was served with generous hunks of Maytag bleu cheese.  The pork belly snack and the vegetable tempura were really great.  The pork belly was very flavorful and the bun was really great.  It was served with some spicy mustard which was perfect.  The tempura was delicately fried--not at all greasy or heavy.  The pork dumplings were fine--a dining companion remarked that they weren't any better than something you would get from Big Bowl.  This is probably true.. . Now, I really, really, really want to like Takashi at this point.  We see noodles coming out of the kitchen to the tables around us.  They looked fabulous and the smell was remarkable.  All four of us had ordered ramen noodles.  But we waited.  And waited.  And waited.. . Approximately an hour before we got our noodles.  The server was apologetic.  The bus boy was apologetic.  The maitre d' was apologetic.  The house manager was apologetic.  But that still didn't have our noodles out to us less than an hour and a half after we sat down.  Our waitress--who was clearly upset by this whole timing issue and was obviously getting grief from all of her tables about this--told us that they had about four times the number of turns than they usually do--which, honestly, should have been controlled in the front of the house.. . We were waiting so long that my girlfriend ordered tea.  We waited for the tea.  After about ten minutes when a couple who just came in ordered tea and were promptly served, and when it became apparent that we were about to be served our noodles, she cancelled the order.  Five minutes later (after we had gotten our noodles) the tea arrived.. . Honestly, I hate to complain about this because I want to like this restaurant, but, seriously folks, that was today's experience.. . Back to the food:  I had the miso ramen.  It was absolutely fantastic.  Absolutely fantastic.  The broth was flavorful and spicy and complicated and I thought it was wonderful.  It is really on the back of this that I say that the food was four stars.. . Monica had the shoyu ramen.  To be fair:  If I would have ordered this instead of the miso ramen, I would have a completely different review to present.  I thought that this was bland and underseasoned.  Though there was a fantastic barbecued egg served in it.  I was simply not impressed with this, Monica was simply not impressed with this.  I should note that another dining companion had the shoyu and remarked that those were the best noodles he had ever eaten in his life.  I would've been more than a little cranky about an hour and forty-five minute wait for that meal, though.. . Our other dining companion had the silky tofu mushroom ramen.  I didn't taste it.  She seemed to enjoy it.. . We got our bill.  We were comped one entree for our wait and we were not charged for the tea.  I thought that was fair--though comping us for all of our entrees might have been more equitable given the length of the wait which was--for a casual Sunday lunch--absolutely unacceptable under any circumstances not due to some sort of force majeure.. . We'll probably try Takashi again...  Hopefully some of the problems will be fixed by then.
