ReviewID: VX2IfORIPUUw8GGSJmPCLw
ReviewerID: M8fF6FtAg469o-J-guvXBw
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Just fucking terrible.  But amusing.  Synopsis:  they had run out of so much food that we were forced into getting what was left.  They ran out of potatoes for their french fries.  They ran out of potatoes in America.  In L.A., around the corner from the farmer's market and across the street from an Albertsons.    They had no drinks left.  No soda, ice tea. No desserts.  The staff was stoned imbeciles grabbing each other's dicks. The layout of the restaurant is awkward, nobody greets you, it's BYOB (and bring your own drinks apparently).  But there's valet so you can get the fuck out quickly to get some real food.   . . There's a saying in the restaurant business:  good service can save bad food, but bad service will kill even the best food.  Umami has demonstrated this principle in HD clarity.. . We walk in and take a guess that we should seat ourselves, and find a spot in a renovated janitor's closet with bar-like seating facing the wall.  There was a sad looking small houseplant that looked like it had been shat on.  My dining partner recognized the origin of the art on the wall as coming from the dollar bin at Staples.  Since nobody came to give us menus or take our orders I went to the front counter and grabbed two menus.  The servers seemed...impatient to getting back to screwing around and playing grab-ass.  He came up and asked if we wanted drinks.  I asked for a beer and he told me it was byob.  Fine.  My partner wanted a diet coke.  They were out.  She asked for an iced tea.  They were out as well.  He then saved us some time and told us that they were also out of french fries and one of their burgers.  So we settled on the house specialty burger and some other patty of shit, their onion rings and their "market salad" (this was the complete description).  . . The burgers come with one special(!) condiment they make in-house.  Their umami ketchup is straight Ragu sauce, and the garlic aioli I asked for never came out.  But when the condiments do come out, they come out on asian ceramic soup spoons - a stingy spoonful.    The onion rings come out in a fucking rice bowl.  There were 6 total.  And the burger is placed in the middle of  a naked white plate, all alone.  My salad never made it which in hindsight was probably a blessing based on the food that had come out.. Finally, when I went to pay, the server couldn't work the p.o.s machine and tried to do the bill in his head.  I had to remind him to take off the salad, which he insisted he did.  At this point I had had enough of this ridiculous monkey shit for service and asked for the receipt, told him to get a calculator and do the math.  He looked at me with this goofy ass grin and told me he was terrible at math.. . There are perhaps three times I can remember intentionally not tipping.  This was the third time.  . . the highlight of the evening is when you have to run across the street to get your drinks, there's a medicinal marijuana clinic next to the liquor store which is kind of interesting.  . . Otherwise, this place is a complete joke.  In fact, I am certain that Umami is a social experiment designed to see how bad service can get while still having customers fork over money.  Look for it on the Bravo channel this month. . . To the owners of this catastrophe - you will be removed from the food scene quickly.. . To potential customers - if you have any dignity and want some good chow, stay clear of this shithole.
