ReviewID: vxsn10dz-lzM9I0torrH8A
ReviewerID: DwiCW87ROqhdQ_d8G74eyA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
It was 10 o'clock on a Wednesday night and I hadn't been expecting to eat dinner out.  Fraiche was one of the few places in the area still open that wasn't bar food or fast food.. . My bf and I got to the restaurant and asked the hostess if their kitchen was still open, since it was so close to their closing time.  She said yes, but asked us to wait a moment while she went back to check with the kitchen staff.  She quickly returned and then sat us at a private table for two, in a secluded but not forgotten area.  . . It was great because the server was attentive and straight-to-the-point, informative but not too pushy.  She told us about the special pasta of the day, a short rib ravioli, and even told us the price, $14.  We only had about 5-7 minutes to put in our order before the kitchen closed for new orders, but the server actually gave us time to think about it and then returned a couple minutes later, a nice consideration.  We both opted for the short rib ravioli.  They brought us water and thinly sliced crusty French bread and a whole grain bread with some kalamata olive tapenade while we were waiting.  Simple.. . The ravioli came out pretty quickly.  It had a simple presentation, with a rosemary sprig for garnish.  The little pillows filled with short rib and cheese were light but rich in flavor.  The meat inside was juicy but the ravioli wasn't watery.  I liked that I could eat the ravioli as soon as it got to the table and not burn my tongue on its contents.. . Granted, it was late night, so there weren't a lot of other people competing for attention with our table, but we got consistently good service (water refills, dessert menu despite the late hour, and periodic check-ins) throughout the night and the food was perfectly filling and delicious.  . . We even had room for dessert.  The dessert was good, a nice finish to the meal, despite the slightly odd pairing of flavors in the dessert.. . All in all, the ambience of the restaurant, the quality of service and friendliness of the staff despite the late hour, and the pretty satisfying food made my first experience at this restaurant worthwhile.  I'd definitely go again.. . Caveat: if you order an entree for your meal, instead of something from the pasta category, the price of your meal will be higher.  For us, we ordered the ravioli x 2, a dessert, and my bf got a coffee, and the total was $43 without tax and tip.  It's not bad for a moderately nice sit-down dinner, but definitely not a regular hang out area for students.
