ReviewID: vY1_GMh5ieM-grhkkLyTeA
ReviewerID: PYkCTbUblipf_2UlFEH_8w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
So after incessant suggestion from a friend to try the father's office burger I decided to finally try it... Last Sunday I decided to take my parents out to dinner and since my mom's been on a bit of mission to try new and daring places I thought taking her to a place like Father's Office would be a good starting point for her... We got there around 9:30pm and the doorman was very kind... He asked if we had been there before and upon responding that we hadn't he informed us that there was no table service so we could order food at the bar... After our IDs were checked, which was somewhat surreal to have happen along side my parents, we entered father's office. The decor was engaging. I particularly liked the scattered beer taps along the back wall of the bar. So we found a table and I went ahead and ordered for us at the bar. We started with the Bone Marrow. I can't even begin to express how perfectly balanced the flavor was when you added the parsley an I believe sel gris. The acid in the little parsley salad cut through the fatty gelatinous richness of the bone marrow just perfectly. It was a very luxurious start to the meal. Next, we ate the infamous "Office Burger". It definitely lived up to the hype. The Dry aged beef had a deep intense beefy flavor. The onion compote was slightly smokey from the bacon and thankfully not exceedingly sweet from the caramelized onions. The bun was slightly crusty while still being nice and soft so it could absorb all the beautiful juices from the meat. And of coarse peppery arugula is always appreciated.... So is it the best burger in LA? Hmmmm.... maybe! I hesitate to say something is the best but I must say this burger was pretty perfect.... I can't wait to to go back to father's office to try more of their flavor-packed tapas... So why did it get only 4 stars? Because I'm saving the 5th star for a meal that truly takes my breath away... None-the-less if I could I would give Father's Office about 4.5 stars...
