ReviewID: vyAd7EdI7P9Dh8oe7L-prg
ReviewerID: -qL_AEDRH-4KSC6jnRYb3A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Naha
Category: American (New)
Naha is a true foodie's delight.  If you're looking for a place in the city where dining is an artistic experience (like the ones you see on tv), this is the place to go.  If you're looking for an upscale chain classic steakhouse, stay away.  Every menu item comes with a paragraph description that takes a gourmand's dictionary to decipher.  Fortunately, each description has the primary ingredient highlighted (ie, "ribeye", "squab", "scallops").  I was here on a work dinner so am not reviewing in regards to price, but the restaurant is expensive.. . We started dinner with a variety of appetizers.  The gnocchi was wonderful- a rich flavor explosion of pillowy-light potato dumplings contrasted with a warm, homey sauce with crunchy nuts and salty ham.  Tuna tartare dish looked like a rainbow on a plate- decorated with a colorful coleslaw-type sauce.  The romaine lettuce salad was most similar to a Caesar salad and again, looked like a painting on a wall.  The scallops were perfectly-cooked, firm yet not chewy, served on a bed of pears.  They also had vanilla bean in them- an example of the unique flavor combinations Naha attempts, most of which work.  However, another example of Naha's presentation- beautiful but small; there was only 3 nickel-sized scallops.  Finally, I had the beet salad which was light and refreshing- barely any dressing but lots of multi-colored red and white beets and coupled with a slice of goat cheese on the side.  After four (small) appetizers, I didn't have an entree, but my colleagues did.  The ones who got the short ribs really liked them but noted that they could have used a few more (only about 4 small ribs per plate).  Ribeye was a larger cut of beef with a side presentation of a potato with a thin stalk of rosemary sticking up horizontally.  Whitefish was served on a bed of mushrooms and other items, which muddled up the plate.  Finally, dessert was well, interesting.  Turtle sundae tasted great, but how could ice cream, chocolate, and caramel not?  Some others were almost a little too creative.  The carrot cake was far from traditional.  It was a sponge cake served with cardamom ice cream and hazelnut cream with orange rind.  PB&amp;J cheesecake was a bit of a stretch too, more aesthetically-pleasing than tasty.  The slice was small and made with purple concord grapes, tan-colored peanut butter ice cream, and a yellow brioche on the side.  . . This is a beautiful place for a celebratory experience.  There are no fat slices of good ol' American apple pie there, but the decoratively-dramatic, stylish combinations make up for that.
