ReviewID: VYOXc-NIbKltNU9hhguS_g
ReviewerID: ZYZNcugF3xUEGyLOVGiZ0Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
This absolutely has to have been the best restaurant experience that I have had in recent history.  While I was a little apprehensive having gone to another "tastings" restaurant a couple of weeks before and being underwhelmed,  this was all and more that it was touted to be.. . From the time I walked into the door, everything was perfect.  Someone whisked my coat away before I even knew it- no ticket for the coat- yet somehow I knew they would find it when I was ready for it.  After being seated in the front room done in shades of gray and purple, we were reminded of the tasting that we chose (12 courses) and were asked if we wanted the basic wine pairings or the more obscure wine pairings.  We chose the basic (additional $95 per person) and were not disappointed.  There was an Italian Cabanon Bonarda that was absolutely my favorite wine of the night.. . We started with cold potato soup with a black truffle served like an oyster in a shell and were told to eat it in just that way.  The food was not only delicious, but I couldn't help wondering with each course how to eat it- challenging myself with options to see if I could come up with how they would suggest the ultimate enjoyment.  One of my favorite presentations was a pillow (yes, I said pillow) that was placed at each setting on the table that was filled with "juniper air".  The smell was amazing and perfectly complimented the duck that was served on it.  Or imagine small cubes of lamb on a hot stone with a sprig of fresh rosemary inserted into that stone.  The aromatic scent that was released from the rosemary perfectly complimented the lamb which was served 3 different ways.  . . Throughout the night, while we had a multitude of servers, all were well informed about each course and answered any questions that we had.  It was great service without any pretense.  They do  encourage men to wear jackets, however, only one of the men I was with had a jacket and the others were not made to feel uncomfortable- keep in mind this was on a Wednesday night- weekends might be different.. . If you are looking for a really special night out- this has to be it.  It's not a "cheap date" - we spent $1200 for 4 of us, but it was worth every penny.  I will definitely be back to see what other surprises this amazing chef dreams up.
