ReviewID: Vyr31hc32VcWYiL5xn5kdw
ReviewerID: 2KDlNQ7zLBKKMTR2xgnwDQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mirai
Category: Sushi Bars
Mirai was possibly the best and freshest sushi I've had to date in Chicago.  The venue itself was cute - small enough to be intimate and busy enough to seem "happening".  The decor was just enough - not overly superfluous but definitely nice and not looking like your corner sushi joint.  Service was great (had a small mixup, but server apologized and took care of it), altho from a business standpoint, this place had way too many employees for the amount of seats.  I don't have too much to add to what's already been said.  Yes, the sushi is amazing, lot of it was melt-in-your-mouth quality.  Yes, be prepared to give up your firstborn child - j/k maybe just the stub of your pinky toe.  Yes, it's a great date place.  Only caution is that there isn't that much to the menu - I feel like I could probably eat all the "special" dishes in 2 visits.  Not to say that I wouldn't repeat, but it'd be hard to mix it up here unless I was strictly coming for the fresh fish!  Oh, word of advice - go early! Many of the so-called specials pushed by the chef were out when i went on a late Thursday evening, including the Kani nigiri and the aji sashimi.  I imagine this place blows up on weekends.. . But, on to my usual review of dishes tried:. . Hirame Usuzukuri - might be the only thing I didn't really like, tasted slightly fishy and didn't have the texture I like for my hirame, perhaps it's because it was of North Carolina variety. TunaTunaSalmon Special maki - interesting creation...i don't know where the salmon was! recommended to be eaten w/o soy sauce. Sakana Carpacio - tuna, salmon, whitefish were the 3 choices of fish we made since we were getting an octopus maki...sauce was tasty!. Spicy Mono Special Maki - probably my favorite roll that night, a bit salty, but the octopus was quality. Gyoza Ravioli - tasted a little bit like some sort of Chinese dumpling, but had fresh scallions inside. Yaki Yaki - might be the least impressive dish.  was basically grilled squid and shrimp arranged symmetrically atop some asparagus.  squid was yummy, but shrimp was kinda whatever. Atlantic sake nigiri, Otoro - melts in your mouth!. . Note: The cheapest bottle of sake on their list ($39/300ml) was quite great - a good balance of crisp, refreshing and slightly fruity.
