ReviewID: VZ9C8B9DE6FEaYqe_F-9WA
ReviewerID: XSLzmNxObUzuaIKxjBJ18Q
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Strip
Category: Sushi Bars
I generally like trendy modern restaurants &amp; and I'd heard varying reviews of Strip.  This "place" tends to be a smorgasbord of things- a bar, a restaurant; a Sushi bar &amp; a lounge - none of which it does practically well.  To be honest, I visited the restaurant twice before writing this review so that I could experience each aspect of this venue.. . Located in faux hell (AKA Atlantic Commons and boy is it common) SIDEBAR:  Why is all of Atlanta like one big 80's mall??  The entire city is like on gigantic suburb.  The neighborhoods have NO character!]. . The restaurant is located on Central Park (original, right??) of this "development", with a nice patio.  Its open late and it seems as though the place turns into from a lounge to a bar the later the hour.  . . I strongly suggest making a reservation in advance.  The reservation can be made on . http://www.opentable.com. .  My first visit was on a Sunday afternoon and it wasn't very busy.  My second visit was on a Friday and it was a mob scene with people, with no reservation, waiting an hour to be seated. . . Strip is a pretty casual place.  Yet based on date &amp; time you go it could be quiet or nosey.  If hitting on all cylinders and the moon &amp; Sun are positioned properly, Strip is good for meeting up with friends, a meal after a movie or a place for a couple who've been dating for a while to have a meal. If you have kids you could bring them - the earlier the in the day the better.. . The menu consists of standard salads, soups, burgers and various sandwiches.  I order a calamari, beef salad and grilled fish of the day and my dining partner ordered the crab cake, and ribs.  All those things were just marginal.  Then came the silver lining.  The Mac &amp; Cheese!  Kids, its ALL about the Mac &amp; Cheese!  It's the shiznit!!. . The second time I went it was just for cocktails and to try the sushi.  I wish I hadn't.  It was boring.  No need to review, just warn you to stay away from it!. . Now the bar was much better, I wanted something sweet but not sure exactly what I wanted and the bartender gave me a great concoction.  The second . . The price doesn't meet the expectation or service.  This is not a restaurant I would recommend as a must try.  I would have to say, unless you are out of options and already in Atlantic Commons then Strip might do.
