ReviewID: vzdYS1kYaFo7Qw2_muWd8g
ReviewerID: miOc5bKHCoZSY6zMAtJ0KQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
i understand the appeal of this restaurant. I mean, we all watch Top Chef, we all see how Tom critiques and nit-picks the other chefs to death. Naturally, you'd think his restaurant was out of this world. NO. After much hype my bf and I went to this restaurant, awaiting the taste of a wonderfully prepared dinner. Unfortunately, we could not wait to leave the place and joked about getting McDonalds afterwards. . . Ambiance wise, the location was awful. Located in a business center, outside a huge building. The decor was nice and classy, but obviously we werent the only ones that didn't like the place, as it was fairly empty during out 7:30 reservation.. . I ordered the potatoes gratin and a spinach mushroom ravioli. My bf got the spareribs with root vegetables and and order of the cheese/jalapeno grits. The grits were extremely bland, needing much salt and pepper, the potatoes gratin tasted like undercooked sliced potatoes in a thick cream sauce. Not cheese, cream. The ravioli was awful. I couldn't even stomach 3 bites as there was a random egg yolk in the middle. Mind you, there was no mention of an egg yolk on the menu so imagine my surprise! the spareribs were pretty good. Nice and tender. Very small, but enough. They were nestled in a cast iron dish with pearl onions and carrots in some sort of wine sauce. Not too bad, but nothing to call home about. . . Even the bread and butter was awful as they brought over a chunk of unsalted butter, and dumped way to much sea salt on top of it. Impossible to cut around so when we tried to eat it, our bread was overly salty. They brought shot-glass sized soups over to us in the beginning which weren't too bad. We weren't fans of the caviar in the bottom, and after a few spoonfuls, the soup was a little voerwhelming.. . The best part of the meal were the little desserts at the end. Cinnamon macaroons and miniature red velvet cupcakes. Judging those, I would have much rather had gone here for dessert rather than dinner. . . Overall, it was absolutely horrible. I dont see how anyone could review this restaurant well because it was just flat out awful. I think a lot of people rate it higher than it should be because of the well known chef, but honestly, there are so many way better restaurants in the LA area that this one should not even be in consideration for you next meal.
