ReviewID: w1h7JUBSHdJhmwu9_5N1nw
ReviewerID: cQag_d0xTVNjizAERPJZwQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: De Cero Taqueria
Category: Mexican
I came across this restaurant today with my girlfriend while we were in the neighborhood.  It looked pretty good from the outside so we decided to stop in for some lunch.  On arrival I was told by the hostess that the kitchen would be closing in 15min (not a problem it was already close to 2pm on a Sunday).  As both my girlfriend and I work in the industry we both understanding of timing and closing issues.  The trouble began directly after.  We quickly looked over the menu and I must admit that we were both very excited about what we saw and discussed numerous things that we wanted to taste, the problem was plain and simple.  The service.  Now, full disclosure, I AM A WAITER.  I understand how hard the job can be and sometimes things happen.  But what i don't understand is what happened.  After sitting for well over five mins we were finally brought some water.  We had already made of decisions (as per the hostess's time warning) and were ready to place our order.  Both servers were walking by our table.  Looking at us and then simply passing us by.  For the next ten mins we both watched the two servers argue as to who was going to take our table.  Both seemed too busy to even walk over and say "Hey we are really busy I'll stop by in a moment".  After an additional ten mins we were both pretty much fed up with being ignored (and watching the tables that came in after us be greeted).   The hostess tried to get us to stay but by then we were both pretty much done there were too many other restaurants on that block for us to sit there for 10-15 mins not and not even have someone come by, even just to take a drink order.  The menu looked very good as did what people were eating around us.  I am willing to give this place a shot cause I really want to try the food but as for my lady, she basically said she would not come back.  As a server I know how bad the job can sometimes be.  But watching the two girls argue over who was going to take us was annoying, and neither or the two even bothering to come by and greet was simply too much.  The service must be  pretty bad when another waiter gets up and leaves.
