ReviewID: W1hxVGepOQfu1YWVBvUsoQ
ReviewerID: jXXPTBnX0yQH2hiTpwzreg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I came here with two of my guy pals and we came hungry and ready for the breakfast that feeds giants.  . . Our plan was to order three different dishes and split it three ways so we can try as much as we can in one sitting.   We chose the Noisella French Toast, Tis the season (pumpkin) Pancakes, and the Some Like it Hot egg scramble.  . . "Addicted to Noisella" Stuffed French Toast - Nutella stuffed french toast, large and thick slices of toast filled with gooey nutella, topped with fresh whipcream and a drizzle of chocolate.  This was hands down our favorite of the three dishes.  The french toast melts in your mouth and the combination of whip cream and Nutella hit your tongue and you close your eyes, smile and go "mmmmm....". . "Some Like it HOT" Scramble - egg scramble with chicken tequila sausage, cheese, the tequila rancheros sauce gives it a good kick, not over powering spicy, but the sausages had great flavor.  Mines were also sitting on my plate of whip cream so it help tone down the heat a bit lol.  It was ok overall the sausages I would want on its own mmm so good.  The best part with the chili cheese bread!!  OMG!  It's jalepeno cheddar slices toasted!  I want some more!!! I wish they were the same size as the bread they used for the french toast, but we got 4 slices.  . . "Tis the Season" Pumpkin Pancakes - 3 pancakes topped with whipped cream and a dollop of pumpkin pie filling.  The pancakes were spiced and was pretty decent, but I was only able to take in two bites before slapping my hand down and tagging myself out, I was too FULL!!. . The place is really crowded and packed in tight and loud, but hey you're stuffing your face with good food, no need for talking.  The host was awesome, he referred to us as "Janet and Friends" and as we walked out, he was taking his break and said "Bye Janet and Friends" hehe.  We waited about 15 minutes at 12pm Saturday afternoon, not so bad.  . . Also gotta Thank all the YELPERS for the Rite Aid parking tip!. . I'm coming back when my cholesterol goes back to normal , for now it's just oatmeal and cheerios...hehe
