ReviewID: w2dhUApAygMoA2sINcJoLQ
ReviewerID: z33x0fHD8gutPy5Gv6Hwpw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Just back from Peru, my friend calls and says, "Let's go to Gorilla Cafe!" Wracking my brain, I feel ashamed. Gorilla Cafe, Gorilla Cafe? I'm no fan of WeHo, admittedly, except for the shopping on Melrose, and drooling over the architecture in Hancock Park, which I suppose just doesn't count. So how am I supposed to know all the cute little cafes? . . And then I placed it: GRIDDLE CAFE! I'd had it bookmarked for a year. So I drove over to said friend's house (which straddles West Hollywood and Hollywood proper, so it's cool), and we walked the four blocks to Griddle to avoid the horrendous parking situation (one star gone - and I started today's review with an arbitrary but optimistic four), arriving at about noon. Walking in, everyone was surprisingly friendly (add one star - we're back to four). We sit at the counter, which was nice - there were options as to where to sit, too - FIVE STARS! . . We talked, eventually got some attention from a rather rad counter waiter guy. . . The menu was extensive and ... expensive (one star off - overpricedness - four stars). I ordered a raspberry champagne drink (mimosa with fruit - delicious - one star - FIVE!). . . After a while, we decided on savory food, as opposed to those gigantor pancakes which just seem extraneous and arrogant in my politically correct mind. We ordered breakfast tacos, to be precise. I chose the Sunset Hipster (one star off for having to say that ridiculous name -  down to four), which is shrimp or chicken, cheddar, bbq sauce, red onions, with refried beans or tortilla chips made in house. She got some with eggs.. . This arrived and it was flavorful, large, and ... sloppy. I think the cooks should grill or at least heat the tortillas (flour Mission brand-type floppy tortillas), instead of just folding them over. Three stars. . . Service is good, though we didn't get a chance to specify beans over tortilla chips (we got chips). . . The French press iced coffee made my heart sing, until I saw the bill. $50 lunch, oops (for two). . . Mimosas, though, don't forget. And I took home half my food. And a ramiken. Shhhh. I tip fat. Ramikens are like 25 cents. That sour cream in the Ramiken? $1.50. Hey.
