ReviewID: W398rq38kRuTOT_dduP07w
ReviewerID: jGghx6ud8qGCSqoCxT3y9w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mana Food Bar
Category: Vegetarian
Perhaps the best restaurant meal I have eaten in the city. Inventive, delicious, interesting flavor combinations, and - significant for a vegetarian restaurant - Mana does not attempt to lure meat-eaters in the doors by featuring the novelty of fake meat. . . This latter strategy, practiced by many (most?) vegetarian restaurants seems senseless to encourage  converts or continued patronage, because while soy-derived products flavored with smoke and other such things may taste fine to vegetarians,  they will not take like meat to carnivores. And it is for this reason that I particularly appreciate Mana, because I believe I could take other vegetarians and the meat-eating stragglers in the bunch to Mana without feeling that anyone had to compromise.. . As other reviewers have said, the pickled vegetables are incredible, with hints of curry and cinnamon and overtones of deliciousness. The summer salad was enjoyable, I likely would not select that again. However, I must say - the Thai watermelon that our server specifically warned us was extremely spicy - had not a scintilla of spice. I told our server that, while tasty and refreshing, I thought we received a defective batch. . . The chili was tremendous. Vegetarian chili is very easy to make and very difficult to make special, and this was something that I will continue to order from Mana. Sliders were good, but I ordered mine without the mayonnaise which rendered it a bit dry - still satisfying. Finally, the cocktails were outstanding.. . Take advantage of the outdoor seating in the summer, as the inside is "quaint" with "mood lighting" (tiny and dark, but still a nice decor). I have no doubt Mana will reach five stars after the next visit, but this time a few of the dishes were forgotten and there were some other quirks that need some fixing. But absolutely recommended and a new staple for me.
