ReviewID: w3dIryDVLT6oJ5I43yFgMg
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ann&#39;s Snack Bar
Category: Burgers
I came here on a sunny, breezy afternoon with Mark T. and Adam R. The boys were very excited about the ghetto burger, but to be honest I was a bit afraid.  The snack shop is on Memorial, and it's a bit run down looking.  Like other posts, if you have seen the Soup Nazi episode on Seinfeld, well Anna is the burger Nazi.  She's a country belle with a no hassle attitude- you follow her waiting rules then you will get fed.   She literally grabs a huge mound of meat and slaps it on the grill, then she sprinkles seasonings and starts patting the burger downs. Her place doesn't have high end appliances, it's a no nonsense kitchen, you feel like you are at your aunt's place, especially in how you conduct yourself.  I have not heard Ma'am and thank you's so many times.  She's a bit scary so everyone's on their best behavior.  I was afraid to order the Ghetto burger, so I stuck with the cheeseburger, which was more then sufficient.  It had one patty (which is equivalent to 2 at most places)  Kraft cheddar cheese,grilled onions, tomatoes, lettuce, mayo, and ketchup.  The Ghetto Burger had bacon (which were grilled, then deep fried to a crisp) and 2 patties instead of one.  All the ingredients were very homey, like you can literally go to the store and buy them, nothing high end and fancy about the ground beef, it came from a long log, and Ann just literally slices it open and starts grabbing mounds of it, and slapping it on the grill.. The experience itself was worth the wait.  Don't even think you have the last word when you come here, it's literally like going back to kindergarten, you wait your turn, and speak when spoken to.  It was a bit funny that the rumors were true, Ann runs the joint, and you just got to follow her rules if you want service. It's hilarious to see people come in, and be told go outside and wait, you can't wait in here.  The rule is if all the stools are taken in the shop, you wait in the patio til someone leaves and there's room for you. Don't even bother placing an order, she won't listen to it.  Very entertaining to say the least, it's quite an experience!. Is this the best burger in ATL? Well for the size and price, maybe, but I think H&amp;F is still a bit tastier.
