ReviewID: w3qMTG91srRZxdf2G3iNVA
ReviewerID: YQB61SnkrbzUJItLq25uGA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Brazzaz
Category: Steakhouses
Warning: Eating at Brazzaz may cause dizziness, bloatedness, weight gain, and a sense of satisfaction like none other.. . I am a big fan of five course meals and at Brazzaz those courses are: meat, meat, meat, meat, and dessert.  Did I mention the meat course?. . Oh yeah, there's a salad bar too.  Lots of good things here: sushi, fresh deli meats, veggies (don't pass on the sesame green beans!), pasta, and, of course, salad.  Try a little of your favorites but don't lose sight on why you're here: the meat.. . Flip your token and begin salivating.  Sausages, chicken, top sirloin, botton sirloin, filet, rib eye, beef ribs, pork ribs, breaded pork, and grilled pineapple make your mouth think it's Christmas time for the tastebuds.  And it is, my friend, it is.  Don't kid yourself, though, although there is a large variety of meats, not everything is as good as it seems.  Make sure you take small portions and try EVERYTHING.  Sometimes the breaded pork is moist and tender, other times, not so much.  The chicken legs juicy but sometimes dry.  Sirloin rare or sometimes well.  No matter what, there is always a good selection of meats prepared properly and served promptly.. . If you take anything away from this review, please, and I beg you, please remember you can ask you server for anything.  Not seeing a meat you like?  Ask your server or a Gaucho (they guys with the meat).  Meat not prepared the way you like?  Tell the Gaucho and they will make sure they bring you your desired choice next time.  Bottom line, ask and you shall receive.. . We always get dessert here.  There's never room but we always get it.  Why?  Because it's creme brulee, that's why.  Not only is it prepared to perfection with just the right amount of even browning and crispy shell but they also add fresh berries or banana.  It's a must.  Don't worry about saving room as it is so delicious and cooperative it just finds its own room.. . Another tip for those who are looking for a bargain: check your local coupon mailers.  We typically find a Brazzaz BOGO coupon at least once a month or so.  You should also check your neighbor's mailer too... just for safe keeping.. . Go. Eat.
