ReviewID: w4tAKK7wJSBnbMvX5Fgodw
ReviewerID: PTAIcdnY-VAZp2RUqDwuJg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Shorty&#39;s
Category: Pizza
The pizza posse hit up Shorty's as part of my pizza series on Eat it Atlanta (insert shameless plug here). We decided to go to the Decatur (Toco Hills) location, where the Shorty's is tucked away at the far end of a strip mall near the Longhorn Steakhouse (side note: what happened to the Big Haired Lady?) It's definitely an unassuming spot, but when we arrived, it was packed and we had to wait a few minutes. Definitely a good sign when seeking tasty fare. . . The atmosphere is a little more upscale, and the menu has some more advanced offerings than just your regular pie. Our waiter was quite enthusiastic, and maybe a little bit of a smartass. When we ordered one large and one small pie I asked if that was enough for the four of us and he scoffed and said that it was enough for just him. His other notable claim was, "We have the best pizza in town, but the pizza isn't even the best thing on the menu." Then there was that few second pause where I realize he wants me to ask. OK, I bite and ask him what is the best thing on their menu, and I'm told the best thing on the menu is the fish. Apparently they cook salmon on a wood plank in their wood fired pizza oven and it's phenomenal.. . Wood fired oven! That seems hopeful! I asked how hot they cook and the waiter said 1200 degrees. Now I'm not so sure about this "best fish in town claim" as there's no way this oven statement is true. Maybe he was saying the fire itself is 1200 degrees but cooking a pizza at that temp sounds a little extreme and in my brief internet research I haven't found an oven that cooks at that temperature. . . The real measure of Shorty's would be in the pizza. For our initial order we started with a small pie with buffalo mozzarella, basil, and onion. We also got a large specialty pie (pictured above) that was a white pie with sausage and cilantro (among other things). After we finished that one, we got another large with pepperoni and arugula. They are of decent size, but they are quite thin so you can easily eat a lot of slices at Shorty's. . . This style isn't for everyone, but I like this type of dough. It has a light color, crispy on the endcrust, slightly chewy and firm, a little browning, but with some nice texture on the inside. . . I was actually expecting their pizza to be more like a Naples style pizza, being they used a wood fired oven, but there was surprisingly little char and the upskirt was very plain (no holes, no blackening). Everything was in balance though. The dough wasn't soggy. There was a noticeable amount of sauce. You could taste the mozzarella. And the pizza with toppings tasted fresh and didn't weigh down the pizza. It's was memorable to me, not crazily so, but memorable none the less, which means Shorty's is definitely a winner to me. Throw in a fun environment and "the best fish in town" and you got yourself a pizza destination my friends. . . OK, and be sure to get the warm cookies with whipped cream for dessert. Good stuff. . . Photos and full post here: . http://www.eatitatlant.... 
