ReviewID: w59BWRoXLU9UZ0qwwugtVw
ReviewerID: YsdwbA5QlOjFJGivM-eUMg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Gladys Knight and Ron Winans' Chicken &amp; Waffles
Category: Southern
We arrived on a Friday night around 6PM and the place was packed from inside out! BF and I squeezed ourselves in to put our name down on the waiting list. God, was that a struggle! As we were waiting for our table with the others, we got a lot of "looks" that made BF and I very uncomfortable. Maybe because we were the only Asians there at the time? Or is it because we were so tiny compared to them? Whatever!. We were seated after 45 minutes. Then we got the "look" again from the other tables around us. Gosh, all we want is some fried chicken, why can't they stop harassing us with their eyes! The young girl who was sitting next to our table was looking at me as if she's never even seen an Asian girl before. I tried to ignore it at the time, but it was really hard. I just want to quickly order some grub, scoff it down, pay and go! . Twenty minutes go by and the waiter finally came to take our order. OK, BF went for the "Midnight Train", it's a big waffle with 4 fried chicken wings. I ordered 2 Fried Chicken Breasts with a side of Mashed Potatoes and Collard Greens. Thirty minutes go by and finally...our food!!! I was so hungry at the time, I totally forgot how uncomfortable the other patrons made me feel. I just ignored everyone and everything and started eating like there's no tomorrow. Not even half way done with our dish, the waiter came by and gives us our check. Huh?? BF actually wanted to try their sweet potato cheesecake, but I guess they needed for us to finish soon because there were still a lot of people waiting. Again, whatever!. The food was good, not great. The fried chicken were very crispy, moist and wasn't greasy at all. The mashed potatoes and collard greens were just average. The waffle, well it tasted like a waffle, not outstanding. I love the décor of this place. They had celebrity pictures, autographs and memorabilias all over the walls and nice hip-hop music playing on the background. -1 star due to crappy service.
