ReviewID: w6nBWT5wsrWSh559b7PYLA
ReviewerID: GihLP06JC_t9txyQr31rLQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Cafe
Category: Vietnamese
Parking?  . . A note to my fellow Yelpers: . -Unless you're reviewing the Crossroads Town Center BJ's Pizza in Corona, please refrain from complaining about parking.  I mean godammit!  If we ever want Los Angeles to be on the fast track (or any track for that matter) towards a walkable, transit oriented, culturally thick and dense garden of restaurants, bars, clubs, shops &amp; pocket parks, we need to understand that provided parking is a negative rather than a positive.. . The Pho Cafe is a great example of this complicated tug-o-war.  . . It's reason for credibility is tied primarily to word of mouth in the Hipster communities of Silver Lake &amp; Echo Park...with absolutely ZERO curb appeal, it is a dammed establishment in certain aspects.. . Don't get me wrong, the word of mouth thing is an essential cornerstone of almost every prized urban grub spot, but what we should also want, what we also NEED is a place like Pho Cafe appealing to the casual passer by.  With no signage or writing, having a parking lot actually huts it because pedestrians have the natural impediment of a parking lot to deal with.  If the parking lot were gone and the shops moved to the lot line...a person could walk down the street and see inside.   A car speeding by is at a complete disadvantage...cars rely on giant signs and easy navigable mass expanses of parking.. . I realize this may be a bit trivial, considering Pho Cafe seems to work...but see the forest for the trees.  There is a larger point here.  Reading complaints about how Pho Cafe's parking lot sucks is a bit heartbreaking for me, knowing that we're fortunate to even see any parking in front.  We need and want better transit, OK.  But let's give policy makers more reason, by ceasing to complain about parking in an already dense and urban neighborhood such as Silver Lake.. . All that having been said, Pho cafe has a simple menu, a simple design and appeals to the Pho fan not looking for the traditions present in Westminster or San Gabriel.  It's pretty tasty and pretty fresh and the "lemongrass beef" is an interesting deviation from the standard fare found at the Trad pho places.. . Check it out...it's pretty good and very relaxing.
