ReviewID: w8ROZncSmUvvM-laTMQ40A
ReviewerID: gWIG32KTNkh3hubHihMUDA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Houston&#39;s Restaurant
Category: American (New)
This restaurant....my god is it good. I specifically like this location becase I feel that the managers and waiters are really on point. Everything is about as efficient as you could ever hope for.. . One star down for no reservations. Sorry but that is clearly just a way to have a big crowd standing outside (so that stupid people can drive by and be all like "Wow dude! Check out the crowd! That must be such a hip and happening place, let's go sometime!") or to make people go to your bar. Most Hillstone restaurants have the same MO...R+D is possibly the worst offender in this category and I give props to Bandera because they actually *do* take reservations. But word of advice, the wait at Bandera with no reservation makes Houston's wait look like a cake walk. But I'll save that for another review.. . Houston's has a small-ish menu. They have a few specials and a soup of the day. The Firehouse Chili on Saturday blows my mind. Unless I'm close to being able to eat it I can't even think about it too much (and seeing as how it's Monday and the earliest I could get is Saturday, this is where the topic ends). There are some really good appetizers like the famous Spinach &amp; Artichoke Dip. It's just really good, let's leave it at that. Order it if you haven't already. You could make a meal out of it and be totally satisfied. . . I've had most of the menu items but I settled on one item that is the best I've had...the french dip. There simply doesn't exist a better french dip anywhere in the world. This is made out of delicious, roasted, medium rare prime rib, piled high on the roll. There is a touch of mayo on it that isn't noticeable but adds a little deliciousness (but if that seems to bother you then just order it without). The au jus is the best I've had. It's just the best french dip you'll ever have. I promise you won't find a better one (no, not even at Philippe's, though theirs is good too...way smaller and cheaper). Oh, and the Houston's french dip is sold at an astronomical price. I don't remember exactly but I will guess something like $17. I don't give a shit though...it's worth every penny. You can't put a price on something so perfect.. . Be careful though. Once eating the french dip you will not be able to even look at another restaurant's feeble attempts at creating this sandwich.. . I usually consider Houston's and Bandera to be my all around favorite "American" restaurants. They have smaller menus but everything is really done perfectly. It's the polar opposite of a shithole like Jerry's Deli where they have hundreds of items and everything is done absolutely POORLY. Or like Cheesecake Factory with like 2 or 3 million menu items and all of them just slightly above average. . . I love this place...I never turn down a chance to go here.
