ReviewID: w_1ERlZIjDqeuHouQP_9nA
ReviewerID: YzjsknYAU95hM3mS0HJljQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
There is something about white walls, high ceilings, and marble floors that attracts me.  Not to mention the goodies dislayed behind clear glass at the bakery/ ready made food items that catches your eye when you walk in.  Bottega Louie is fresh and clean.  Its funny when you actually leave the place that you feel you are right back in down town LA where the streets smell foul.  . . Anyhow..  i enjoyed my meal here.  The atmosphere is very modern and I love the high ceilings.  I also love white so this place was perfect!  I came here for lunch hoping lunch would be served, but i didn't know that on weekends they serve only breakfast and brunch till 4.  Then they serve dinner from 4 pm till closing.  I was a little disappointed because i was hoping to get my fix on the trenne and the portabello fries.  For brunch however, they serve from breakfast menu and salad and pizza from the lunch/dinner menu.  At least i got try one thing i was hoping to eat from the lunch menu= pizza.  I ordered the bianco pizza because i saw so many pictures on yelp.  It was good!  the garlic and cheese smell is heavy, but i love it!  The arugula was a good balance from the cheeses. The crust was only okay.  I think they left the pizza in the oven for too long.  It was a little burnt on top and bottom and tasted more like a cracker for some bites.  Hopefully it was just mine because the top of the pizza was so tasty.  The ham and Gruyere fritatta tasted familiar.   It didn't  look  like a fritatta because i always thought they were at least 2-3 inches high!!  This one was pretty flat and looked like an open faced omelet.  The potato pancakes with apple sauce and sour cream was really good!  It was tossed with green onions and was   nice and crispy on the outside.. . My bf liked the strawberry jam they serve with the french bread and butter that he went and bought a jar of it.  Later to realize that in my pantry at home we had 3 jars of jam from the same brand.  I thought it looked familiar when i walked past my pantry and saw the checkered red and white cap.  On our way out we also bought  a red velvet cupcake because i can never pass that up!  it was small , pretty good, but not as good as Dots.  . . I will be back for the trenne and the portabello fries.  Any other recommendations yelpers?
