ReviewID: w_Pgs7ZSv-3GE00Zywaz2w
ReviewerID: 0fRZr3IzbqImRNswkCnNDw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Spring Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Last night I had a dinner that was so good it made me blush.  Luckily, my beau still wants to do things to impress me sometimes, and he picked this place out like the ace in his back pocket.  I am a huge fan of the Green Zebra and couldn't wait to see how Shawn started it all here at Spring.. . Let me start out with a bit of advice- LET YOUR SERVER PAIR YOUR WINE!  Their wine list is extensive and full of gems I never would have thought of trying with my meal.  We both agreed that the food was amazing, but the wine pairing enhanced the whole experience ten fold.  Not only that, but our server (Mary) was so knowledgeable in her craft that I felt like I was attending a prestigious wine school.  A "gamey" sake to accompany the earthy flavors of the sweet potato with the hamachi tuna and a sake referred to as "divine droplets" to accompany my light and creamy yellow tail maki.... genius!  I could go on forever..... . But instead I will delve into the foodgasm that occurred in my mouth from the least likely source.  I don't eat bacon because, for lack of better words, I think its icky.  I know that statement stirs up strong emotions for some so please don't hate me.  When you are having a grown up dinner at a restaurant like Spring and they bring pork belly to the table, you can't play the icky card.  You have to eat at least a bite..... and Ah Mah Gawd.....it was fantastic!  The crisp of the bacon, the sweet of the sticky buns, hot of the chili sauce and tang of the pickles.....it was ridiculous.....I went back for a second forkful.  (I also ate the octopus.  Read the above story again and replace bacon with octopus.). . The surprise fave item of the night was the lemongrass coconut soup- it is such a perfect harmony of amazing flavors in your mouth- sweet, and salty with a perfect little shrimp delight packaged in Won ton.  I never expected to be so enthusiastic about a soup course.  . . Of course I had to have a bit of desert, accompanied by a delicious port- it was a take on a smore with little salty butter cookies with merengue sandwiched between served on hot melty rich chocolate.  Phenom!  Totally worth nearly exploding.. . So, when you are lucky enough to have a dinner at Spring, let your server pair your wine, order things you wouldn't normally eat, and just like Green Zebra- put a little of each element of the plate into each bite and you too will blush at the table.
