ReviewID: Wa0BpGvfeFODATrAcLHEww
ReviewerID: ELKmbnByACQXHYpmpsiCRQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Terroni
Category: Italian
I was meeting a business associate at this restaurant for dinner. I arrived at the restaurant early and got seated. After a few minutes, the bus boy brought a tiny mini-saucer with about an ounce of olive oil (literally) and bread to the table. I asked him if he could bring one more saucer of the olive oil because there were two people eating. There were two reasons for this. First it was such a minute amount, it would not be enough for two people, and second because I don;t think it is appropriate to be swabbing bread in a tiny saucer with a business associate you have never met. Not much to ask at a fairly pricey restaurant. I was abruptly put in my place and told that this is very expensive olive oil and that was all I was going to get. Temporarily stunned and not believing what I was hearing, I said ok and asked him to bring me a side of Parmesan cheese. I happen to like Parmesan cheese and olive oil with my bread. Sue me. On this 'ridiculous request' that I seemed to be making I was once again told, "No, you cannot have any cheese. That is not allowed." At this point, after only being seated for 5 minutes and having somebody so rudely greeting me, I was literally starting to boil over. I told the bus boy I wanted a side of Parmesan cheese and he once again said "No you are not getting any.". . At that point I told him to send the manager to the table. When the manager arrived I thought I was going to finally get an apologetic ear but to my surprise the manager was even ruder. She told me "I'm sorry that is not allowed. It ruins the taste of the olive oil." I said to her that I like Parmesan cheese with my olive oil and I decide what is good for my taste buds or not. Once again she said "The chef has made the decision that the food should be eaten the way he prepares it." It's not a food dish I told her. It's the olive oil you dip your bread into. I explained that I was about to drop $100 on a pasta dinner and that if I wanted some Parmesan cheese with my microscopic saucer of olive oil, I should be able to get it. I sincerely believed at that point she would say "Ok...this time, but we can't do it again." BUT NO. She replied "I'm sorry but we do not allow any substitutions on the menu". I told her this wasn't a substitution, I wanted a freakin' little side of Parmesan cheese. Once again the answer was . "NO". . If I had not been meeting someone for business, I would have gotten up and walked out of the restaurant. Unfortunately it was not the time or place to do so, so I sat there and dealt with it. When I got my ridiculously over-priced pasta dish for dinner, I couldn't even ask for Parmesan cheese in fear they would have said no and I would have flown off the handle.. . What a miserable restaurant. Mediocre food, over-priced and absolutely no clue as to how to make a paying customer happy. I paid the bill, but now I will tell everyone I know, and post reviews telling people not to go to this horrific restaurant.. . There are far better Italian restaurants in LA that actually respect their customers.. . For the 2 tablespoons of Parmesan cheese they could have put on my table, they will now lose thousands of dollars in potential business because this review be posted in multiple places. . . I hope they like the taste of THAT.
