ReviewID: waPofWDAQbuKJkoswUbheQ
ReviewerID: b0I0Xx0Tgm0-IlUGx7waFQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Elements Café
Category: American (New)
Yowza!  Elements Kitchen is INCREDIBLE!  Can I just say, this afternoon we had one darn good meal?  This cozy little place was a Yelp recommendation, and we couldn't wait to go.  The seating area is inky dinky (inside and out), but you feel like you've discovered one of the best restaurants in Pasadena.  And who doesn't like they are "in the know"?  . . We started off with 2 fresh lemonades, squeezed from the tartest of lemons. Nothing beats a homemade lemonade on a hot day. So, we were tickled. . . We had the wild mushroom bisque with a creme fresh and truffle oil dollop.  Rich, but delicious, and a great combination of flavors.  Alongside were some herb and parmesan foccacia that were piping hot out of the oven. We looked at each other and smiled. We knew we just found a new favorit place.. . My hubster got the highly acclaimed Mac &amp; Cheese with Chicken.  He took his first bite and I watched his eyes roll into the back of his head out of sheer pleasure.  He declared that it was the best mac and cheese he's had in his life.  I tasted it, and I agree. The man ain't lyin'.  It was damn good. Not sure what mixtures of cheeses they used to come up with such a creamy texture, but it was so good, he licked the bowl.. . I ordered the amazing Curry Chicken sandwich with dried cranberries, toasted almonds and Madras curry on a house foccacia with a  light mixed salad.  It was cool and exploding with flavor and had a fantastic mix if textures.  I was overjoyed and will most definitely order it again!. . Then, we at dessert.  Oh Dear. It was sooooo good.  Hubster ordered the Key Lime Cheesecake.  It was light and super tart and I couldn't steal just one taste.  I had three!  I love me some ginger snap cookies, so I ordered the Ginger Molasses cookie.  I swear I reached back and felt my shoulder blades, looking for my wings.  I figured I must have died and gone to heaven. . . So that's it.  A long review I know. But, I just couldn't help myself.  Go. Visit. Eat there. You'll love it.
