ReviewID: WB4FDlTR_t6VQcQ0PEmR6A
ReviewerID: _1Qk6NLFy3wqkhpjAPEZVA
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
I love their food .. however ..... . Every time I order from them there's always a problem with my order. The first time I ordered delivery somehow my black beans were left behind :( I allowed it to slide I understand everyone makes mistakes. They credited me that amount for next time. 3 weeks after I called to use my credit and for some reason ..  they had no record of that incident and supposedly the manager wasn't on the clock so he couldn't speak to me to resolve the problem, so they didn't credit my food on that night. . I had to call back the next morning to complain to the manager in order to get my credit. My credit  was granted so my boyfriend and I decided to order food again  we ordered the breaded chicken combination and a sandwich and a side of grilled asparagus, So why was the asparagus missing? Ugh !!! at this point I was super irritated we actually didn't complain.. . Okay .. it gets juicier .. we had stopped ordering food from them over a month I believe, and the next time we ordered they had swapped  our sandwich with some other peoples order ... okay we got  credit again ..So again we used our credit  for pick up I get there 15 minutes later and why did the cashier girl make it for delivery?  I had specified  it was pick up twice over the phone .. so then I had to wait 15 more minutes for my food to be cooked or re-heated not sure ? so then I get my food  and I start checking my order and again my black beans where not in the bag and she had gotten my food order wrong on top of it I said breaded chicken not grilled, so I left it at that I really wasn't about to wait for them to cook my actual order.Good thing I went through my order before leaving.. .  I just don't understand what is so hard on getting someone's order right?, I've been in the restaurant business for a couple of years. I know when you get an order wrong is either you don't enjoy your job or your not paying attention when someone is telling you what they want. Or your bosses don't care either otherwise they would get rid of people that are hurting the business . . We sure got some free food for their mistakes but honestly not worth it!  . Has this happened to anyone else? or do I just have bad luck?
