ReviewID: wBK-n1B32bHvhsuBBYMIUg
ReviewerID: sjgeMz775fWMsa4L9yGOjg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Hamburger Mary&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
Halfway through the meal my fiance leaned across the booth and asked rhetorically, "are we ever coming here again?'   When I gave a resounding no, he followed up with a suggestion, "then I say we dine and dash."  That's right folks, we had such a bad experience we didn't even want to pay the bill.. . So what was wrong? Let me make a list:. . 1) Bad service.  Our server had friends at a booth next to ours and could hardly be bothered to come to our table, inches away from where she ALREADY was.  I asked for mayo on the side.  My plate came out, sans mayo.  I asked for mayo again. She said, "Right away" but then finishes cleaning a table before she went to the kitchen and returned with my mayo.  Ok, so maybe my idea of right away and her idea of right away don't mesh.. 2) Mediocre food.  It was lunchtime, and quite so the kitchen could not have been that busy, but our food took wayyyyy too long to arrive and when it did, it was warm not hot. No excuses for that- but oh wait, I forget, our watiress was busy with her friends and thus our plates had to sit under a hot lamp until a lull in her conversation.  Beyond that, the burger itself was barely adequate.  The meat was overcooked, the bacon soggy and the combination of bbq sauce and the "special sauce" was too sweet.  . 3) Unprofessionalism of entire staff.   So apparently the bartender and wait staff play this game when someone attractive walks in the door- one will go "woooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhh" and an another will answer the call with another call.  I'm sure that the staff love it.  I'm sure its loads of fun for them.  I'm also sure that I will never return to the restaurant and will warn others away as well.  If you can't have respect for your customers then you don't deserve customers.   Oh! And my fiance found hairs in his food.  Yes, that's hairs plural.  If the employees were acting like asses in the front of the house where people can see them, who knows what goes in the kitchen?. . Yeah, in short, I hated it. I won't be back.
