ReviewID: wcC8IeKwpHiGGrQPFRl-Gg
ReviewerID: ar6ahAtqYusTHZ0npN5OXA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Original El Taco
Category: Mexican
After spending about an hour trying to decide where I wanted to go to dinner last night, I finally decided on The Original El Taco. Right before my friend picked me up, I gave them a call to ask them to hold us a table, as instructed on the website.. When we arrived, the place was packed. We checked in with the hostess, but we were still going to have to wait. So we went to grab a drink at the bar, and ordered sangria for me, a margarita for him, and two tequila shots. (Tuesdays are like my weekend, because I usually work when everyone else is having fun.) The bartender was super nice (Brandon, I believe), so we decided just to sit at the bar for dinner.. We started off with queso dip, then ordered the pork carnitas taco, the pork belly taco, the red chili steak taco, and the chicken fajita salad. (All to share, as usual.) The queso dip was good, if not a little too runny. The chips were great, I loved the flavor of the salt. The tacos were all good, though the steak tasted like it was marinated in Dale's. (Not that that is a bad thing, but I could do it at home.) The fajita salad was very disappointing. When I think of a fajita salad, I expect the chicken to be warm. It was not. There was no cheese, no tortilla, nothing. (I know it didn't say on the menu there would be those things, but honestly. It was just a salad. Why even include the word fajita?...hmm, I guess that bothered me more than I thought. I suppose when you are in a sangria haze everything is a little happier.). We stuck around for a few more drinks, and my friend even won a shot of tequila on the wheel....of....tacos! It was a fun night, but will we be back? I am not sure. Our bill was eighty dollars, so it was a hundred dollar dinner. (3 sangria, 2 margaritas, 1 beer, 2 shots, chips and dip, 3 tacos, and a salad) Perhaps now that I have the menu narrowed down, I will be able to just pop in for a few tacos and not drop so much hard earned money.
