ReviewID: WCIzLpZF7FnSethhULF6pg
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Dogwood Restaurant
Category: Southern
Heading towards the door, I saw a gold sign, that had something like this " Please Dress Accordingly" . Upon entering the establishment we were warmly greeted.  Upon being sat down, I had a few minutes to glance at the restaurant.  It's very cleanly decorated. Beige Chairs, white table cloths, warm lighting, makes a very warm and romantic setting for any special occasion.. What was ordered:. Appetizers:. Fois gras, toast, maple syrup sauce. Duck w/ Parmesan risotto. . Entree:. NY Sirloin Steak w/ whipped w/ Parmesan cheese potatoes, asparagus. Grilled Lamb, w/ berry sauce, light whipped potatoes, onion relish. Side of Mac n' Cheese.. (Nothing special w/ the cheese just a simple smooth mac n' cheese, I think they used a medium sharp Cheddar from the taste). . All the appetizers and  entrees were presented very pretty, on nice white plates. Again with the clean lines, and simplicity that makes this restaurant very attractive to me.. . Entrees were no more then 32 bucks. The most pricey appetizer was the fois gras which was 16.00 (and it was tiny, with a tiny fried quail egg, but very good, I would however forgo the maple syrup sauce, I didn't think it added a component of the dish that I really thought was necessary). . The NY steak was cooked to order, nice and juicy for a NY strip.. The lamb to me was a little bit more then medium rare, it seemed pretty rare, but it was nicely marbled and soft to the bite. As a friend Kit and Adam would say "Mary had a little lamb- but now it's on my plate..mmmm". . Dessert was strawberry shortcake filled with Creme Brulee Ice Cream.  The biscuit that constructed the dessert was light and moist, with a touch of powdered sugar.  The ice cream at the first couple of bites, tasted like vanilla ice cream, but then I realized it tasted ab it more eggy, making if more creme brulee.. . Meal was wonderful, Jim our waiter good on recommending the Duck Appetizer. His take is, it's a special you can't get again- so give it a try! Glad we did, it was delicious!
