ReviewID: WdnsqOe7jjEbIUY_sZ3GvQ
ReviewerID: QT36gi28fuk4msEXmm9irw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Veggie Grill
Category: Vegetarian
This is a relatively new chain with 2 locations in Irvine and 1 in El Segundo just a couple miles south of LAX.  The menu architect is Ray White, who was also half of the brains behind my long-time favorite Native Foods in the desert.  Because of their common heritage, the menu at Veggie Grill reminded me a lot of Native Foods--which is a good thing!  The restaurant has been receiving accolades, including this year's VegNews' restaurant of the year, so we were anxious to try it.. . Physically, the El Segundo restaurant is attractively designed, with the now-standard high ceilings, concrete floor and modern furniture.  It looked like a hip college hangout.  Patrons order at the counter, put a number on the table and wait for the food to be brought from the kitchen.  Wait times were minimal at 5 pm on a Saturday, and seating was ample.  By 7 pm the place was crowded but not full.. . We ordered four items: the V-burger, the Carne Asada sandwich, the Santa Fe Crispy Chickin sandwich and the Beam Me Up chili.  Entrees were $8-10.  Everything was good, although I especially liked the Carne Asada sandwich, which I thought was a first-rate dish.  We got sweet potato fries and steamed kale as side dishes, and both were very good as well.  I'm not a huge fan of sweet potato fries but these may be the best I've had.  I personally don't like kale but they put a nice dressing on it and made it taste palatable.  I'd say it was the best kale dish I've had, and I wouldn't be adverse to ordering it again.. . So, very high marks for this restaurant all around.  I can't wait to go back and sample more things on the menu and get the Carne Asada again.  The restaurant is so close to LAX that I may just have to swing by next time I'm flying in or out of there.  Even better, I'm crossing my fingers that maybe someday the chain will expand to the Peninsula.  I promise to be a regular and hungry customer!
