ReviewID: WDzU6jmZ_2ZigPKUpOkcSQ
ReviewerID: NlUJ9P_zFouWrAy5iNL3PQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
This is my new favorite restaurant in town.  If you drive by on an afternoon, you'll see this is no secret, there is always a crowd waiting for a table.  I like to go on weekdays when they open at 7am and avoid the crowds.  Also you will avoid what can be surly attitude on the part of the crowd wranger that works for the restaurant.  I wouldn't want that job, so cut him some slack anyway, OK, and if he gets a chance to know ya he will cut you some slack too I bet.. . Since I get there when it opens, I have time for a leisurely breakfast and still can get to work on time, the only drawback being I haven't had the guts yet to try ordering a lunch item at 7AM (the menu DOES say "Served all Day").  True I don't care about the clock and will eat (or drink) anything at any time, so eventually I'll get around to it.  It's just that I'm still working my way through the egg dishes (haven't even tried the pancakes yet) right now.  Hopefully the lunch cooks are there when it opens and if I order a burger I ain't gonna get some stink eye, but I doubt I have any worries there.. . If you like coffee, a french press is your only option, which is awesome, but be fore-informed.  You get your choice of mild, medium or strong brew.  In the afternoon, there will be various chili choices depending on the day (if you're ordering a dish with chili), however so far the ones I've tried have been rather unusual in flavor and kind of detract from the meal, so maybe avoid the chili if you're a first-timer.  I haven't seen any chilis listed at opening (another reason maybe I should avoid ordering lunch at 7AM but we'll see...)  . . To impress your friends and family have them order the pancakes and gasp in awe at their sheer size and volume, besides, most people order pancakes anyway.  Me, I'll get around to them eventually I'm sure, but I prefer a Du-Par's sort of pancake experience and besides I never get tired of eggs.  . . You will hear some bluesy rock and roll on the speakers all the time and you get a feeling this place has it's own raison-d'etre and will leave its mark on history and don't even begin to ask me what the heck that meant, sorry.. . If you are looking for my personal non-pancake recommendation, I recommend getting the Pomodoro Omlette, which is filled with garlic sauteed tomato, basil and Parmesan (unfortunately the Parmesan cheese doesn't usually melt completely).  Make sure to add shrimp to that, it's a must!. . If you live nearby here consider yourself lucky.  If you eat here that is!
