ReviewID: wefivBFmMdFCXo-_rcKUnw
ReviewerID: KeJqunnvArQVLKPBQsqAsw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Comme Ca
Category: French
True Rating: 3.5 stars w/ two visits over several months.. . I dined here recently for the second time. As the prologue suggests, the first time was worthy of four stars, but my most recent visit warrants three.. . We were eager to get back to one of our favorite foodie-cum-scenester restaurants when I saw that they were participating in "Restaurant Week." Their three course prix fixe menu looked great and included a couple of my favorite dishes from the first visit, such as the salad lardon, or as another reviewer crudely called it, the "bacon salad.". . One of the things that's so nice about Comme Ca is that you get a real foodie menu without the pretentious pricing found at some "finer" dining establishments. I think some reviewers have forgotten that, or are not aware. Thus, my guest and I decided to forego the dineLA menu and order off the regular dinner menu/placemat (more later) because we realized we could get anything we wanted for around the same price as the prix fixe, perhaps minus dessert, which I don't need now, trust me. In other words, we were fine with two, say two-and-a-half courses for the same price.. . Bread here is great and served by a suberb supporting cast of bus staff. Since my guest usually orders sparkling water, I love that Comme Ca has their own in house water filtration system for flat and sparkling water. This is a nice "green" detail, although I hope they reuse their galss bottles. They must, as they read "Comme Ca" along the sides.. . For those who criticize the service, I think their pacing is appropriate for a place of this caliber, offering this kind of food experience. I will go so far as to agree that the restaurant's guests may have been better served by one more server on the floor. In our case, we were in no rush and let our friendly server know. BTW, they are the best dressed servers in town as far as I'm concerned, a nice detail rarely executed this well.. . We started with the bone marrow and oxtail jam which was four stars for me. I love marrow (had 1 better), there wasn't much, but it is considered a delicacy, and is paired with a generous portion of oxtail with crostini. Anyone who expects oxtail turned into some kind of jelly/marmalade is silly, so toss those reviews aside! The fleur de sel enhanced the marrow nicely. My guest had the salad lardons; frisee with poached egg and bacon. Scrumptous, simple, perfect for Comme Ca. My guest had a good duck dish, something I order often, and it was done nicely. I ordered the lamb shank and was pleased with the tenderness of the meat, although it may have been a tad on the dense side. Were I at a "New American" place I'd have thought it sauce heavy, but for French it was nice, and the ratatouille enhanced the dish.. . The noise level has been well documented, so I'll leave it alone. The bar program is exceptional. Unique and classic hand-crafted gin and bourbon drinks alongside some trendy (re: acai) drinks, with the courage to serve absinthe (you tell me, trendy or classic?). Minus to the "sommelier" (quotes "because you never know"). I asked for a rec between two wines, one I knew and another I didn't. We discussed them briefly and the "somm" demonstrated that he knew about the bottles. He rec'd a third bottle, describing it as a blend of the same three varietals in the other two bottles. I always trust a "somm," but in this case I was duped. The wine wasn't bad, and it was something new to try, but it was 80% one varietal and 20% another. That's 0% of the third, for those counting. Plus, the 80% happened to be syrah, which I usually don't like much at all in that concentration. I found it lacked the lushness of the other choices and had more of that "syrupy" syrah taste. Also, I asked why they don't use crystal stemware like most other places of this caliber/reputation, and the "somm" tried to tell me the clunky glass he was pouring into was Riedel crystal. Later my waitress confirmed that they have limited Riedel available upon request. Um, I was just asking, "somm" guy. I'd have been happy with, "Glass stemware allows us to have a more varied and value priced wine list." I used to sell Riedel, so I felt like he was playing with me. In the end, I regretted engaging him at all. Maybe nic-picky wine-snobbery, but he's a "somm," you know. Otherwise, the wine list is nice and well priced, if a bit limited, especially considering they have a Wine Director and TWO "sommeliers" on staff, kinda makes you wonder.. . Okay, the placemat menus, briefly. I like them, but take them away when I order. Take them, take them away, please. I'm all about the no linen trend, but take away the placemat menus, please. They're so annoying and you've got to know it's true.. . I love the foodie menu and wine/bar list, but need to return to grant 4+ stars
