ReviewID: wF4N4Jn5LzWFJXpQvuiogg
ReviewerID: MbE3C2bCJJ8FZ1nK7K82bA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
I'm absolutely perplexed at the reviews I read for this place, because I'm pretty hard on Italian restaurants (we have so many damn good ones here in LA) and Ugo was a VERY satisfying experience. . . There were 3 of us for dinner. It was a Sunday evening, and the place was packed. We requested an outside table under a heat lamp (mid-Sept, starting to get cool in the evenings), and we were granted it.  Friendly staff, greeting us nicely at the door, through the restaurant, and immediately upon sitting down. A runner asked if we'd like bread. We said yes. 45 minutes later we realized we were never given it, but this was because we were trying to mop of the outstanding sauces with our entrees. (He apologized, brought it right away, and we sopped up said sauces.). . I've been in a mojito mood lately, and the runner confirmed that they did serve an Italian version of one. Our waiter appeared pretty quickly, and he took our drink order. Their "Italian mojito" and two iced teas. These came quickly. Their mojito was outstanding. I forgot what kind of liqueur they used, but it gave the drink sufficient "weight" so that it didn't go down so fast (like regular mojitos). I like being able to sip the thing throughout a meal. Kudos there.. . We started by sharing a caprese salad. It was wonderful. They lightly grill their Roma tomatoes for this salad, pairing with the buffalo mozzarella and basil and oil and balsamic. I liked this twist of warm with cold; it was a nice surprise. Everyone at the table thought is ranked among the better caprese salads they've had.. . I had their Pescatore (sorry about the spelling) Fettucine, with a freshly prepared arrabiatta (spicy) red sauce. The sauce was flavorful, not too spicy, and obviously freshly made. The pasta was perfectly cooked, with a great texture. The seafood? Calamari, clams, shrimp, scallops, and a couple other things. They tasted fresh, not frozen, and cooking of them was about a 9 out of 10. Just the right texture for the "interior" of each seafood meat, either melt in your mouth or close.. . The other two people at the table had Chicken Marsala. The chicken was PERFECTLY cooked, tender, flavorful, perfectly spiced. The sauce was heaven, and the spaghetti aglio olio kicked butt decently.. . Dessert brought Tiramisu for me, and a couple of types of gelato for the others. My Tiramisu was pretty good, not the best I've had, but maybe a 7 or 8. It wasn't traditional; it was embedded in a dark chocolate cup. Others I had had a stronger espresso flavor, but this still hit the spot just fine. The gelatos were creamy, full of flavor (they let you go up to the gelato bar and taste a whole bunch of them before you order), and were some of the better gelatos I've had.. . The meal with tax for 3 was $106. It was a bit pricey, but frankly, it was a great meal, we were three very happy people, and we took home sizable doggy bags.. . Downtown Culver City has arrived. I would not hesitate to recommend this place to anyone in the area who wants a pretty decent semi-upscale (by NO means was this mall food). Three picky eaters were wow'd by the quality and execution of the food (the bread was not exceptional, but ok), the excellent small town/urban atmosphere (fenced in sidewalk dining with cars far enough away to be unnoticeable), and they know how to make a good drink. The service was efficient, accommodating, knowledgeable. You can go there for the gelato if you want, but I *will* be back for the food and the experience.. . Gazing at the plates and faces of other diners, I saw nothing but happiness and pleasure. And these weren't mall rats.....it was a well-heeled casual crowd. Plates looked appetizing, and everyone I saw nodded a lot when they started to eat their food.. . 4 stars instead of 5 only because: the bread wasn't the absolute best (not warm, not crunchy on the outside like good Italian bread should be), the runner forgot the bread, and this was damn good Italian, but not quite in the category of The Donatello in San Francisco back in its heydey of the 80s (when it was winning awards as best Northern Italian in SF). But definitely 4 stars. I was HAPPY dammit!
