ReviewID: WhFkgMONjpBNi0tYcQC6lQ
ReviewerID: wM-lbC6lsus0w1V8QZaKmA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pho Dai Loi
Category: Vietnamese
I'll be upfront and admit I know nothing about pho.  I didn't even know what pho was until a few years ago.  And I didn't know it was pronounced "phuh" until a few months ago.  I was one of those asses that came in and ordered pho, as in "she was a ho, fo' sho'."  . . Pho Dai Loi is the only place I have ever even eaten pho, but I definitely like it.  I have had the crazy combo pho which comes with all kinds of strangeness like tripe.  Good, but I definitely prefer the pho tai, which is pho with just rare steak slices.  In my pho education, I have come to learn that good pho tai isn't cooked with the steak in it, but that the steak is added last minute and it cooks in the warm broth.  This is how they do it at Pho Dai Loi, so the steak stays nice and juicy with hints of pink color. . . Don't tell anyone, but pho isn't even the main reason I come here (gasp!).  It is good, but I literally dream about their spring rolls.  They are fat, hand wrapped, filled with big ole shrimp and served with the most delicious peanut sauce.  Someone put a nice photo of them on here which I have voted as Very Helpful since it has already gotten me salivating.  Also, they have bubble tea - YAY! - in all sorts of fun flavors like honeydew and mango.  . . The ambiance of this place is indescribable.  It is like a 1960's cafeteria with a giant chandelier to keep it classy.  Sometimes you share tables with people, like the wonderful Vietnamese family of 4 (5 if you include the absurdly precious 3 month old) we sat with and chatted to last time.  The food will come out in under 5 minutes, no matter what you order, but you may have to flag down one of the innumerable yellow-shirted waiters to get more drinks.  They are always speedwalking somewhere - where to?  who knows.  But they keep this place running, and let me tell you that at noon on Sunday, this place is Packed with a capital P.   Last time we came, there were about 5 tables of people waiting to be seated ahead of us, but somehow we all were seated in under 2 minutes.  And try as we may, my husband and I can't seem to spend more than $30 at this place.  . . I guess at some point I should give another pho restaurant a try (maybe Pho Dai Loi #1, if that even exists?), but for now I'll probably keep coming back to my first and only Vietnamese love.
