ReviewID: wHvOWElRO6lcS3sagIZosw
ReviewerID: ca1k8LZ6J-EmI-hXkzjN0A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Have you ever had a lover who knew exactly how to caress, touch, excite, humor, and satisfy you? Have you ever experienced pleasure in such an overwhelming way from an unexpected place that you think it all might have been a dream?. . No, this isn't me offering my "services.". . My Mozza cherry has been popped.. . After almost a year of hearing about this oh-so-hyped restaurant but not wanting to engage in the red tape hurdles it takes to secure a reservation, my friend and I said, fuck it, let's just wait for seats at the bar. Based on my extensive Yelp research prior to our Tuesday evening visit, I knew that arriving before 8 pm would minimize our wait time. Not that we minded waiting, because we - as self-proclaimed pizza connoisseurs (my family owns pizza restaurants in Chicago) - wanted, needed, yearned to see for ourselves whether it was all true.. . It was. It is. It's a miracle. Please, let me indulge by recounting the magical evening:. . We put in our name at around 7:45 pm, and the lovely hostess quoted us a 30 minute wait. Not bad, not bad at all. She said we could have a drink at the wine bar here or go next door to Osteria Mozza and have a drink there, and she would come get us when our table was ready. . . As it was getting somewhat crowded by the door, which is right next to the wine bar, we decided to go next door.  Osteria is gorgeous - light blue paint with dark brown wood, high ceilings, very sophisticated. The bar can accommodate many more people there, and the ambiance is more upscale.  (It's next on my list to try, for sure).. . That said, we wanted to start drinking. Right away. We decided to start with a white. As mentioned in previous reviews, Mozza doesn't offer glasses of wine, but "quartinos," which are actually about 1/3 of a bottle. We tried the Verdicchio di Castelli di Jesi, which was a wonderfully light but flavorful way to tease our palates. And 2 glasses (aka 1 quartino) for $10 is a hell of a bargain. . . We decided to head back next door. When we entered, we were told there was one more party of 2 ahead of us. We waited a little longer and were finally seated at the far end of the pizza bar - very likely the best seats in the house. The total wait was about 45 minutes, a bit longer than we had anticipated, but we were buzzing and our hunger was stirring more strongly.  We were ready to dive in.. . Now, the food:. . Appetizers:. 1) Fried squash blossoms with ricotta - heaven. Not greasy in the least. Perfectly crisp, exploding with flavor. 2) Avocado, cherry tomato and bacon breadcrumbs salad - rich and delicious. Bacon breadcrumbs...why haven't I had that before? Genius.. . Pizzas:. 1) Fennel sausage, panna and spring onion. 2) Funghi misti, fontina, taleggio and thyme. . No words. Literally. My friend and I didn't talk for the next 15 minutes, unless it was "omg, this is incredible" or "omg, there is an orgasm in my mouth," or other derivatives of this phrase.. . Both pizzas were incredible. The crusts were, in a word, perfect. They struck this balance of crispy yet fluffy. I could taste the salt. Not doughy or soggy in the least. Not burned at all. Perfect. Michaelangelo painted the Sistine Chapel ceiling in 4 years, Nancy Silverton and Mario Batali can create perfect crust in 3 days. How we've progressed.. . Throughout this extravaganza, we drink two more quartinos, a Barbera and a Sangiovese. Both delicious and they perfectly complemented the pizzas (as recommended by our awesome waiter Dave).. . Stomachs full, we kept on eating. It would have been a shame to keep a morsel on the plate.. . Finally, the piece de resistance: butterscotch pudding.. . One of the best desserts I've ever had in my life. I can't describe it. The texture was thick yet tasted light. It's also seasoned with this salt that gave it an incredible richness.. . I woke up this morning with my belly aching and head in a fog, wondering if I had imagined the whole thing. But when the realization hit me, I smirked that knowing smirk that one often does the morning after an incredible night of, well, you know - of Mozza.. . UPDATED: Went again and tried the goat cheese, scallion and bacon pizza (DELISH) and the squash blossom pizza (good but I would pass next time). We were seated at the bar immediately on a Thursday night at 7:30, which was awesome, though our server was not nearly as friendly as the one I had my first time.
