ReviewID: WIHkvFNAbtBGRzYELzcU0g
ReviewerID: 9fohjStVrGE15XpwYFix_A
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Now I might get some beef for being one of the few people on here apparently with any issues with Mastro's, but that being the case I felt all the more determined to leave a post.  A coworker of mine brought up the idea of going to this restaurant, and at the moment I had never actually heard of it before.  It didn't take much to twist my arm because I love a good steak and the reputation for this place seems amazing.  . . We made reservations for that evening, and showed up right on time.  There was a valet as expected, and everyone was polite while coming into the establishment.  The waiters were knowledgeable in detail of everything on the menu.  At this point everything seems grand.. . Things start going downhill as we slowly begin to be annoyed by the music and look on to see that it is being preformed be an elderly Caucasian gentleman playing the keyboards, and a snare drum and cymbal at the same time.  Dropping classics from Stevie Wonder to the Bee Gees.  Now although this was good for a laugh, for what this place is charging, give me something a little better then some jack of all trades, master of none musician.  On top of that it seemed like there was a rodeo up stairs because everyone dancing was wearing a cowboy hat.  . . That is weird.. . Perhaps it was just a strange night, but nonetheless, as far as I know, its cowboy city at Mastro's.  . . We were then treated to two men sitting at the table next to us (and when I say next to us, I mean I could read the time off the watch of the guy at the next table) trying to hit on these girls at another table.  Dropping every cheesy conceivable Hollywood line possible, and then watching in astonishment as these girls fluttered their eyes while these guys talked about whose house was nicer.  Very LA.. . The food was good, but not great.  I ordered the Filet Mignon with the bone on it.  Never ordered that before, probably won't waste my time ordering it again.  I have had better steaks with no bone, why am I paying extra for a bone that "supposedly" enhances the flavor....but doesn't.. . I don't know.  I would be willing to give the place another chance.  Even though it was a weird night, I would accept that it was most likely just the evening that I came in on.  Nevertheless, I just thought for the price, I have had better steak in LA.  It is that simple.
