ReviewID: WjHvqlsrdateUxxZa4VsFA
ReviewerID: t6KU6I71YriFsmQx0XwArA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wisteria
Category: American (New)
My experience at Wisteria was solid, especially for the price.  Based on my admittedly limited experiences, I prefer their "new Southern" food to South City Kitchen's execution of a similar concept.. . When I went with my family, we tried a variety of things, and most were excellent.  I started with a Caesar Salad, and it was good but the capers are pretty strong and they're not stingy with them.  I also tried the Seared Sea Scallops appetizer over pork belly.  The sauce had a nice kick to it, and the pork belly was awesome (it's good in so many forms), but the radicchio was quite bitter when you get a piece of it.  I just avoided it.. . For the entrees, we tried the Skate Wing, the Molasses-Rubbed Pork Tenderloin and the Burger.  I got a side of the Mac and Cheese (and Greens) to try -- and to share.  The Skate Wing was tasty and the grits and asparagus accompanying it were really good.  I wish more places offered skate wing.  The Pork Tenderloin was great -- I'm not likely to order pork as a main entree, but this was the most tender I've had.  Also, it was accompanied with sweet potato souffle, and that was really great.  I'm a sucker for sweet potatoes, though.. . The burger was prepared well, but I wasn't wild about the foie gras mayo's flavor.  I'm not big on mayo or foie gras, so no surprises there, but the person who ordered it like it a lot.  And the Mac and Cheese, wow!  It's done casserole style with a nice crust and has greens (spinach?) integrated into it.  It was a heavy dish, but I love mac and cheese and this was among the best I've had.  . . For desserts we tried some of the mini desserts.  The Coconut Cream Pie was light and refreshing.  The Fudge Tart was extremely rich.  In fact, I think it was too rich to follow the heavy meal I had.  The orange and chocolate ice cream with it was interesting, though.  I'd like to try it unaccompanied to get a more objective taste.. . The service was great, too.  We went on a weeknight, so it wasn't a full crowd, but I can see this place being relatively loud when full (due to the layout).  All told, Wisteria is nice without being overtly fancy, and their prices are very reasonable.  A few things had unbalanced flavors, in my opinion, but a vast majority of what I had was very good.  With the price and casual atmosphere of the place, I can easily see myself wanting to come here semi-regularly.
