ReviewID: WjttwowplwyrEp9W5ZdtLA
ReviewerID: zi5quqUgVrLTWDDzTPZLPw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
This is a very large bakery that offers a huge number of items. I have tried a bunch of them and the quality is not even. Generally the prices are much better than average including the most reasonably priced eclairs in town - $1.50 . . Cinnamon roll - terrible, like a giant hunk of wonder bread with minimal cinnamon and icing, very thick rolls of dough . . Tres Leches - fair to good, the sauce was great but the cake was too fragile and bland . . Cheesecake -fair to good, not quite creamy enough for my taste and not sweet enough. The crust was thin (this is a plus) but could have been crispy instead of mushy . . Turnover - excellent, extremely flaky and almost cavernous crust, unfortunately the filling did taste like canned pie filling but the crust was good enough to overcome this, also they could omit some of the excess sugar on the top. . . Empanada - I never really like these and this one was no exception, too much crust, bland uninteresting crust, the mango filling was good enough to scoop out with a spoon but forget the rest of this pastry. . . Sourdough bread loaf - good but nothing special and similar to the better quality sourdough breads available at the supermarket . . Chalah - terrible, dry with excessive egg and sweet flavor, crust was worse than wonder bread . . Mango mousse - interesting and worth ordering but had an uninteresting crust on the base (could have been crispy) and a big piece of yellow cake in the middle . . Eclair -Outstanding, they have both caramel and chocolate, the caramel is really crisped sugar and is not as good as the chocolate. Both are have an excellent pastry and custard. . . Dulce de Leche cookie: good, a specialty of this place. They are shaped like a Hershey's kiss. The cookie is interesting tasting on it's own and is filled with a dulce de leche cream. While I enjoyed the cookie very much, I really had enough of it after about 1/2 the cookie when I wanted to try a different flavor.
