ReviewID: wk_7pDdSVY0SzzluxbPAsw
ReviewerID: ZBDh6XD98hTp9_w0mLgCVw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Din Tai Fung Dumpling House
Category: Chinese
Alright, on Sunday I ate.  A lot.  Like 7 places a lot!  I'm just coming out of my food coma to write about it.  . . The day started out with Shauna D's dumplings UYE where we would hit four dumpling restaurants.  I met up with her at DTF a little after 10.  There were supposed to be about 10 people, but they ALL flaked on the first place and Shauna and I were the only ones that showed up.  When I arrived there was already a line to get in, as they didn't open for another 10 minutes.  They were trying to get people to go over to their new restaurant, so this cut down on the crowd a little bit.  Since they wouldn't give us a table until our whole party was there, we waited until almost 11.  By this time, we decided we were too hungry so it was table for 2.  . . We sat down and I left the ordering to Shauna.  We ordered sauted spinach, an appetizer plate and an order of steamed pork dumplings.  I've never been a huge spinach fan, but it actually had a good flavor.  The appetizer thing was pretty good too.  It had various things that I'm not really sure what they all were (I think there were some noodles and sprouts and other things), but I enjoyed it.  Finally, the dumplings came.  10 dumplings in an order, 5 for each of us.  After reading the chopsticks wrapper that had the instructions on how to eat the dumplings we dug in.  First, put some vinegar in the little bowl with the ginger.  Next, pick up the dumpling and put it in your spoon.  Bite a small hole in the dumpling and suck the juice out.  Then, dip it in the vinegar and ginger mixture and eat the rest of the dumpling.  Wow, these were good!  Juicy, but not overly juicy.  Enough to make them really tasty, especially dipped in the vinegar and ginger.  . . The people here were nice and the service was good.  They charged $6.50 or so for 10 dumplings.  A little more than some other places, but a fair price for good quality dumplings.  Continuing the UYE, we were supposed to go straight to the next place, but we decided to wait a little bit so a few others could join us.  Ahhhh...an hour and a half break before the madness continues...
