ReviewID: WKbcOvFd7lOU49fkTtOqQw
ReviewerID: LJ8U5ZVnFpF8XNUR7DcUng
Rating: 4
Restaurant: HB Restaurant
Category: American (New)
I was taken here by the lovely Jo W for a belated birthday dinner. See, I like to celebrate my birthday for at least a month. Its the only way kids, the only way. Spread out the love. . . I came here and met my friend Jo for our 7:30pm reservation. The place is cute, romantic and small. Small candles dot each table, as the night wore on, you can tell this isn't a bad place for a group of girls, group of friends or that someone special. But sadly there is one thing that was a killer for this place and that was the noise level. It was loud, not as bad as I have been to in other places, but kinda annoying, I won't lie. However there are quite a few things that make up for all of this hub bub .. bub. . . The service was really quite good. Even though our server was stretched a little bit, (plus she looked like a friend of mine who is out of town, kinda freaked me out a little), she was spot on when she was with us. Made me feel like we were the only ones there. Wish I remembered her name so I could recommend her. Its BYOB. Gotta love that. I was lucky to be treated by Jo to a bottle of Vueve Rose, her first rose champagne, I'm such the lucky guy. The food was any where from good to really great. Let's break our meal down. . . We started off with the artichoke fritters and the dates. Dates were good, I mean they are wrapped in bacon, how could they not be good? Stuffed with almonds and topped with brown sugar. Now since they are already a little sweet, I thought the brown sugar was a little overkill. Or perhaps I just like mine a little savory. The fritters were great, a little soft and chewy on the inside, a crispy on the outside and not at all greasy or oily. Also, it came with a garlic aioli which certainly had a bite of garlic to it, though I had no problem with that. Then for the main, Jo went with the steak with truffle fries, whilest I went with the pork loin. With all this talk of swine flu this and that, I've been on quite a porky craving. This stuff fit the bill, however I do have some minor qualms. First off the pork is good, although a little over cooked. The potatoes were good, however I felt like the pork was swimming in the left over juices of the apple and cabbage that accompanied the rest of the dish. It was flavorful pool, but I tend to like to see what I am eating, although search for what ever at the bottom was a little bit of fun and at the same time, no diving equipment needed. I really don't eat beef, but her fries were open for the taking and take I did, delicious. Not too heavy of truffle flavor, but just enough to enjoy. Then came dessert. I will say this, thank the freakin' universe no song was sung. Just not a fan of being sung Happy Birthday too. However I will take a candle in the chocolate chip bundt cake, actually screw the candle, I will just take this chocolaty, moist and slightly ooey gooey tasty treat to finish off my slightly bursting stomach. Jo had the bread pudding, which I think she liked, although I think I did spy a look of wanting my cake.... oh whoops... sorry I just polished it off.  . . All in all it was a really good night to once again celebrate me. I wonder if I could parlay this for the next six months or so...
