ReviewID: Wl3UMKivG-ZF9-LJ30BPTQ
ReviewerID: bSjwm8IEsTgG1fgdldqz6g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I don't know how this place is always so packed....  I drive by it and shake my head.  I ate here about a month ago and it was mediocre at best.  And by that, I mean, it pretty much sucked.. Not only did we have time to do the crossword as we were sitting in the bum dominated courtyard of the director's guild but we waited for almost an hour.  An hour, despite that the bald host hit on my in front of my friend and kept telling us, "not you, yet, I remember you" and leering.  Good thing I was with a friend, it was creepy.  . Finally, we get seated, at which point we are famished.  We have been waiting for an hour, already.... well, we get to wait more.  Thank God that we were seated in front of the huge jar of candy, since I ate a lot of it while we waited and waited and waited.  . We ordered, finally....  he got the eggs and chili, I had the breakfast burrito with bacon.  I will give them that they let you substitute easily, since I'm not a big chorizo fan.  I personally am not impressed by the menu, it seems hard to find something you want.  I don't want an entire order of banana pancakes.... shouldn't that be a side?  Dessert for breakfast? I already ate all that candy while I was WAITING  for someone to take my order.  . Regardless, a breakfast burrito and a glorified omelet are not hard to make,  why did it take 45 minutes.  At this point, I've given up my whole sat afternoon for a breakfast burrito and a jar of candy....  Food was not spectacular.  It was fine.  I ate about half and left the rest, the salsa was too runny and made the tortilla soggy on the bottom, basically inedible.  The eggs were good.  Why isn't the burrito served with hash browns or home fries?  Inexplicable.  . Maybe this place is better during the week, when the clientele is mainly out of work people who have 2 hours to devote to breakfast, but in my mind?  There are places that pay you for 2 hours of your time.... unless it is amazing, it's not worth the hassle.  And this falls way way short of even good.  I recommend the candy and avoid the creepy bald guy. . .he should be in the back, not manning the front of the house.  Glad he thought I was cute though... thanks!
