ReviewID: wl57GVw_vYYXs37OtRawDg
ReviewerID: 7NnyLLX1bNVVEB2tFXsOww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
HAPPY NEW YEARS ! !. . I took out moms for a nice brunch today and wanted to try this spot because it's close to my place. I tried coming here a few weeks back, but MONDAYS CLOSED. Drats !. . I've read some of the review this morning and was beginning to drool over the sight of Plum n' Almonds Pancakes that Puka took a pic of ! !. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... .  I love breakfast, I could eat breakfast 3 times a day for reals...so I was all geared up n' ready to go ! . . The place looked nice from outside, quaint...avocado green...mmm...avocado...yes I was that hungry ! We got there just after noon and there was a small platoon of peeps in front...and the patio looked like a Pearl Jam concert with Eddie just about to dive off the roof...haha...(damn...I just dated myself didn't I ) . . But we quickly grabbed a couple of chairs out front n' commenced to talk as always...You know it's a new year mijo, you gotta...clean your place...when are you cutting that stupid beard...wash your hair...when are you getting married...( you know the drill ! )  Ahhh...mom ! . http://static.px.yelp..... . . We were quickly called in (whew !) . . The inside is really homey...mustardy, but homey. The menu is pretty simple, with all kinds of alternatives to certain plates written on a chalkboard off to the side, made for an interesting dilemma !. . I decided on a grilled breakfast sandwich w/ pa-taters, mom's had a basic breakfast w/ garlic turkey sausage link . http://static.px.yelp..... . I also ordered a Brown Buttered Banana &amp; Macadamian Nut pancake . http://static.px.yelp.....  (thank gawd for the child size, 1 pancake vs. 3 of em) and a cupa Joe.. . Breakfast was ok...the sandwich lacked the oomph that would've made it bomb, but the arugula (which was an interesting add) made up for it. The pancakes were very nice...basically the caramelized bananas, butter and maple syrup made it sinfully good...again thank gawd I only had one pancake ! Coffee was good n' strong and very hot...so no complains, sorta.. . The only thing that bothered me was the lack of service, albeit good, just a lack of it. I mean the server was very friendly and spunky but just didn't come around to check on us, esp. me with my coffee addiction !! At least the cup was huge, cuz if it would've been those small azz cups I woulda regulated ! . . I let that slid cuz she had her hands full and well was on top of the mosh pit just outside, remember ? Some servers are Saints, they deserve a break...sometimes. Again, I let it slid, cuz I hit up someone else for my refill. . . All in all, the food was decent and the service wasn't horrendous, I would have given it 3 stars, otherwise. Oh and the company, well, made it that much better. haha. I'm going to give it another try, on a earlier time slot before the onslaught of hungry mid day risers ! So go n' check it out !
