ReviewID: wLFs3HeePWa9NFGisX_0lQ
ReviewerID: x1FY-UEpDW03M38xt8QFsQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
I came here when the circumstances weren't promising: a USC football game had just finished and Louie was packed. I don't follow football, so I had no idea it would be so busy. BL does not take reservations and I was here to celebrate my friend's birthday with my husband and a friend. My friend really wanted to eat here, so we ended up waiting 2 hours. Despite the long wait, BL really delivered.. . When our server found out how long we waited and that we were there to celebrate a birthday, she was very to nice to us. What we ordered: lasagna (very, very good, a large portion suitable to sharing), chicken parmesan (decent, not too heavy tasting), portobello fries (not actual french fries but sliced, breaded and fried portobello slices served with a garlic sauce), calamari that was very fresh and tasty with a slightly spicy sauce, rib eye steak (decent), and mussels and clams (good). . . Sizes of the dishes were good. Banter between the birthday boy and our server was entertaining. Our server gave us complimentary small dishes (asparagus with fried egg, a shrimp and garbanzo bean dish, an order of Burrata and Grape Tomatoes) as well as a birthday dessert which the birthday boy shared with us. I liked the sweet butterscotch flavored and pudding. . . Other notes: I really like the way the interior of Bottega looks. I think it would be better if they had real tablecloths as opposed to butcher paper, but one doesn't notice that so much when hungry after a long wait. They also have a deli area and bakery area selling muffins, packaged salads and more. Our friends enjoyed the bar while waiting. The staff offered my husband and I complimentary sparkling or flat water while we were waiting. . . My only caveat with Bottega is that if you're going on Friday or Saturday after 7pm or after a USC game gets out, you might be waiting for a long time. You'll have better luck at off peak times. Overall we had a good experience here.
