ReviewID: wlWNPP84F70It_l6OP2_mA
ReviewerID: hdLToS_AFNyqUzzcZI7UXw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Our group of 6 came in around 7:30pm. We payed $10 for Valet parking.The places opens at 5pm. Paid $25 admission per person. It was a pretty upscale place. All the men were dressed in suits and most of the women were in nice dresses, sipping cocktails by the bars. There were many levels, so I can see how you can get lost and confused at first. I felt like I was in an oldies movie when I first walked in there.. . The Close Up Gallery was okay. This guy did some magic tricks with cards for about 45 minutes. We walked around to Hat n Hare where this bartender was doing magic tricks with more cards. It was okay. I just didn't like the waiting around for shows. There's always ppl crowding around, so it's hard to see.. . We had dinner reservations at 9:30pm. After reading many reviews on here, I was wary about the food, and stayed away from most of the steaks. Everything I had turned out really good though. I had the ribeye steak ($38) and lobster tail ($22) and lobster bisque ($7) and they all turned out really good. My friend's Milton Steak (~29) was kind of dry. Another friend had chicken, and it was not seasoned enough. The calamari ($11) was good. The garlic bread ($6) was good, I mean, how can you go wrong with garlic bread?The crab dip was decent, and so were the steak tips. But I wasn't too crazy for them. For dessert, try the chocolate souffle, it was soooo moise and soft. I loved it. I also had the creme brulee. All desserts are $9.  . . There are bars everywhere you go, and you're allowed to carry your drink whereever you go. After dinner, we had tickets to go to the main show at 11:15pm. It was the best! We saw 3 performers, and 2 of them were awesome, especially this one female magician. . . I think the suckiest thing about this place is that they don't allow any pictures at all whatsoever. I was most disappointed about this b/c we were all dressed up and it was such a nice place inside. But there is this man walking around with a camera. I heard he charges $20 for a photo, but it comes with a guest pass. I managed to sneak some photos with my iPhone though.. . Overall, I have Magic Castle 4/5 stars b/c I didn't like the waiting around for shows. Before each show, we would have to wait at least 30 minutes to go in and get a good seat. So if you go there, you should arrive at 5pm, catch the earliest dinner possible, so you can watch more shows. If you want to have a good time, then just have low expectations and don't get too excited. :)
