ReviewID: WnGl8hFpCfpUzEVV-XdcHA
ReviewerID: 4EkDs9ZvbnmwGhmm6bGH7A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
I've always really, really wanted to try Lawry's The Prime Rib. I'm a huge college football fan, so I know before every Rose Bowl, they have the Lawry's Beef Bowl, where they invite all the athletes to eat at Lawry's. I'm not very big on prime rib (I'm more of a steak person), even so I still gave this restaurant at 5 out of 5! The service was really good, the way they served the meat is unique, the food was tasty, and the prime rib was one of the best I've ever had. I won't give the deals how the restaurant works, you'll just have to try it out yourself, but here's what I ate. I was kind of skeptical about DineLA restaurant week the second time, but since the meat is the same I gave it a second chance.. . The Salad (not pictured) is pretty cool how they prepare it. The dressing is good, it's kind of a thousand island, but not really. Croutons were a bit too crunchy, and salad over dressed but everything was good. 3.5 to 4 out of 5 rating.. . Main Course, it was only a 6 oz. cut "California Cut", but it was still pretty filling. The cream corn is really delicious, and the mashed potato is smooth, with the gravy and prime rib au jus complements the mashed potato well. The prime rib is cooked to perfection, as I got the medium rare, it is medium rare. It is very juicy, the "Lawry's Cut" is even more juicier. If you put the whipped horseradish, it gives it a slight kick and works well it the prime rib.. . I had the English Trifle. It tastes very much like strawberry shortcake. It's not as layered as I'd imagine to be, but it was still good. The cake is quite moist, it's not super sweet with a tangy sauce. Others had the creme bruelle, which was burnt and watery, probably because it was restaurant week, so I'll extend grace.. . I'd definitely come back to try a larger "cut". I'd highly recommend this place. It's a bit pricey, $31 for the 6 oz. and $37 for the Lawry's Cut. All meals come with the salad.  If you don't mind the price, definitely check it out! It made me ^____________^ after eating here!. . x-posted on my Xanga!
