ReviewID: WnrHwset15Go2o49Xb6EiQ
ReviewerID: T7Py8yQNLQ-R9Ax1fY8ciA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
This is what happens when Kogi's weekly route is...2 blocks away from your friend's apartment, 1 mile down the street from your work, and parked inside your school.. . Dinner on Tuesday: Hey Eric! Uh can I have 1 short rib burrito, 1 pork taco, 1 tofu taco...um...a slider and a hot dog. Yep, all for me. . Dinner on Wednesday: Hey Eric! Its me again...ah let me have the kimchee egg torta and short rib tacos! Yeah.. Dinner on Thursday: HEY ERIC! Yeah this time I brought some people. Anyways...can we get 23 tacos? They're for my coworkers...K thanks, see you Saturday! . . Obsession much? For sure.. . (Kogi three days in a row = heart attacks and pimples!) . . Here's the BREAKDOWN. As of this week:. . Price: $2.15 (with tax). Tacos: are pretty small street tacos, but they USUALLY fill them with ample amounts of supple meat and Korean trimming(marinated cabbage/lettuce/onions/cilantro magic). Light eater? Get two. Everyone else, get 3 plus. P.S. Tacos DO NOT keep well. . . Price: $5.40 (with tax). Burritos: Size is decent, contents are rich. These are breakfast burritos made with eggs, hash browns, cheese, and your favorite Korean meat or tofu. I think there's Korean topping in there too, but not sure. Damn tasty. . . $5.40 each (with tax) for Kimchee Quesadilla, Torta, Hot Dog, or any other special of the day -- that's the general price breakdown.. . QUALITY MEATS: they use the good shit, basically.. . Short rib: Super heavy in burrito form, but delicious. Balanced with cabbage/lettuce topping in taco form. Too sweet in tortas and sliders (breads used are Hawaiian, hence the sweetness). . Spicy pork: Slap some of that pork on basically anything and I'll eat it. Pork  is moist, luscious, and have the perfect mix of salty/spicy goodness I crave in all things in life.. . Chicken: I've had it like once, its good, but not as great as their pork and short ribs. C'mon...Koreans don't really eat chicken. Just a note. Hah-cha.. . Tofu: These tasted delicious as fuck when I was vegetarian. I tried it again earlier this week and it was weak. The tofu was cold and uncooked, but their online description said it should be pan seared...go figure. Fluke maybe. Oh well, I eat meat again!. --------. . Like most things in life, I'd try Kogi at least twice (if you're in the area). Totally worth the effort. The lines are unpredictable. For shorter lines I'd go to SMC or the Brig. Hell, go to the Alibi Room if you want to sit with a beer and wait for your Kogi to come to you.
