ReviewID: WOhSCA-YO8S2igWOQD5m8Q
ReviewerID: EIbWDlpI3jCKBQlqaW-ZfQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
So I'm going to give this entire review in portugues: quero falar tudo de esse restaurante para todo de voces.. . just kidding.. . anyways, Guy decided to "surprise" me and take me to a brazilian steakhouse for my birthday! Woo, brazilian in the house. Naturally my sister had to join in, and all we did was falar fofoca with all the waiters. . . I've been to a lot of these places here in the valley, in LA, in Rio de Janeiro. Its pretty legit, but not perfect. The salad bar is superior quality than any other brazilian restaurant I've been to. But, it wasn't very Brazilian. It didn't have much traditional dishes (some ferofa.. maionese, but thats really it). much of it was more Italian-American high class salad buffets. My two cents in it is that they wanted to make it more upscale, but  that wasn't Brazilian. Still good.. . The side dishes. Sugary fried bananas, fried polenta (ungu in my regions), and mashed potatoes. All good to me except the mash, somehow my mom learned all the good brazilian cooking out there. Oh, I forgot to mention that they served pao de quejo, a very classic cheese bread appetizer. It was delicious!. . The meats! Some way too salty, even for my brazilian mouth. I found the parmesan crusted pork the saltiest and most unappealing. The bottom sirloin was amazing. All other means fared well, I distinctly remembering the likened taste of the picanha and the filet mignon of course. It was sheer bombardment of meats. Beef all fared the best, as we brazilians have the most cattle head in the world, we ought to know what we're doing!. . mm, and i drank some guarana. . . when they found out me and my sister were brazilians, they immediately sent us some rice and feijao! Hell yeah. They told us they dont give it to most customers unless requested because nobody likes rice and beans except brazilians. All of the waiters spoke Portuguese btw. dessert: free yummy cheesecake! Delicious. I realllyyyyyyy wanted some puddin de maracujar (the best brazilian dessert ever), but the meat really impacted my pregnant belly!. . All in all, (fuck this review is long), I think this was a good experience (especially because it was free). If i had to come back, I would really have to think about it though because it is SO expensive. Solution: Marry rich.
