ReviewID: wProJPgjoOxGjl_lsZAgRA
ReviewerID: 4s2S9oWIT5b1S26huyT-Fg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fogo de Chao
Category: Steakhouses
K: The $$$ sign is no joke! Expect to pay at least $50 a person on the meal there. The salad bar and cheese balls were delicious! I guess because of all the reviews and the hefty price to eat there, I expected the quality of the meat to be better. I was not impressed that the chicken was dry. I thought maybe my taste buds were off from devouring so many cheese balls but my fellow foodies that night agreed that the chicken was dry. They also expected the meat to be tendered and melt in your mouth quality. The one item that is a must try is the sausage.  I do recommend the place if you are on a date and want to impress someone. The ambiance there is very romantic. The servers come right to your table &amp; they are quick to refill beverages &amp; appetizers and the lighting is dim. The Décor is Brazilian but not over the top. . . E:Excellent service. . Overall meat was dry. . Filet Mignon was my favorite. . As far as price, we def paid for the name &amp; experience. Felt that I've been to other brazilian bbq places that were just as good and not as expensive.. . . N:Pros:. . -          Salad bar has a large variety of food. . -          Prompt service with food. . -          Bacon wrapped Filet mignon was perfect!. . -          Prime rib was very delicious. . -          Yes/No cards to let servers know that you want more food. . -          Friendly staff . . -          Plenty of sides that were very tasty - cheese bread, mashed potatoes, cooked bananas. . . . Cons:. . -          Very pricey so make sure you come with a big appetite. . -          Some of the chicken dishes were very dry (especially the bacon-wrapped chicken). . -          Not enough chicken or white meat (mostly red meat was served). . -          Ate too much at the salad bar so I wasn't eating as much meat. .  J: Good service and mediocre meat (chicken is very dry) and very expensive
