ReviewID: wPz9j5W9E25cXrGB4vnu8w
ReviewerID: VBKG7d7WvH8uPbVWPpAuiQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
I adore Umami Burger.  The taste is amazing, the prices are not too bad, and though the burger is small, by the time I'm done with one burger and half an order of fries, I'm actually pretty damn sated.. . The only thing I can add onto the pile of everyone else's reviews is my personal preference, which is the Truffle Burger, mmmm.  I normally prefer my burgers more elaborate and piled high with good stuff, but the first time I ever came here, I ordered this one accidentally (really.) and even after trying a few of their other burgers, this simple but luxe burger is the one I can't quit!. . The other thing I'd add, which is what keeps this from being a full-on five-star review: every so often, something really annoying happens at this location.  The first time was when I tried to bring my mom here on a Sunday night at 8pm -- when we pulled into the parking, the valet ran out to tell us that, for REAL, they have "run out of food."  I mean, I appreciate that they tell us this before we get inside, but I've never heard of a restaurant straight up running out of food!  This was pretty soon after they had opened, so hopefully that kink is worked out.. . The other time was last night though: for once, we weren't able to find street parking, and so we pulled into the lot to valet.  Again, the valet (the poor bearers of bad news!) came out to ask us if we were getting take-out.  When we said, confused, "no... eat in?" he stated that they were closed, except for take-out.  It was about 9:15pm, and when I noted that the website (but really, I meant the Yelp page) said they closed at 10pm, he offered, "ohh, they're working on changing that. But we're really closed."  It was a sad sad situation, especially when you can look in and see others enjoying their burgers. . . So, please learn from my mistake!  If you're craving their luscious goodness on a Sunday night, they close at 9pm, not 10pm!  And maybe call first to make sure they still have food.
