ReviewID: wq9KGzpGldlxqeeWiRYhHA
ReviewerID: 4c476nX33LrEFvtNToF4Ow
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
The first time I went to Father's Office, it took forever to find a seat and I had hyped their burger up so much in my mind that when I actually tasted it I was really disappointed because it didn't seem to live up to its name (I actually don't like or eat burgers very often, although I can appreciate a good one, so that might have contributed to the disappointment factor). I chalked it up to a learning experience and figured I probably wouldn't have much of a reason to return.. . Fast forward one year later and we were in the area dropping off my rental dive gear at Eco Dive Center and figured since we were so close, we might as well stop by for dinner. . . The wait still sucks (I know paying customers should have the right to dine as long as they please once they sit down but when you're obviously done but just sitting there yakking it up with your girlfriends at an empty table and there's like 15 people waiting around to sit down, some of them holding plates of food even, have enough grace and leave already!) but the food was so much better this time around. I don't know if it was because I was hungry but I was almost embarrassed at how fast I scarfed down my burger. After watching 'Food Inc.' recently and hearing about the evils of processed burgers with meat from a thousand different cows, it was easy to appreciate the quality of the patty in the FO burger. Tender grass fed beef with sweet caramelized onions intermingled with the salty tang of blue cheese, spicy arugula, all on a soft yet crisp edged french roll to soak up the juices... It was a good burger, I can't lie. . . We also had the White Anchovies which were as satisfying as I remembered, and of course a basket of fries. On a last minute whim, I ordered one of the specials they had featured on the screens at the bar- rare Yellow Fin Tuna with Yuzu, Shiso, Cilantro Sprouts, and Tomato "Ceviche.' Absolutely and utterly delicious. The citrusy yuzu vinaigrette with the shiso oil and luscious slices of seared tuna was so fragrant and addictive, I ripped off a piece of my burger bun and ran it around the plate to pick up any last drips of sauce and herbs. . . I'm not much of a beer drinker so I can't really attest to their selection but I know that's what they're known for so I'm sure it's great. I'd give them 4 stars on food alone, but that wait and self seating is still a bitch and I'd have to be craving that burger mighty bad to go through it on a regular basis. Good burger though, can't deny that.. . You can find more descriptions and photos from our meal here- . http://www.alamodejour.... 
