ReviewID: WqIEK0UDM_L2AEOebHoGIg
ReviewerID: fP5-u5yZ683B0Mdd7Zjb6A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
It was fate that Kogi and I meet. I was checking twitter for this Korean taco truck's location and dismissed the idea of going there when I saw it would be in J town. Then, through a strange twist of events that involved going to LAX twice in one day and spending hours in the cellphone waiting lot contemplating ghost riding the whip, I ended up eating at Daikokuya. The Kogi truck apparently parks here on a regular basis.. . Food: Let's put all line-related bitterness aside for a moment and be objective here. The tacos are scrumptious. Since I ate at Daikokuya, I only tried a single short rib taco while friends tried the burrito and the pork taco (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). The meat is perfectly seasoned and comes with either a lemon or orange wedge for an extra zing. It's like 2 bucks a taco, but they're microscopic! I was actually really pissed when my order came up and saw how small it was. It took all of 2 minutes for me to consume the thing. If you go here, make sure you get something big and filling like the burrito. . . Service: This is the part that makes me want to shank someone. Tina B., our manservant, and I waited in line for probably an hour while also waiting to be seated at Daikokuya. I had to pick up our order after being seated in the restaurant. I could not believe how long the line was and how slowly it was moving. There's a Mexican food truck I go to regularly called Ernesto's (Ernie's for the repeat customers) and the line is always super long but moves 10 times faster than Kogi's. So boo to the service. I hope they improve. This taco truck has several randomly visited locations that you can find on twitter (or just check the Kogi website). It runs by UCLA frequently. Lucky students.... . Atmosphere: It's a truck... . . Synopsis: I'm only giving this place a high rating because it's innovative and delicious. The portions are so freaking small and it takes longer to move through the line than to get seated at a super popular restaurant like Daikokuya, if that tells you anything.
