ReviewID: wqmGsRhisGAmhdMhuAwn0Q
ReviewerID: oaYm-xPfTjRmzSKQ0N8C3g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Native Foods
Category: Vegan
Each time I dine at Native Foods in Westwood, I'm reminded by how much I love college towns.  They are full of young, carefree, idealistic people that make me feel young, carefree and idealistic again.  Most of all, college towns are FULL of cheap eats for hungry poor college students!  And luckily for me, one of these cheap eats happens to be an all-veg restaurant!. . FOOD:  Hands down, the BEST vegan chicken sandwich on the Western Hemisphere is the Chicken Run Ranch burger at Native Foods.  My veg dining mate  tried it and freaked out because he thought it was actual chicken.  While he was busy dissecting his burger I happily scarfed mine down and stole his fries when he wasn't looking. Haha.  I also recommend their "Save the Chicken" bowl, their sausage sandwich (I know my guy friends are laughing at this one... PERVERTS!!!), and for dessert, the tofu love pie (it will convert any tofu hater, I swear it!) and any of their cookies.  Yumm-O!!!. . AMBIENCE: ...crowded.  Pretty simple and bare except for the college activity flyers  overcrowding the bulletin boards.  A chill spot to catch up with an old friend, or perhaps a casual date for the one who you want to get a bit closer to... because seriously, if you look at how small the upstairs of the restaurant is, you'll really have no choice but to get closer.. . PRICES: Are pretty good, especially for West LA.  Might still be a bit expensive for a college kid's budget.  But, Native Foods does have a $7.99 soup and sandwich combo menu (which I think interestingly enough includes tacos as another alternative).  I'd budget about $10 per person to eat here, but there's normally enough for leftovers to take home as well!. . PARKING: UGH, gotta dock a star for that.  Parking in Westwood is such a pain in the @$$.  Sometimes it takes longer for me to find parking than it does for me to drive there from... wherever.  But of course college kids don't care because most of them don't have cars.  For the rest of us... it might be worth it to park in one of the local lots to avoid a parking ticket.
