ReviewID: wqmR84lMzcPrI5wR3NZ8vw
ReviewerID: ltSmOwuKNmUBK3VH-XOpBg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
This is not a review about Mozza's food... it's a review about their hostess service tonight.. . Thought I would just pass on the experience to everyone here on yelp so they can avoid being treated badly.. . If you don't have a reservation, you won't get a table at this popular pizzeria.  They do allow walk-ins... put your name on their list and when chairs open up at the pizza or wine bars they'll seat you.  . . Today's estimated wait we were told was 30 minutes.  After 30 minutes I checked in and the hostess told me it would be another 10 minutes.  After 15 minutes, the hostess came outside, called my name and led our party through the happening lively fun restaurant and into an empty wine cellar.  The room and all it's tables were completely empty.  It felt like a crypt in there.  I almost wanted to say, what the f*ck, you couldn't have led us into an empty room 45 minutes ago, you made us wait all this time before you shipped us into this graveyard which was just as empty 45 minutes ago as it is now.  What the hell were we waiting for?. . There was no explanation, no apology... so I went to the Hostess and said I would prefer to sit in the actual restaurant, one of the bars that they reserve for walkins was fine... the response: it would be another 30 minute wait.  I was upset that she wasn't up front with wait times and seating options so I told her we would pass and our party left.  There was no way I was going to give them my business with that kind of treatment.. . Just because the food here is 5 stars doesn't mean you get to treat people badly.  If the wait is going to be an hour let the customer know... if you're planning on seating the customer out of the restaurant proper, let the customer know.  If something has changed, let the customer know.. . If you don't have a reservation, be prepared to wait a very long time... longer than you will be told (to some of you it will be worth it, to others of you it won't be worth it).  If you don't want to sit in the dog house in an empty dead room, be clear with the hostess where you will allow yourself to be seated.  I didn't even know this wine cellar back room even existed, I wish the hostess would have explained what she was making us wait for.. . I like the restaurant.  I will come back.  It's usually a 5 star experience.  Tonight, though, we walked out... If I could give it a zero star experience tonight I would.
