ReviewID: wqtYQ_6ReH4UCezAKHat0w
ReviewerID: fF96J8EaHKFoIecd2MHmnA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
Visited Blu Jam with a couple of friends last weekend for Brunch. We wanted to try something new so I headed to Yelp to see what I could find. After a bit of research we decided on Blu Jam.. . I had the Eggs Bohemia. It's two eggs, any style-I opted for over-easy, mixed with smoky bacon, ham and chives. All served with a side of country potatoes and your choice of toast- I chose the Rosemary on the recommendation of our server. The eggs were cooked perfectly to order and it was mixed with a generous amount of bacon and ham. The potatoes were crispy yet soft and the rosemary toast was a nice new flavor! I also ordered a fruit smoothie, you have the option to choose any combination of fruits, I chose strawberry and blueberry. It was quite tasty and a good start to the day!. One of my friends chose Kamil's Breakfast and didn't love it. It sounded pretty interesting but she said "there was something missing" from the dish. Couldn't pinpoint it exactly (she said it could be cheesier??) but it was just "something" that made it feel lacking. . Another friend chose the Louisiana hash and while she liked it, she didn't love it. . . Unfortunately none of us really loved our dishes. And for myself and my friend who had the Louisiana Hash felt like amongst our eggs and such we were eating grass as they completely overloaded the dish with an overly generous amount of chives. Normally chives are sprinkled atop the dish and diced quite small, our dishes were covered in green and the chive pieces were at least a half inch to an inch in length. A bit overwhelming. . . Also while placing our order we had asked for water to be brought out. We had received our other ordered drinks (latte, tea and smoothie) but never received our water. We then asked for the water and our server never apologized for forgetting it,  instead we were told by a gentleman (I'm guessing the owner or manager) that they are conserving water and we have to request it. Um...we did, and never got it. it wasn't rude or anything, but we did make the request and it was forgotten. We didn't really feel like a lecture was necessary since it was the server's fault not ours.. . I realllly wanted to like Blu Jam, especially after reading such positive reviews here. Perhaps it was what we ordered, I'm not sure, unfortunately I don't know that I'll be back. The food wasn't stellar and service was ok, not completely efficient (see water comment above) but friendly. It was an ok experience.. . **Rating is probably more 2.5, but I didn't really feel it was a 3.
