ReviewID: WqWpnAqJCurQfgYVV4ArEA
ReviewerID: 2Cm5qJskx-wtfglGuM_GUw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
I've had The Little Door bookmarked for quite a while now and what better occasion to finally pay a visit than for a seemingly long overdue date night.  . . This restaurant is indeed inconspicuous from the outside but upon entering, it is as other yelpers have described, like being transported into someone's quaint and enchanted garden.  The entire space is dimly lit with candles abound.  Great for me because I look much better by candlelight but more importantly, it created a lovely ambiance fitting of any date night.  . . We were seated in the piano room right before the blue room.  I think I would have preferred to sit out in the garden area.  The tables where we sat were so close together, I could have easily rubbed elbows with my neighbor.  There just didn't seem to be enough personal space to create a more intimate dining experience, something my boyfriend and I found a bit humorous but I could see how that may possibly make a first date awkward. . . For starters, my boyfriend and I shared the provencal fish soup and the seared duck foie gras.  The soup was quite good.  It was creamier than I expected it to be and reminded me of a bisque (I love bisques!).  The seared foie gras was nicely prepared and came accompanied by a thick slice of bread atop a drizzling of maple syrup.  It was almost like eating foie gras with french toast.  The foie gras was a bit on the salty side but was complemented well with the sweetness of the maple syrup. . . Entrees:. . Lamb Shank Tajine with Cinnamon, Orange Peel and Fava Beans. My boyfriend opted for this dish per our waiter's recommendation. This  dish is very substantial in size.  The lamb shank looked as if you could club someone with it.  I've never been a huge fan of lamb as most of the ones that I've tried have been gamey but this dish was tender and flavorful.  It came accompanied by couscous which gave a nice contrast in texture to the tenderness of the lamb.  . . Grilled Marinated Loup De Mer and Dungeness Crab Quenelles with Saffron Sauce. This dish has got to be one of the best seabass I've had.  It was a very light but flavorful dish.  The crab cakes were quite good as well - crispy on the outside but not overcooked.  I was more a fan of the seabass than I was of the lamb. . . Dessert: . Lemon Meringue Tart. When it comes to desserts, I lean more towards items that are either more on the tart or subtle side in sweetness rather than rich or decadent.  The lemon meringue tart was indeed more on the tart side.  It came accompanied with berries and ice cream which helped to tone down the tartness of the dessert.. . I do have to note that it took 45 minutes after our appetizers for our entrees to come out, all while the other tables that were in super close proximity received theirs even though some of the patrons ordered well after us.  I knocked off a star on the rating because our waiter did not come by to check on us at any given point to explain what was taking so long.  It would have been nice if he had come to acknowledge the wait rather than us having to flag him down. Sometimes a small gesture goes a long way. . . Overall, despite the minor service flaw, I'm still quite fond of The Little Door for it's lovely ambiance.  The food was tasty enough for us to forgive the unexplained wait but I wouldn't say that it blew my taste buds away.  Perhaps next time around we'll come for the a late night bite to try the smaller plates.. . Price per person for two appetizers, two entrees, dessert and a bottle of red: $100 - 120.
