ReviewID: WR1bkfXbJg3YoIcdB6sQlA
ReviewerID: fdVCBVz4VWLo2bMbPsco9Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
I LOVE MEAT.  I love my vegetables too, but it must come with MEAT.  The dry aged ribeye here at David Burke's was the best steak I've had in at least a decade, if not my entire life.  The food in general was simply great.. . I started with the beet salad (see pic) which was very fresh and perfectly balanced in flavor.  I knew I needed it to preemptively fiber balance my meal... because I ordered the "CAVEMAN" special:  a ~30 oz I think 35 day dry aged tomahawk cut bone-in ribeye (chicago is famous for their tomahawk cut ribeye), served with LOBSTER SCRAMBLED EGGS.   AWWW YEAAH...... cholesterol tastes delicious.  THis was seriously the greatest steak I've had in decades.  I tried some of my dining companions' 55 day dry aged ribeye and it was stupendous--the flavor so intense, and the fat so melt-in-your-mouth tasty.. . I asked the waiter if we could see the aging room (AJ asked me to do some scouting for him), and the waiter said of course.  We got a guided tour of the aging fridge with Rick Gresh himself, the executive chef.  Rick was super friendly and cool, not a hint of pomposity--totally the type of guy I could just get a beer with at a bar.  Rick showed us how the meat goes from "fresh" to "aged"--that there's no mold involved, it's just a wall of pink salt blocks, and the meat basically digests itself.  When he cooks the steak, there is no marinade--just salt and pepper, and brushed on "beef love" (as he calls it) which is a mix of beef drippings and some spices.. . The service... could have actually used some work though--the waiter was not as attentive as we'd have liked--there were many times when we looked for him, and he was nowhere in sight.  The sommelier was friendly and helpful, decanting my cab I brought from SF for me, and helping me pick out a nice pinot for the table.. . but the quality of food, and rick's friendliness.... trumps everything.  Check out the pics....
