ReviewID: wRVfzKnVSL_ORPw4VL21uw
ReviewerID: 34zD6-SJlY7IYQA8tpAl0A
Rating: 5
Restaurant: LA Mill Coffee Boutique
Category: Desserts
i met two silverlake friends of mine saturday morning at this new place.  "boutique" in the name tells you it is likely to be different from the norm, and it is.   we loved everything about it.  i love the tropical and would drive a ways to get there, but this is simply entirely different.   i am surprised that some of the cranky reviewers so far would not welcome a place which is innovative and provides quality, especially in the drinks, some of which are not available elsewhere, and the very tasty menu offerings.  the cheap shot comments about the server outfits were unnecessary, i thought, they were understated and suited to the place.  la mill is truly novel and a refreshing change of pace.  it would be a breath of fresh air in any neighborhood.  if you are in a hurry, and  you like the familiar and supersize,  this is not the place for you.   the decor is beautiful, the service friendly and attentive, and the seating comfortable.   one of the owners came by our table to greet us and he was clearly keeping an eye on everything.  we ordered the carafe of kenya, amazingly smooth, and i ordered a chai, absolutely the best i have ever tasted by far -- no icky syrups here -- along with croissant and banana bread.  if you wish, the server will provide an explanation about the beans and teas being used.  the chai was relatively small but i enjoyed savoring every sip.  the place was full most of the time, including families with small children, couples, etc., who seemed to be lingering over conversation and enjoying themselves.  the pastries were delicious, and your glass of water is refilled constantly.   all beverages and foods are made to order.   this place is about taking time in beautiful surroundings, savoring fine coffee, teas and light meals, not chowing down on "all you can eat" or running out the door.   i didn't think the prices were too high, considering the quality and the ambiance.   i also got a mojito iced tea for the road -- that was amazing.  i should have bought two. next time, i have got to try the "coffee and a donut."  i look forward to my return.  i wish la mill boutique were closer to home.
