ReviewID: wS_QBM39cY2t0voyvtCSyQ
ReviewerID: yvXEJcXRtffR2GuWULbRjg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Water Grill
Category: Seafood
The Diet starts Tomorrow.. . Actually,  tomorrow is today as last night was the culinary equivilent of a knockout.  And, it'd give plenty of memories to lean on while I nibble plain lettuce and Akmak crackers for the next month.. . Starters: Dungeness Crab Cake---delicious, surprising and very crabby instead of crumby. The grouping of flavors had an orgy with my tastebuds. . . Chowder: This is not your Bobby, Jack and Teddy Chowda. Except that it, too, was rich and powerful.  I really liked it, but would definitely try something else next time, unless I required a butter and cream infusion for lifesaving purposes.. . Entrees: The oft-mentioned Big Eyed Tuna is outstanding. I never order tuna, but it sounded too good. This was at least sushi grade, seared and treated with so much love in its preparation (with lentils and brussel sprouts)  that I almost felt guilty to eat it. Almost.. . The Sturgeon (insert Chico Marx joke here) was also killer, and a total 180 from the Tuna. Wasabi tinged on a bed of perfect spinach makes for a perfect dish to swap with your date to mix and match.. . Throughout we had a very reasonable-priced white burgundy maybe a chablis---An Jou was the grape. Tasty. You could easily get into budget trouble with the wine list, but you don't have to.. . Dessert: Truly, I was pretty satisified in the middle of the appetizers, but for the sake of science, I labored on. So, by meal's end we naturally considered getting two desserts.   Reason kicked in to take it slow--hell, you can always order more.  But after The Red Velvet Pudding, the show was over.  You cannot top that.  Yes, John Park is a rock star. . . Service was as you'd expect: unhurried, friendly, and informed. It's a good team effort from the host through the sommelier. And, as nice and fancy as the Water Grill is, it feels welcoming and low key.  Cool to see a range of ages dining out.   And the building it's housed in is a storied Deco treasure.   Oh, and if you're hip there's even some help on the tab if you know where to look.. . Still, the diet awaits. But when I'm off it, and have something to celebrate, maybe next time we'll do the tasting menu.
