ReviewID: wSLr2H0MI9nSkhHovLuqkA
ReviewerID: LQ_woP6Lt0vOj3BBGgp1Ow
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Fraiche
Category: Italian
After ignoring the snotty hostess who seemed to find the four of us so very unpleasant she coudn't look us in the eye to tell us our (reserved) table wasn't ready, the evening started promisingly enough.  Because what's not promising about a bartender with a 1970s coiff/stache juggling cognac snifters filled with fire? Huh?  So very likeable.  And then there was the ever-so-slightly JoJo Starbuck lookalike uberdrunken guy with the high pitched scream-laugh who offered to buy us all drinks.  The bar area was situated rather dangerously at the terminus of several hard-to-spot steps, so for those of you who--like us--had been at Vinum Populi before dinner, be forewarned that a tumble straight into the well-dressed Sony execs at the bar is a definite possibility.  I'm very, very graceful, so such a thing would never happen to me. Screecher guy, that's another story.. . Finally seated in the outdoor patio (considerately screened in plastic curtains against the clatter of bustling downtown Culver City), we agreed to eat Italian style--sharing everything.  Some may call this simply "sharing", but I'm feeling chauvinistic these days about My People, since they're The Last Ethnic Group it's Okay to Stereotype in Film, Television, and Music (do a search on the word "guido" on yelp, if you don't believe me).. So anyways.. . They seem to like salty at Fraiche. Everything was abundantly flavored with that white wonder, sometimes to the detriment of the flavor.  We shared the rigatoni with bolognese (the pasta was silky and rich, but the sauce's predominant flavor was...salt), the risotto with wild morel mushrooms and fava beans was superb (here the salt came from good-quality pecorino cheese), the lamb spezzatino was stew-like (good) with ricotta gnocchi which were good but a bit bland and a gremolata (snotty world for a grainy-textured sauce) and the branzino en papillote (very good, very rich, and again, salty).  The food was rich and filling, and we definitely didn't have room for dessert. . . The service was good, fast, and friendly enough.  We were having a good time, laughing a lot, and our waiter knew to leave us alone except when we needed him.    Next time I'd like to eat in the big yet warm dining room, and perhaps try the steak frites--one of my favorite dishes..simple, yet hard to do exactly right.   Overall Fraiche was good but not great in any way, no flavors stood out completely, and nothing we had was memorable (in fact, I forgot what appetizers we had).  I'd try Fraiche with a group of people, and definitely do the sharing, because based on three of our four dishes, you might be a bit disappointed.
