ReviewID: Wsx_Cxm41PvDokgyCrDuyg
ReviewerID: tCfKY7zsd4a5JKTEoFQgfQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
So all this before the magic even started. By now, everyone was having a good buzz from the alcohol and the bill came out to about $600+, but whatever, haha... THe waiter gave use our main show tickets after our meal.. . THE MAGIC. The food was great and even that was a great experience, especially with a large group of people, but it was time to enjoy what we really came for. We grabbed a few more drinks and stopped by a 79 year old magician doing closeup tricks along the way. After a few cool card and string tricks, we continued to walk to the floor where our main show was at. The vibe was great and everyone was happy to be there. I didn't experience any of the drunken stories read on other yelp reviews. We watched another magician do a rope trick and then decided to line up for our main attracion so that we'd be able to gaurantee our seats.. . THe Main Show. The room was small, with 3 rows of seats, stadium style. In front were red curtains and there were several accent lights lighting up the front of the stage. There were two performances. One was a mind reading trick where he guessed who had the odd colored candy in their hand, which was one of our friends so we know it wasnt some kind of set up trick. THe other cool trick he did was the spoon bending trick. That one was amazing!!! The next guy did a trick where he got a signed playing card into a listerine bottle. We know this wasn't set up by a fake member of the audience again because it was our friend again. There were a few other mind boggling tricks but those were my favorites.. . THe Close-up Room. We waited about an hour to watch this 20 minute show and I am glad we did because I would have to say it was the best show of the night. While in line, one of the cocktail ladies came by and I asked her if she would be able to get us some fries. The fries were amazingly good! It was finally time to enter the room and it was again an extremely intimate room with three rows of 7 people. The magacian was from Spain and had a funny accent and personality. He performed the most amazing slight of hand routine I have ever seen. From making cards disappear to making them reappear, every part of his act was fun.. . This show concluded our night and we took one last group photograph in the main lobby before we left. It was definitely worth the experience even though we easily spent over $100/person.
