ReviewID: wuK87xGs1XMUeofzMO3WMA
ReviewerID: u5I2FXbaGmUCDL7bvUqFAg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
Had a dinner party here a while ago on a thursday night and every dish we tried with cheese was sublime. Words can't do it justice. Our simple starter of crostini with fresh ricotta, tapenade, and fresh sliced basil was an absolute delight. The burrata we were told arrives from Italy every thursday and so we ordered the Burrata from Basilicata. It was served on thick slices of toasted bread with olive oil and leeks. We also had the Fresh Ricotta &amp; Egg Raviolo with browned butter, Goat Cheese Ravioli with five lilies, and Burrata with bacon, marinated escarole, caramelized shallots -- all amazing. The other dishes we had were just good, not the "ecstatic culinary experience" we were expecting, just simply good. The Francobolli di Brasato with thyme was good. The grilled octopus  was indeed an insane mastery of cooking technique, the taste and texture is reminiscent of italian sausage- with it's smokey flavor and texture, not chewy or rubbery at all. It's an astonishing feat in itself and a testament to the skill that the chefs possess. But honestly I'd rather have italian sausage over grilled octopus that aspires to taste like it. I'm not saying don't try it. By all means try it. You'll be amazed with what they've done with the texture and taste. But you may feel cheated that the dish you only expected to be a light grilled seafood dish, delivers the nuance of rich comfort food, but it's comfort food "lite". For me it imparted a craving for comfort food that was a bit more substantial. Having said that, I'll rate the grilled octopus as just good. I'd much rather have tender thin sliced raw octopus at Sasabune. Much more satisfying in that it doesn't make me crave something else other than what I've eaten.  . . By the time my secondi arrived I had all but expected the heavens to part and cherubs to start singing. The Beef Brasato with Polenta and Horseradish Gremolata was very tender but I expected this dish to be amazing and it disappointed that it was not jaw-droppingly good, but simply an expected good. Perhaps it was the inflated expectations coming into the restaurant, or perhaps it was an over zealous ordering of antipasti and primi dishes that our dinner party ordered that did me in. I was a little full by the time my main dish arrived. . . For dessert, the rosemary cakes with olive oil gelato and rosemary brittle is a must try!  The blend of taste and texture is indescribably good. . . Overall, a great leisurely dinner, we arrived at 9:30pm and left at nearly 12am, the service was impeccable, the sommelier knowledgeable, the atmosphere bustling, you'll leave full and happy, but you're wallet will be a lot lighter for it.  . . First courses and dessert: 5 stars! . Main course: 4 stars.. . ********UPDATE********. . Came back to Mozza for dinner with friends for Korissa's birthday. I love Mozza even more now. Seriously 5 stars for the food, but -2 stars for the backed up kitchen, and overly long wait for food that night.
