ReviewID: WWdYiBWfgleJP3Q0qR-IHg
ReviewerID: d5SGY80KrWrFTDJck9KcQg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
I really wanted to be able to sling up 5 stars for this place but there were a few things that disappointed me.  . . We had a reservation but we had to wait over 30 minutes after our reservation time for a table.  They only take limited reservations and the rest is first-come first-served.  However, they need to try and better honor reservation times.  No apology from the host, nor did he check in with us during our wait to let us know how the table was coming along.. . In the half hour we stood by the entrance waiting to get our table, I did have time to take in the atmosphere.  Weeknight bar crowd had a lot of young professionals from the loop.  Decor is minimalist industrial and the art they do have makes a great statement.  In short, nice looking people, nice looking space.       . . Needless to say, by the time we were seated I was famished and grumpy.  Their draft cocktail, "hub punch" (a blend of vodka, tequila, licor 43, pomegranate and oh shit I forgot my middle name) is so yummy and quickly got our dining experience back on the right track.    . . Their eclectic menu doesn't mean mediocre fare (ala Cheesecake Factory).  Hub 51 can do sushi, Mexican, American traditions and more.  Embrace the hype; the chicken nachos are off the hook.  Chips are thin and crispy, the organic chicken is tender and flavorful, salsa was smoky and kinda hot, cheese is not overly greasy and the guacamole had huge chunks of avocado (jeez, that was my "ode to a pile of nachos").  Good value for the $$.  After filling up on the nachos, we opted for more appetizers and went with the spicy shrimp and king crab roll and the dry-rubbed ribs.  Sushi was excellent but the ribs (only 4 ribs for $12) were unremarkable.  . . Service was okay, she was very pleasant but you could tell that she, like most of the staff here, is young and inexperienced.  Terribly awkward end to the meal.  We decided to do only appetizers so that must have thrown her off.  We were in the middle of eating our ribs when she casually asked us "are you all set?" which we took to mean "can I get you anything right now?" We said yes, we're ok, and she immediately plopped down the bill without even offering us dessert.  She was really sweet and it was clear we weren't being ushered out, but it was still weird.  Had Berry Chill not been a short walk from the restaurant and had I not sucked down multiple hub punches at that point, I would have said something.  But we left, not completely sated but eh, what are you going to do?    . . All in all, we'll probably be back for more drinks, the chicken nachos and to try out more of their menu.
