ReviewID: wWWi70prNoeuUFtWwzlXPg
ReviewerID: g2rUSkwlF1DIVpsvTVGt6Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
First timer. My ex and I are big garlic fans, and what do people say.."go eat at The Stinking Rose if you're a garlic fan!" It was her birthday, so why the hell not. . . Food is pretty decent. But...not garlicky enough for me, at all. I mean I'm not such a fan that I consume obscene amounts of garlic with every meal, but I easily infuse more garlic flavor when I cook at home than what I ate tonight. So what did I eat?. . First, I had the roasted shrimp. That was yummy, though it was a tad bit salty. Roasting the shrimp allowed me to actually eat the shell along with the meat because it was actually crispy. Yes, I eat the shell when I can, because first of all, I'm lazy, and second of all, it actually helps lower the high cholesterol of the shrimp. It came with melted butter with either lemon or vinegar in it, which tasted great but I didn't taste much of garlic with this dish? I ended up putting the fresh raw garlic condiment they had on the table on the shrimp to enhance the garlic flavor.. . Then my ex had garlic crusted ribs, and I the garlic chicken with 40 cloves. Both came with a side of mashed potatoes.. . My ex's dish was not too bad, but again, I tasted more rosemary than garlic. The rosemary was a bit strong, and maybe they were pretty liberal with the garlic but the pungency of rosemary overpowered it? I dunno, but if it were up to me I would've put cumin &amp; thyme on ribs rather than rosemary; that would complement chicken better in my opinion.. . Speaking of chicken..I wasn't very happy with my dish. I was really just expecting a good roasted chicken with garlic, tons of garlic, I mean, it says 40 cloves of garlic, so it had to be somewhat garlicky, right? Well, it had a subtle hint of garlic on it, but 40 cloves? I don't really taste that.  My chicken was a bit bland, it had a lot more white meat than dark meat, and it was glazed with this..sweet cream sauce, which tasted kinda like blue cheese ish? Which seemed really unsuitable for the dish? I think if they were to put that sauce on it, they should at least say it on the menu "chicken glazed with sweet sauce" instead of just "roasted chicken" Now, aside from my chicken, it had maybe 7 cloves of roasted garlic on the side, with a droopy stalk of green onion. I dunno where the rest of the 33 cloves of garlic was, but it wasnt stuffed in the chicken. When I tasted the garlic on the side, it was the most ungarlicky garlic I've ever had.  And the green onion too, tasteless.. . I really think they over roasted the garlic and the green onion until all the flavor leaked out of it. Actually, it tasted like they boiled the garlic and green onion to death then threw it on the dish. . . The check took too long, and they packed my ex's ribs without bbq sauce.. . So..overall..I think the food is not bad, but nothing is garlicky enough and the foods don't taste very balanced (weird spices and sauces that did not complement), so the price did not justify the food.. . The shrimp was good, and the best thing was the raw minced garlic infused with green onion condiment thing on the table.. . I would go back there again, not for the garlic, but to give other foods a chance. . . The reason I give it 3 stars is because my experience with the food failed to equal the reputation of the restaurant.
