ReviewID: WXPEsoMH1dlbqjq72XJw5g
ReviewerID: -MuHLm0xno7Nh83Ew2dNRQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
Decided to give Yamashiro a try for the first time because it was listed on my daily Groupon ($80 bucks worth of food for 1/2 price) so I took the offer.  Made my reservation on Opentable for a Saturday night and had no problem getting 7pm seating. . . Host/Waitress.  We arrived a little early and were about to hit the bar when the hostess she could sit up early if we wanted.  We took the offer and ended up getting a great seat at the corner of the restaurant where we had both a south and west facing view.  We also had a pleasant waitress serving us (don't remember her name) who asked if this was our first time here and since it was she treated us well.  I thought maybe she would roll her eyes or something but she was nice.  . . Food. We decided to start with the Tempura Calamari and a California Roll (I was tempted to try the Darth Vader but stuck by some of the negative reviews here and decided to pass).  The Calamari was good, I couldn't really tell the tempura batter from normal fried battered Calamari but it was still good none the less.  The California Roll was decent as well, not a home run or anything.  Service wasn't exactly prompt but we were in no hurry, as long as the drinks kept flowing and the sun was setting we were happy.. . For the main course I tried the Ribeye special with Wasabi sauce, my wife had the Roasted Chicken (creature of habit I guess).  The Ribeye was tenderful and moist and served with Sweet Potato fries.  I would say it worth what I paid, not bad like some reviews are making it out.. . The best part about the meal was the dessert....we ordered the Strawberry filled Doughnuts with strawberry creme sauce and I ever never had anything like it, it was the Bomb!!  Great way to end a meal.. . Overall our bill came out to about $80 with the Groupon, not too bad for all that food and drink.  Afterward we went down to the Japanese garden and took in the view of the L.A. basin.  Afterwards we paid the $7.50 to the valet (btw..don't bother trying to park off property, its not worth the walk up the hill). . . Very romantic place, I may be married nowadays, but I still know how to keep the wife a little moist with night outs like these :-)
