ReviewID: WXQ3D4PlPttmdY1EZxEq_w
ReviewerID: mACwHrgFMmLyADIvLDAwMA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Maison Akira
Category: French
I went for dineLA, but I didn't like my meal all that much.  I realized as I tasted my friends' meals that I ordered the wrong items.  This restaurant gets 4 stars for good decor and atmosphere and a few dishes that shine.  I won't get too much into the decor, but they do a great job creating the illusion of space with mirrors--this came up in our conversation twice.  The place doesn't feel stuffy, whereas it might without them.  At the same time, they give you a sense of privacy since you're not actually next to a full room as big as your room (and there isn't some guy sitting right behind you wearing a tie as loud as yours). . What I got (off the dine LA menu). Escargot Bourgignon on Brioche with Organic Shimiji Mushrooms:  The flavors were subtle...a little too subtle.  I was concerned that something was wrong with my tastebuds, since these snails tasted almost like nothing to me.  It wasn't bad...because it wasn't really anything. . . For the appetizer, I SHOULD have gotten the either the warm house smoked salmon, which had a subtle-in-a-tasteable-way smokiness accented well by the capers.  The venison carpaccio was also delicious; I expected gaminess and tasted none.  Perhaps it was the thinness of the slices or the wasabi aoli.. . Sautéed Canadian Scallops in a Black Mussel,Seaweed Jus with Zucchini Flan and Braised Belgium Endive:  these were cooked properly; though one dinner mate thought they were slightly tough.  To me, these just tasted like scallops...and nothing else.  There just wasn't that much flavor.  It wasn't bad, because it wasn't too briny or seafood-y, but I would've liked a more flavorful sauce or accompaniment.  The Zucchini flan was interesting, though the braised endives were a little too bitter for my taste.  Perhaps this dish was meant to be subtle and that was lost on me?. . what I SHOULD have gotten: either the sea bass or the chateau steak.  I learned at the table that the chef used this sea bass recipe in a meal he served to the Japanese emperor.  I tasted it and it was rich and delicious--definitely something I'd serve to honor someone.  The lobster ravioli that came with it tasted...ok.  I personally felt like lobster meat was tragically wasted as the dough neutralized much of the flavor.  The steak came with a Bearnaise sauce, which was the first time I'd tasted one.  That sauce was exquisite, and I cannot emphasize that enough.  Exquisite, I say!  . . Rum Raising Feuilletee: This dessert was..just ok, but I didn't taste the other desserts.  I probably wouldn't get a dessert if I were to come back here for dine LA or otherwise.. . Overall, my night felt forgettable, except when I tried the rest of the dishes at my table.  I guess I ordered the most bland appetizer and entree, but I must admit the other 2 apps and entrees were great.  To get 4 out of 6 dishes excellent is pretty tough in my book, I just wish I had ordered foods I'd like :(
