ReviewID: WyGl0ImT15UIzQdsm4CwpQ
ReviewerID: KILReHgA6VVdZiedpC5PqA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Top Spice Thai &amp; Malaysian Cuisine
Category: Thai
i am obsessed with food.  thai food makes me very very happy.  so, when i headed home for lunch con mi mama, i wanted thai lunch. i've realized that we will happily go to the same places (which isn't a bad thing, esp when it's delish) but today, we were feeling frisky, so....top spice, here we come.. . service is strictly business.  your dishes will be cleared, no glasses will go empty, you will be offered a to go box.  no personality served along with-and i'm fine with that, but if you want your server to fill in for a bff, you might not be happy.. . so, lunch specials in the 7-9 range.  you get tons of food, so this meets my criteria for cheap lunch. i had spicy catfish (having given up MEAT meat for lent) with the prerequisite coconut soup and my mom had roti canai and chicken satay skewers.  my mother had no leftovers. none.  skewers, bare.  they looked moist and had a nice little grill on them.  between bites, she told me they were delicious.  i was surprised by the subtle yumminess of my soup, which is often a throwaway.  this was a wee bit spicy, just enough creaminess and chock full of mushrooms and tofu.  my catfish had a little too much batter, but my goodness, i got like three pieces! the red curry was a little rich, but i ate all the cucumber that came from my mom's satay, and that toned things down. lots of veggies, and basil leaves also make me happy  i don't eat those green peppercorn things, but for what ever reason, i like when they are on the plate, and they gave me a big long cluster of em. . . this place had a huge crowd and lots of takeout business.  foolishly, that made me think the food was going to be totally amazing, which it wasn't, but i would go back, as it was quite tasty, and came out quickly...which matters for lunch. oh, btw- the atmosphere inside is sorta like being in a dark warm cocoon and they have lovely silverware and cloth napkins, which adds a nice touch.
