ReviewID: wZlWj40e_8wuYQiVZI2rVA
ReviewerID: T763DnqDps68STPygHdczw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Before I talk about the food, let me gripe about how horrible LA's public transportation is. What takes 15 minutes to drive took me a whole freaking HOUR. Yes, my friend and I actually braved the lousy LA metro bus system to get a taste of LA's famous Umami Burger. Yes, we rode an hour's worth of horrible public transportation just to get a damn burger. And holy cow, it was freaking worth it. . . I looked it up, and Umami is a Japanese term referring to "a pleasant savoury taste imparted by glutamate, a type of amino acid, and ribonucleotides, including inosinate and guanylate, which occur naturally in many foods including meat, fish, vegetables and dairy products.". . Huh? Let me simplify it for you: Umami is the freaking amazing 5th sense of taste that makes you salivate like crazy when you chomp on a good savory dish. Think: MSG. Ahhh.. . And that's exactly the sensation we got when we chomped into our burger. We ordered two burgers and split them both to share. One was the original Umami burger, which had a meaty beef burger, roasted tomato, mushroom, Parmesan chip, caramelized onion, and spread on a toasted Portuguese bun. Umami...x6!!! . . The other was the Turkey Miso Burger: Turkey burger with Asian BBQ sauce and avocado relish on Portuguese bun.. . Holy Freaking Sensation! Words cannot describe how amazing these burgers were. Literally, my mouth was watering as it chewed on this burger. I was wondering how the burger cold be so freaking juicy, and it turns out half the juice was from my own saliva! . . The service was a bit hatter-batter, and all over the place, but I didn't care. The food was seriously amazing. Plus, the servers wore these cute Umami shirt. I want an Umami shirt!. . I'll definitely, most certainly be back. But until I return again, I shall refrain from all thoughts on Umami. Homer goes "Mmm...Donuts..." and I go "Mmm...Umami...". Okay, okay, I'll stop.
