ReviewID: wzv0eSPEYBuFCHKVZQbGlQ
ReviewerID: nh-Uj_fYdkAZuva7DFBvcA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Glenn&#39;s Diner
Category: Diners
AND THE WINNER IS KYLE!. . Every once in a while you need a place to take a lady on a date to impress her, to charm her, and, ultimately, to get laid.  Such a place cannot seem like a place you take women to get laid.  It must be casual. It must be unpretentious. It must be disarming.  With Glenn's Diner... I win.  Like, every time.. . I discovered this place with a girlfriend a couple years ago.  I only remember boxes of cereal on the wall and that the Smoked Mac and Cheese got me laid.  After several visits, with dates and casual acquaintances, (who didn't stay that way for long,) I started to ABSOLUTELY love this place.. . Now about those cereal boxes.  Ladies seem to love that stuff. (Cuteness factor? CHECK.)  A quirky little touch like that and I'm filing through my mental checklist to make sure my couch and bed are clean.  Combine it with the ridiculous attempt at irony (?) by calling it a Diner (it ain't) and she will be talking about how cute the place is (CHECK!)  The restaurant stays busy but, since she's never heard of it she'll feel like she's being let in on a precious little secret (CHECK!). . The crowd itself is mixed and the energy is pretty high.  The dude one could only consider to be "Glenn" walks around asking people if everything is good.  I kinda like messing with him with a, "yeah... are you alright?" because he never introduces himself.  It's like a considerate man just walked in to check on the world.  There are a number of ethnic people dining when I eat there, which I must say, puts me at ease a bit... But only a bit.... . And though the place is smaller and bustling with fast-pacing waiters seemingly ready to bring you short stacks and sausages out of a giant plastic bag from a freezer, what greets you at the table is SERIOUS craftsmanship from the kitchen.  There are more than enough reviews here to describe the amazing quality and variety of seafood.  The comfort food (including the "pants on the ground" mac&amp;cheese) are incredible and, if your a bruncher, (aka lazy and delusional that it's 1 pm and the "B" has passed; what are we? savages?) the Bloody Mary will have people gawking at you.  it is more of an appetizer, with its large slice of melon and full skewer of shrimp.  If she get's the mimosa, that comes with a small bottle of bubbly, prepare for some "afternoon delight"... I keeps it real.. . WARNING: Like many "friendly" restaurants in Ravenswood/Lincoln Square, there can be some serious baby traffic. (UN-CHECK!) Make a quick "googoogaga" face at the thing, let her see you do it and go back to talking about sports!! (...CHECK.)  Unlike many of the other "sun-up" haunts, there is enough adultness in this place to keep us from feeling judged for still being childless and man is that anything BUT an aphrodisiac. Move through it quickly!  They only win if you show them weakness.  Put your head down and enjoy the rest of your asparagus.  It's worth it.. . The fact is the food, chalkboard menu that changes with what fish is in rotation, and the little touches of flair a great and this place is clearly a can't lose.  Not to mention the fact that it's not horribly expensive.
