ReviewID: X--kv06bS0uM7m_dQKFagA
ReviewerID: AW311JxyBImxa3WPGKmY0g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Glenwood
Category: Pubs
Today was one of those lazy Sunday mornings that screamed for a casual brunch somewhere. We had been wanting to try this new eatery in our neighborhood for a while, and since they were reputed to have a decent brunch selection, we decided today would be the day.. . We walked in to a mostly full room, yet the comfortable, high-walled booths gave a nice sense of privacy. The well stocked bar tempted me into trying a bloody mary, and it was an excellent choice. Spicy, but not too much so, and a bargain at just 5$ glass.. We both ordered the Village Breakfast, which included a selection of eggs, meats, hash browns, grits or a biscuit for 7$. The plates were out in a reasonable time, not super speedy, but gave us time to enjoy our beverages.. . The eggs were cooked exactly as I ordered them, and the bacon was so perfectly done and smelled to good that I actually had to eat a piece instead of handing it all off to my non-vegetarian breakfast partner. The biscuits weren't the many-layers southern variety, but were substantial, definitely homeade and had an incredible flavor - I could have made a meal of those alone. The hash browns were more like home fries, cubed and tossed with a small amount of peppers and onions, excellently seasoned and not too greasy.. The crowning glory, however, was the sizeable serving of grits. I've spent the last hour on the internet trying to figure out what on earth they could have used in the kitchen to get grits this good, and I'm still stumped. These were thick, earthy and flavorful... so far from the watery, bland crap they serve at most local pancake houses it was like  an entirely different dish. I noticed they have a shrimp-and-grits dish on the menu, and that is what I will be trying next. Seriously, these grits were the best grits I've ever had, and that's not the bloody mary talking.. . The service was friendly, and the manager came around to personally ask about the food and our experience. The best surprise was the bill, which was amazingly reasonable for the amount and quality of the food we got. Definitely a welcome addition to the East Atlanta Village.
