ReviewID: x1GCt9VamFHkozoGhvlZ3g
ReviewerID: A4Q67zDRm7sl8xIj1YnIrw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Wow. Wow. Wow. . . To kick off Valentines Day Weekend, the honey and I had a date night in LA. She said I was going to love their Caprese and their pizza; two of my favorite dishes on the planet. . . Amidst the angry couples who didn't bother making a reservation on V-Day weekend, we showed up lookin' cute and ready to indulge after a busy week of studying and hard work. After the host tried to appease the outcry of angry couples, we gave him our name and we were quickly seated at a table for two by a window. . . The decor is a fusion of modern elegance. Nothing crazy on the walls, no ugly table clothes, or any obnoxious decorations. It was beautiful, straightforward elegance without pretension. The paper place-mats work; they have little Italian "lessons" so you can educate yourself on how to say "Don't stick your head out the window!" before eating your meal. The silverware is in a postage envelope with a postcard as a little keepsake. It's cute. . . Everything - seriously- EVERYTHING looked delicious. We settled with the Arancine Bolognese and the Caprese to share accompanied with a little carafe of a Tuscan Sangiovese/Syrah blend. Within about 10 minutes we had it all on the table. . . The Arancine were about the size of mini-meatballs laying on a very thin layer of tomato and cheese. . The Caprese was the best I ever had. The softest mozz draped in a pile on the plate with light basil/olive oil and salt drizzled on top. The cherry-size tomatoes still on the vine sat on top. . . Let me repeat that - It was THE BEST CAPRESE I'VE EVER HAD! . . Pizza - we shared the Goat Cheese, Bacon with leeks and scallions. It was fabulous. The green leeks were refreshing next to the savory taste of the bacon paired with creamyness of the cheese. You must try it! . . Service was a little spotty, but wasn't terrible. They were very quick to bring us our Caramel gelato with marshmallow sauce and Spanish peanuts. The evening was a very sweet ending to a very sweet holiday. . . XOXO. . P.S. Authentic Italian pizza is SUPPOSED to be thin crust! FYI. :)
