ReviewID: X2mo4gFs5yvIWvUS5d99_A
ReviewerID: r1jSd7XW686g1mwcPycZNA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Modern
Category: French
So I've been here before and have eaten in the bar area and thought their smaller plates were very decent.  Their Tarte Flambee is quite possibly one of the best in the city.  Their wine list is impeccable and I can always expect to find something interesting and new to try from it.  Yesterday was the first time I ate in the formal dining room, where as had been noted before, jackets are required for the men.  The gorgeous view of the courtyard as nightfall comes, does give the Modern an advantage few other establishments can replicate. . . Eric and I had walked in sans reservation and as we were both in our corporate suit-ware, were promptly led to a nice, romantic and cozy windown corner table for two.  I was disappointed to find out that the formal dining room requires either a tasting menu or an $85 prix-fixe menu as I wanted something light on such a warm evening.  Eric and I were already both comfortably seated though and so despite the three course prix fixe menu, decided to stay in the formal dining room.  . . Eric ordered the Arugula and Sweet Pea Risotto with Gold Leaf and Fresh Sheep's Milk Ricotta for a starter and then had the Black Angus beef tenderloin with, as our waiter put it "their take on a potato salad".  Said potato salad had tongue bacon in it and seemed to consist of julienned-vegetables mounted in a little pyramid.  He finished with the lemon napoleon while I had the Foie Gras Terrine for appetizer, the Suckling Pig as an entrée and the milk chocolate Dacquoise for dessert.  . . Portions are not huge.  But every single plate of food was bursting with flavors and everything was cooked perfectly.  Even the bread butter which came on a plate that itself could serve as art, came at the perfect temperature.  The country rye bread that came with the foie gras terrine had been warmed to the point where the outside of the bread was just slightly crunchy while the thick inside was still soft.  The foie gras spread as easily as the butter and melted in my mouth.  The only way my enjoyment of the foie gras could have been increased would have been if you'd given me a small glass of Chateau D'Yquem to drink with it.  Eric's risotto was an interesting deep shade of green with an edible gold leaf slowly melting into it making it look even creamier - the rate at which the risotto disappeared proving that indeed it was delicious.  His tenderloin was cooked to perfection, medium-rare, showing a consistent pink throughout the three inch high tournedos of a tenderloin.  My suckling pig on the other hand was fantastic.  It was a reconstructed dish almost.  Instead of a slab of suckling pig, someone had taken the time to tear the meat by hand into small slivers, before shaping it back into the pork belly piece it once had been, topping it all with the crispy, crackling skin on top. The natural jus spooned on added just a touch of sweetness to the tender meat.   . . Presentation was gorgeous and service impeccable.  In fact, I should emphasize how fantastic the service was.  Apart from Gramercy Tavern, where the service is perfect if rather formal, I would say that the service at the Modern was the best I've had anywhere.  The sommelier appeared just at the right moment.  The waiter seemed to read our minds, coming by to collect our plates soon after we stopped working on them.  Water glasses were refilled without ever having to ask for it.  Courses came as if on cue.  I had a glass of the Sekt (sparkling Gruner Vetliner) with dinner while Eric had a glass of the 97' Barolo.  The nose on his barolo was everything you'd want from a barolo yet on the mouth, it actually had a rather light body which was just perfect since it was a rather warm night to start with.  My glass of Sekt on the other hand had tiny bubbles and had I not know otherwise, I would have easily taken it for a French Champagne instead of an Austrian Sparkling. Amuse bouche and little extras like the handmade chocolates and petit fours at the end of the dinner kept us delightfully entertained while our food was cooked and the check was taken cared of.  As if that were not enough, on our way out, we were handed a bag with a little loaf of muffin/cake bread, a la Gramercy Tavern.  . . The Modern might often be referred to as the restaurant attached to the MOMA but it can more than stands on its own merits.  It compares with Blue Hills, Eleven Madison and some of the great restaurants in the city, both in food and service.  And I will certainly be back.
