ReviewID: X2VbZE55I9_p9Zgv005XUQ
ReviewerID: dOYzsxLTkOuCSBHbFLXPoA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Yamashiro Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
"Oooooooooh, look at the view!". "How romantical.". "OMG SO EXPENSIVE!". . I would be one sucky Yelper if I reviewed this place with just those quotes up top. But that really does sum up my experience there. . . I'm a sucker for good views, and especially if that view is panoramic and you can see the glitz and glamour of Los Angeles all around you, I can't help but coo appreciatively as I mindlessly push aside my expensive, mediocre food. Even just for the view and the experience of sitting amidst the sparkling lights, I'd totally ask my next boyfriend to take me there. . . Getting there was a bit of a pain though, but what can you expect from a restaurant that's on top of a freaking mountain in a residential neighborhood? I kept climbing and climbing these one-way narrow-ass streets and got worried that I was going into some foreign suburb, but there it was, nestled comfortably off of a sturdy cliff. Parking is difficult, so unless you want to park in the neighborhood and make the hike up to the restaurant, just valet your vehicle for $8 and make it easier for you and your sweetpea. I was actually pretty glad because they actually take credit card to pay the valet!. . The food was EHHHHHHHH. It felt like they were trying way too hard to make sushi rolls classy and high-class. In fact, they try so hard that the sushi have weird names like DARTH VADER or RECLINING BUDDHA. I tried both of these and they were not very good. Darth Vader is the pitch-black roll with black rice and other black fishy things, and Reclining Buddha didn't even have rice and just had veggie-type crap in it. I love my rice and meat. This stuff was too healthy for me. Or too black. Don't be offended.. . And as a sidenote, each of these rolls cost around 15-20 dollars. Can you say "WTF?" But I didn't. Because I was in a classy restaurant and I was going to be a lady, damnit!. . Moving onto drinks, the PERONI beer was the bomb. It was really good. I tried the sangria and that was pretty and drinkable as well. Don't drink and drive. Water is the shieeeet. For dessert, we had the BREAD PUDDING and the NY-STYLE CHEESECAKE. Those were both okay as well. I hate cashews though, so the bread pudding wasn't THAT great. The cheesecake tasted just as good as the cheesecake you would get from Cheesecake Factory or Mimi's.. . I may sound like a hater, but if you're going to charge almost 30-40 dollars per entree and up to 20 dollars for dessert, shouldn't you have FANTASTIC food? I'm telling you, it's really all about the view. Next time, I want to go during the day so I can actually see the Japanese garden they have set up outside. Overall, it was a nice cozy time with just some ridiculous food. . . Yamashiro's lucky that I get distracted so easily by pretty lights.
