ReviewID: X3kqAYIbdSS4AK9s1zlKVg
ReviewerID: q_jEY68DjYJfiNzZOHVdNg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
When I go for Sunday brunch, I want ambiance and service, period.  This place is set up for their own convenience, and not designed for their customers.  The restaurant is big, when you walk in you get in line and order at the counter like at a deli or like at M Cafe de Chaya. Some of the menu items are similar, cold veggies.  There are at least two cashiers, separate one for sweets.  Be prepared to stand in lines and to go back again if you want coffee or dessert later.  The menu is listed on a board over the cashier. I ordered a nicoise salad which was close to $19 with tax and a $1 tip for the cashier. There is a reason, there is a tip line for the cashier on the receipt.  It means - don't expect any service after you order and pay.  You get a number, find a table and they bring the order over.. . I pay this kind of price for a mere salad and then I have to browse these dirty tables.  All the empty tables were cluttered with dirty dishes, our table was finally cleared off, with a quick wipe or two.  He also started to take our number holders away, and then asked, "Are these yours?"  When I come up with a smart remark, I'll get back to ya.  Then some other bus boy brings my salad to the table and walks away, nothing said about the missing silverware.  This place really rubs me the wrong way.  I had to turn around to inquire as the bus boy scurried off and was told, "He's bringing it." Then one at time, we received the silverware, the bread and then the water, all completely without grace or a single word.  You will never hear, "Is everything alright?" or anything like that.  I am partial to glasses for my beverages, especially at a restaurant.  For our water, we got the clear plastic cups that could blow away in the wind.  . . My salad had 3 beige little chucks of what could be water based tuna from a can with romaine lettuce. The dressing looks like Caesar salad dressing and has no flavor. The salad included a few slices of black olives, several green string beans, a few tomato quarters, a few potato pieces and barely an eighth of a boiled egg with the yolk missing. Did not include anchovies, served on a small tin plate - just like a side salad order, see pic:  . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . . For the price, and the service - completely not worth it. No service, if I wanted to send it back to the kitchen or if I wanted anchovies, should I get in line again? Where but in LA would a restaurant get away with these prices while saving expense on the staff?  If you don't ask for the bread, you won't get it. I hesitated to use the word rip off but I am and I did. I would have been happier eating the salad at McDonald's.  If you want to feel like a hungry person nibbling on scraps on a small tin plate, now you know what to order!  I suggest you take it back to the kitchen, I wish I did. For far better nicoise salad, ambiance, prices and service, go to Clafoutis or Cafe Marly Melrose where you get a serving size piece of the tuna that is rare in the middle and seared on the outside.. . Cafe Marley Melrose nicoise salad:   . http://www.yelp.com/bi.... . Wikipedia nicoise salad:  . http://en.wikipedia.or.... . . 1-12-08 Update. . I emailed this review to the restaurant, and so far there has been no response.  That pretty much sums up how they treat their customers.
