ReviewID: X3UmzXWNaCBytiY3FsG4NA
ReviewerID: 8D7-47olBoWnqCnDltfGgw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
There are two kinds of sushi places: places where I would consider ordering omakase, and places where I would never consider doing such a thing in a million years. I'd estimate that 90% of the sushi places around L.A. fit in the latter category. One rule of thumb: if they have "philly rolls" on the menu, don't order omakase. . . I'm not so snobby that I avoid places where I'll order some rolls, I just think the two types of places should be rated differently. Sushi-Gen is an Omakase spot. This has an important implication for customers (and reviewers): If you go to Sushi-Gen and order spicy tuna rolls or the typical round-eye "sushi deluxe", you're not making the most of the place. Not only do you miss what they have to offer,  you usually overpay for what you get. It's like going to be best wine bar in town and paying $12 for a beer instead of $15 for a great unusal wine you wouldn't have known to order yourself! . . With that backdrop, I think the first criteria for Omakase is that the ingredients should be absolutely stellar and fresh. No problems here: Sushi-Gen's fish is very high quality and fresh, as others have pointed out. Additionally, the rice is a bit warm - when combined with the cool, fresh fish it creates a very nice sensation on the pallatte. . . The second is an interesting mix of selections. If I'm giving the chef carte-blanche to choose my meal for me there should be some surprises. Indeed, there were a few dishes I'd never seen, and some I'd never heard of! One example was a spicy scallop sushi, which is to be eaten WITHOUT soy sauce. It had a lemony flavor to it with a subtle mix of spices. . . Finally, I we live in a showbiz town and I like some drama in my Omakase. Surprise me. Make it a conversation! My friend I had lunch with told me while we ate that he liked chopped up tuna. The chef overheard this and made a special toro roll that mixed chopped up tuna with some little fruit pieces - it was phenomenal!!! There was a flow to the meal and the sequence of dishes was as exciting as it was fufilling. . . Bonus points: we said we wanted to spend around $50 each, and the tab was $51 (pre-tax). . . So, that's why I give this place 5 stars. I think the price is reasonable for what you get when you make the most of what Sushi-Gen has to offer. It is unfortunate that people order a salmon roll, give this place 3 stars, and say it's overpriced. Fortunately that leaves more seats at the bar. I will be back...
