ReviewID: X3VbuBChmtS3z5hCmo6MgQ
ReviewerID: pjyiGFo8GNQ4YvcukxbOug
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
Just came back from The Boiling Crab and I am feeling stuffed!. . I have always wanted to go but have been a bit of a wuss about having to drive there from Westwood but my love of crab was stronger then my hatred for bad traffic and bad drivers.. . We were meeting at 12:30 but I have heard that the lineups can be pretty insane so I left my place at 11:15 am hoping to avoid the rush. I ended up getting there around 11:50 am so  I parked in the back lot and ended up going to the pastry shop 3-4 doors down to simply look and see what they had to kill some time.. . Looking and seeing, who was I fooling? I finally settled on a slice of mango mousse cake which was very tasty and light, sweet but not cloying. What a way to open up my appetite for the crab!. . I wandered around a little more thinking that it is too bloody hot to be walking around outside and went to wait inside the TBC until everyone arrived.. . They tied our bibs around our neck then took our orders. I had the King Crab legs , mildly spiced, the whole shabang style or whatever they call it with an order of sausage and french fries.. . *I was told that the level of spiciness is stronger then many places so you may want to taken medium if you normally like things really hot and mild if you normally like things medium.. . My crab soon arrived in it's clear plastic bag and it smelled delicious! There were 3 giant sized crab legs that were demanding my attention  so I started cracking them open and I was soon rewarded with sweet morsels of crab which I then dipped into the delicious garlicky sauce that was at the bottom of the bag. Yum!!!. . The sausage and fries were good but to be honest, I was too fixated on my crab to care.. . ATMOSPHERE: . . Cozy little joint with sports playing on the multiple screens, minimal, no frills type of place. . PROS: . . Crab was delicious and filling. . CONS: . . Not fun for those who do not like making a mess or having to deal with hands that smell like garlic. . I will definitely be going back to TBC even if I have to drive all the way to Alhambra to get it!
