ReviewID: x4d9unMV9rIS1Fcqvf2sfg
ReviewerID: Xsez4Vs1OF9myURKODQ9Lg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
So after stalking the opening of one-half of the Nancy Silverton/Mario Batali enterprise for the past few months and constantly calling every Monday morning in anticipation of their opening, I finally got a reservation. Mind you, I had to make the reservation a week and half beforehand for a MONDAY night. . . This used to house the Alessi Pizzeria which was actually one of my favorites. The thin-crust pizzas were delicious and sort of "getting-there" close (nothing can ever be as yummy as the super wafer thin crust pizzas of Italy, however) to the pizzas in Italy. It was never crowded and you could always get a table...but alas and alack...I guess that meant they weren't doing well. It's too bad. It was a real hidden gem in LA. On to Pizzeria Mozza... . . My friends and I got there and it was packed. The bar was also packed (Apparently, walk-ins can eat at the bar if the tables are full, which they usually are). It wasn't packed with hip Hollywooders looking for the next cool place, it was packed with foodies (young and old alike). I suppose any place with either Nancy Silverton or Mario Batali associated with it is going to have its share of stalkers (I'm absolutely sure I'm not the only rabidly crazy one). All the servers looked like they were model/actor wanna-bes, but were certainly knowledgeable and the service was fine especially for it being so busy. . . I started off with a glass of Sangiovese, while waiting for the last friend to arrive, that the bartender serves to you in a small carafe. It was pricey ($12), but for the amount that you get and the quality of the wine, I thought it was reasonable. We were seated and ordered a bottle of a different sangiovese and then started with appetizers. I, of course, ordered the arancini - fried rice croquettes with a tangy light marinara. Delicious. They were light and not greasy and really really good. Everyone at the table inhaled them. We also orderd the chicken liver bruschetta with capers and pancetta. Now because there was liver involved, not everyone was on board. But that just meant more for my friend and me: fine by us. It was delicious. The chicken liver was rich and did not have a strong liver/iron-y taste and of course, it went great with a little bit of fried pork product. A little bit of fried pork product makes everything better. . . On to the pizzas. I ordered the cheek meat pizza with egg, radicchio, and bagna cauda (I think that's a butter/anchovy based sauce). Yummy...this is almost like an authentic carbonara on pizza crust! It was delicious and such an original combination. Although the crust was good, I was anticipating super thin crusts, which this was not at all. That would be my only complaint. My friend had the pizza with the clams, pecorino, and parmgianno. This was amazing as well. The clams went perfectly with the sharpness of the cheese which I absolutely adored. I might say that I liked this one more. Once again, the only complaint is that I am really stuck on this paper-thin crust that I can't really seem to get anywhere in the U.S. My liver-despising friend ordered the funghi misti pizza which was fine, but did not bowl me over as the other 2 did. I think the way to go here is to order the pizzas with the more daring and interesting ingredients. The lardo pizza, gorgonzola dolce pizza, and the white anchovy pizza are all waiting to be devoured by me. I can't wait. Even though we had stuffed ourselves, we decided on dessert. I have no idea why I ordered the butterscotch pudding (I don't like pudding), but I did and it was superb. It was so rich and full of flavor AND it came with these delectably crunchy, yet light wafers that went perfectly with the pudding. The wafer was really weird (with a sprig of rosemary in it) but went really well with the pudding and was really really sublime. Can't really explain it because I don't really know what it is. It's a total teaser though. You just want a whole plate of them. . . Anyway, all in all, despite the not-thin-enough pizza crusts, I was pleased. Well, probably more than pleased since my friend pointed out to me that I inhaled the entire dinner. I do, however, have a tendency to do that. It's obviously a bit pricey for "pizza," but when it comes to yummy food, I don't really care. If you don't get a bottle of wine, I'm sure one can get away with spending $25 (if you get an appetizer). Well, since a couple of those pizzas have my name on them, I'm sure I'll be going back sometime soon.
