ReviewID: X4sGbnfek10au2i3LD7nSw
ReviewerID: -yV155y63RQslpr3yIdqrA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fred 62
Category: Diners
During our crazy downpour this week, I found myself in my old Los Feliz stomping grounds.  I just had an eyebrow wax and the weather was kinda gloomy and cold and wet and all I wanted in my belly was a big old gooey bowl of Mac n'cheese.  Then I remembered Fred 62 had what I was craving.  Remembering that parking in that area is tricky I made a deal with myself that if there wasn't a spot nearby, fate would decree I'd have no mac n'cheese that day.  . . Well I found a spot SORTA nearby and ran through the raindrops and into a place I had frequented for breakfast/brunch many times when I was still a '323'.. . Fred 62 is ALWAYS busy to some extent and you have to know going in that this place is one thing during the day and a whole other beast late night.  I find Fred has a bit of a split personality disorder and it attracts very different crowds depending on whether Fred is offering classic alternative on Sirus/XM and eggs for brunch or if Fred is being 'too cool for school' in one if its booths at night when 'Swingers' wannabes roll in after a bender at the Dresden.  However, no matter HOW busy it is, I've always managed to get a seat at the counter.  I have never found the staff unfriendly or 'bored' and service is always swift.  My dude at the counter was in a particularly chatty mood this day.  I think there were a lot of regulars in having soup and sammiches.  I noticed some of these regulars leering at what I ordered.  Food envy perhaps?  Happens to the best of us.. . The mac n'cheese was the perfect combo of white cheddar gooey-ness, pasta firmness-peppery seasoned and had that wonderful crumbly topping with the crunchy cheese stuck to the sides of the bowl that you just want to scrape off with your teeth!  Pefect rainy day medicine!. . I totally dig this Los Feliz diner, but I reserve a star for the parking situation.  (of course, if it's night time or Sunday you can always park in the post office lot across the street!)
