ReviewID: x62HTAXRW7JKTBxbPXzBAA
ReviewerID: EcAg0uUVSI4hoQ96Jycbow
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Magic Castle
Category: Performing Arts
Eclectic, off-beat; nothing in the world like it.  Sometimes great, sometimes not so much.  Some folks get it, and some don't.  The nice thing is, those that don't, don't come back.  (Apparently, they go and review Target stores.)  And good riddance.. . L.A. is known for ripping down old palaces, and I've been watching it happen for more than thirty years.  From Tiny's, Schwab's and Ship's, to Ciro's, Perino's, and the Coconut Grove - shabby to chic, anything that's got history ends up with a target on it.  . . Sure stuff gets saved - but would you feel better if they killed off most of your family just because they let some of 'em live?  Save it.. . Unlike most of the old timers in town who need fund-raisers and low benchmarks to keep the doors open, the Magic Castle has never become cheap and easy, though it's going on forty-five years as the most famous and successful private magician's club in the world. You've got to know someone to get in, either as the personal guest of a member or by getting an invitation from one.  But let's assume you don't hob-knob with illusionists, card sharps or Shimshi, who might bring you in as their guest.   An invitiation will get you and up to seven of your best friends in, for a cover charge of twenty bucks each.  Buying dinner is part of the deal, and that'll run you thirty to fifty each, depending on your taste in beverages and desserts. The food is great (despite what fussy mouths say) but if you're looking for a spectacular, fine dining experience, you're already missing the point of the Castle, so skip it.    . . Enjoying an evening at the Magic Castle means being able to appreciate the incredible, dimly lit, Victorian-esque labyrinth itself as much as taking in the entertainment.   The Castle features a minimum of six or seven different entertainers seven nights a week, with additional, unscheduled performers appearing from time to time throughout it's many rooms and chambers. And the lineup changes every week of the year.  You'll have to step lively to catch all of the week's performers in one night.  Avoid the busy crowd of Fridays and Saturdays if you can, but if you've got to gothen, be sure and ask to be shown to the W.C. Fields bar, wor some of the most amazing close-up fun you'll ever have.    Five bars and quick, winsome servers will keep you plied with beverages throughout your visit, though, yeah - the booze is overpriced.  (But if you're just looking to drink, try the Bigfoot Lodge. Seriously, Carol and her crew pour 'em stiff over there...  mmm.  Right then, I'm off.). . So if you can wrangle an invite, use it.  Like I said, nothing lasts forever, especially in this town. Here's to another forty-five years of magic from Milt and company.. . - Father Fang
