ReviewID: x6pQ44kwah0LkaEKcG2hYQ
ReviewerID: pVf-OLMqNG56cTtrNjiGZA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Ecco
Category: Modern European
wowza my yowza. . . I chose this restaurant after reading other yelpers glowing reviews of Ecco (thanks guys - yeah!!) and am happy to be able to give a huge 'ditto' to the yelplove this place has already received. . . Next time some one asks me where they should take any of the following: parents, large group for special occasion, first date, business partners, anniversary or breakup date - without hesitation, I'll joyously shout ECCCCOOO! . . Our waitress Rachel was hands down the most knowledgeable foodie I've ever come across in person. (not counting Food Network hosts here. And I'd like to note that she was way cooler than one infamously perky host, R. Ray). She waxed poetic about the heirloom tomatoes that were in season, smoky wine flavors and left us all quite impressed.. . Without her guidance, we would have ordered individual entrees, maybe shared a dessert. booorr--ing. . . Rachel recommended going family style, as the menu is set up to easily be shared/sliced/diced among your party. . . Section I includes a palette of meats and cheeses to create your own pairings. Warning that you will not find easily recognizable names like 'cheddar' or 'salami' on here. .. we had the three milks robiola, speck and finociona, just in case for some reason you get a waiter that isn't quite as helpful. . . Section II has tapas-sized 'taste &amp; shares' and more traditional sized appetizers. Four words: Fried. Honey. Goat. Cheese.. . And finally there are some entrees and pastas - oh, baby, chili-braised pork with garlic and homemade pappardelle! . . We didn't try any of these, but justsoyaknow they also have paper thin pizzas and a couple panini choices too. . . And on to the more gluttonous  - they have some ecco-exclusive wine selections, which are reasonably priced and exciting to try something 'exclusive.' We tried a red zin (and estimated that red zin will be the new pino) at just $33 a bottle. As for dessert, spoons clanked fighting over the last chocolate torte bite. Mmm.. . As we piled on the order, I resisted adding up the cost of those $8 mini plates in my head. But when Rachel bought the check, it made me want to marry Ecco. Split between the four of us, we ended up with a $45 tab each, including tip! I honestly thought for the quality (and quantity!) of the food, we'd each end up throwing down at least $75-100 each. . . As for the ambiance, the crowd was a mix of the young and restless, as well as a couple families, trendy birthday parties, and the like. . . Decor is contemporary but not so much so as to scare your grandparents. And I resisted the urge to rip out the glam modern bathroom fixtures and pocket them.
