ReviewID: x8Vb1O-OMIXkDevhjJlwlA
ReviewerID: tXenUy5kek5EKsVQAjnkFw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cho Sun Ok Restaurant
Category: Korean
Great food for a VERY cheap price. . . I will say that I spent an EXTENSIVE amount of time doing research before heading here since it was my first time at a Korean BBQ or Korean restaurant in general. I read almost all the yelp reviews which were incredibly helpful. . . We got there at 7:30 on a Friday night, even though I know that's one of the busiest times. There were only two parties ahead of us in line, but we did have to wait for about 40 minutes for a table since the place is so small. I was pleasantly surprised about the decor, though. From the outside and from some reviews, I was expecting it to be pretty sad looking. I actually thought it looked relatively clean and nice, though it is very small. . . When we sat down, we ordered the unmarinated beef strps for 2 since that's what I heard was their specialty. The server brought out the 10 bowls of assorted veggies, etc. and was definitely not interested in telling us what they were or if there were directions on how to eat anything, so we just started picking at everything and I was really happy at how good they all were.. . The beef was brought out and the oil on the cooking stone was smoking, so still unsure what to do, we just started throwing some meat on the grill. Eventually a server came over and seemed perturbed we'd started on our own, but not in a mean way. She threw more meat and the garlic cloves on the stone pot and really got things cooking for us. She did show us how to eat the beef (dip it in the sesame oil/salt/pepper mixture, pick up some shredded scallions and some marinated onion/jalepeno stuff, cram it in your mouth). It was delicious.  . . We stuffed ourselves with the meat and they came over to make the famous fried rice. I was so sad that I really didn't like the kimchi fried rice. It must be the kimchi because the flavor was just nothing like I'd expect from fried rice, and I didn't really like it. That's just my personal taste though. Don't go expecting the fried rice you've had anywhere else, cause this ain't it.. . Otherwise, I loved the experience and am planning to go again with a couple more people. It's a good place for small groups (4-6) and a fun experience to share. It's also BYOB so the bill ends up being so small for all the food you get!. . Definitely try it, but if you're unfamiliar, do your research because I didn't hear much English at all the whole 2 hours we were there. Oh, and you do end up smelling like food, but I have that same experience at the Melting Pot, so any time you're cooking at your table, you're gonna smell like food afterwards. We just left our coats in the car and were fine.
