ReviewID: x_sgwPsMQdj1PXJeXt1TSQ
ReviewerID: -vdo-XDggc2QNmdqRA9YOA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
As if all the fantastic cocktalian outposts spotted throughout Downtown weren't working hard enough to convince me that I should live down there, then Bottega Louie sure pushed me further to that conclusion. I had been scoping out the gorgeous open white space with dark wood tables and black banquets, complete with gilded tables for weeks upon weeks on my regular jaunts to Seven Grand. So I was excited when the stars aligned this past Friday and my brother, sister-in-law and I made plans to finally eat here. . . Upon being seated by the friendly hostess staff, our server promptly offered us bottles of either complimentary still or sparkling water - something small but rare in this day and age and therefore appreciated by this group of diners.  In true Yelper fashion, we opted to order several dishes and share everything so that we could get a good feel for the menu. The only flaw in this plan is that I'm going to have an immense amount of trouble ordering next time I go back because everything was incredibly good! . . We started with the arrancini arrabiata which were perfectly crispy on the outside and  creamy on the inside...just the way I like my risotto balls. (yeah, I really can't talk about this without sounding dirty, I apologize) The caprese salad was divine with perfectly salty/creamy buffalo mozzarella and just the right amount of olive oil. The Margherita pizza was good but the real pizza star was the Bianco pizza which was  perfectly cooked and full of flavor. The ravioli with pancetta, sage and peas was creamy and lighter than I thought it'd be but in a good way. The roasted beets (perfectly sweet golden beets I might point out) with goat cheese were so good I wanted to run out to a farmer's market and buy some golden beets immediately. You know, just in case I had a golden beet craving... a beet craving? What did this meal do to me?!  . . We rounded out our meal with some wines off their well-rounded list that even includes generous half-pours for those who like to drink on the light and an incredible chocolate soufle with vanilla sauce that just melted in your mouth. Seriously, from front to back, everything about this meal was incredibly good. My mouth is watering just thinking about it and I'm dying to make it back to try out their brunch. . . The service was fantastic, attentive and efficient without making us feel rushed. Our waiter took special care to send out our dishes at a moderate pace so we never had too much on our table nor felt like we were waiting on something. The team system they have going also goes a long way towards keeping the flow of the meal at a pleasant speed, with clean plates constantly being laid out between courses and dirty dishes being immediately cleared. Plus, you can tell they know their menu and have plenty of good suggestions for the indecisive diner. . . So, best part? The entire meal was only $84 for 3 people! With the quality of food and service, I found that to be awesomely cheap. I will certainly be back at Bottega Louie soon.
