ReviewID: xaftqe67Q5my6J6DdkM1fQ
ReviewerID: TK1fmhXevt5l4JrafXvqbw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Swung by here on the way home (SD) from beautiful Fresno! . . Atmosphere-  Nestled in the furniture district or something. Kind of an odd location. Walking up to it you immediately notice the packed outside patio area which looks cool, except for the being packed part. The inside is also long and slender. All new wood, orangey in color. Very clean lines. Pretty hip looking, but not so much that I felt out of place. I also noticed the taps, and it looks promising. I do however quickly realize that this isn't just a beer spot. It is part wine, part fine spirits, part foodie, and part scene. Whatever, I am in LA so no big surprise. Overall looks cool.. . Quality- The place is clean, the products they had were good. Local food products and local beers.. . Service- You seat yourself (lunch at least), you order at the bar. The bartenders have earpieces (hands free now, it's the law), but are very nice. I didn't pull the old (I am going to test your beer knowledge routine, so no comment there). Bus boys are quick to clear off your used items.. . Selection- Here is where I was underwhelmed. They do have a nice selection, but nothing that I was thinking "Oh man! I have got to get that beer!" For a restaurant, a great selection of beers. For a beer spot a middle of the road selection. The reason for the low mark is because of their menu comment. On a page titled "The good sh.." My wife commented to me, "Yeah, if you go to any BevMo you can get these" There was one that I didn't recognize, and of course forget, that was a BA Belgian stout....$72 a bottle (I remember that!). Maybe I am just very, very spoiled living in SD (Hami's, O'Brien's, Toronado).. . Food- While the selection (Lunch at least) is pretty slim. What they do have is delicious and local. We had a beet salad with a spanish blue cheese, candied walnuts and a pumpkin oil drizzle. I had the burger and fries. Unless you don't like meat or burgers...get that it is delish. They did also have some specials that sounded interesting. I was surprised that only for the specials were there pairings suggested. After reading about this place in Food &amp; Wine and discovering about their emphasis on beer pairings with food, just like wine, I had different expectations here.. . Value- Pricey. $8 for a local 12 maybe 14 oz pour. Beet salad, burger + fries, Craftsman Orange Grove and a Lost Coast Great White + tip $44.. . Overall I am glad I got to check it out, good selection of beers that I can get where I live for cheaper. The food was excellant, and the experience was good.
