ReviewID: XBKKzhcks6l_vwdbFgOzXg
ReviewerID: rZrtcu5vZA_CMhx4BzdYyw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Yolk
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
2 Stars for Effort.... Focus, Little Hen.  Focus.  It's YOLK.  . Not buckets of dairy from Big Bessie; . This ain't no crank-it-out Cheesecake Factory.. YOLK: It's small and special.  Keep it that way.. . Yelp, help.  . Yolk just may need to understand and better appreciate the value of downsizing a specialty menu. Seriously.  The menu is quite extensive and spread thin.  I could fall for the YOLK hype if their product stood up to the anticipation presented via on-line menu descriptions and on-site decor.  (SNAPS: a spacious layout, clean crisp design for a breakfast joint, though I question the bright true blue, a deeper shade could be more sophisticated if Yolk were up to par.  A "Romper Room" comparison was overheard while waiting to be seated.). . YOLK NOTE:  This establishment may be just fine if you need a breakfast "hot spot" to take the visiting in-laws, you are an indiscriminate tourist or a Columbia student skipping class and blowing daddy's dough/your student loan on a conveniently-located south-loop mediocre meal.  Ouch.. . "The Not-A-Secret Shoppers". Monday, February 19.  . On President's Day, my guest and I waited less than ten minutes. Excellent.  Thankfully a much shorter wait than expected based on previous YOLK reviews, and our table was close enough to the front, plenty of natural light to balance the blow-out of bright yolky-yellow interior paint. . Our server was young, cute, and seemingly slammed with tables near 12:30pm, rather frantic, but adorable and eager. She promptly served two cups of dirt-water coffee (nearly $2.50 a cup).  Sadly, we were not asked if we'd like anything else to drink; I was curious about their fresh juices as noted on the YOLK website, but upon inquiry, she commented quickly that she didn't have time to take any other order just then as another table had been waiting longer to order-in, and away she goes.  . No coffee cream or milk at the table.. . THE DO-IT-YOURSELF DINER, part 1:  I had to get up to snag a tacky-plasticy bowl of those not-so-complementary 7-Eleven-style flavored dairy creamer packets from an empty table.  Silly stuff like this: Do it yourself.. . Soon enough she returned;  After placing our order: an Irish Benny and the Monte Cristo with one egg on side, our experience just became simply bizarre to a laughable yet unhumorous point.  The basic "one egg on the side" request seemed to have thrown things out of whack for much of the staff; they seemed fairly perplexed and had to clarify the order twice post-placement.  Grrr.  Surprisingly, the Monte Cristo came out with not one but -of course- two eggs on the side, and sadly, the benedict's eggs were poached hard, stiff yolks.  (A simple-enough cooking mistake or else it sat long enough in the kitchen window before delivery.  Whatever.)  Upon mention, the anxious server removed, in attempt to remedy, and did bring back fresh poached eggs -still gooey yolks...and wiggly wet whites.  Moist.. Eeek.  No fork.. . THE DO-IT-YOURSELF DINER, part 2:  Up from the table again, server -busy, and who is the manager? and surely the front desk girl can help me out...Tag team = fork.  Thank you!  Way to be assertive.. . Only now with prodding fork do I notice the english muffins are burnt-black and the mushy hash is just that, like dog food-slop (as mentioned in another review)/ beefy sludge slipped out of a tin can and mashed on my burnt muffins covered in runny yolk and some slimy whites with the most common hollandaise imaginable.  . . Come on, kitchen staff, and who let this mess leave the kitchen and hit my table?  But these accidents have to happen to someone, right?  . Right?  Really?  Was this fair-quality dining experience avoidable? . Definitely.. Our bill was almost $30 for this heartburn.  . We truly hoped we were a rare case and, . after reviewing our check.... . THE DO-IT-YOURSELF DINER, part 3:  I was inclined to speak with management, providing an accurate account of our first-time observations, a rough play-by-play.  Ugh.  Rough.  . . No comp was given.  Mr. Manager was quick to defend Yolk and did kindly offer a $15 gift certificate, a 'nice' gesture, but my boyfriend still wants to mail it back to the corporate office.  . Instead, I think I'll sell it for $10 on Craigslist.  . Clearly, I will not be back to Yolk, nor can I, with any soul-searching, highly recommend Yolk. . . I say, Buyer beware:  Do not venture toward the Irish Benny, and.... Be wise:  Knock any high expectations down to mediocre.. . Tisk.  I had heard/read good enough things about Yolk to encourage me to TRY it.  If you are looking to spend money on tasty goods and a more cozy atmosphere, Bongo Room is not far.  Custom House is incredible but appropriately costly.  Gourmand may be off-beat and worth a shot.  I'm genuinely not interested in Orange.  . What a shame. . Surely, there must be other top-o'the-mornin' options for this neck of Chi-town.
