ReviewID: XchS-q1hsM96G3WS6AR5bw
ReviewerID: nzsv-p1O8gCfP3XijfQrIw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
So I finally, and I mean FINALLY, made it here with BFF after talking about it for months! So here's how it went down. We get there around 12.30pm and there was a short line, but no problem, it gave us time to peruse the menu. After deciding that we were gonna get 3 sausages to share between the 3 of us and the truffle fries, we then had to decide which ones to get.. . After ordering -- which included 2 beers as well -- we went to find a spot to sit down. It was like walking through an underground club or something.... down a walkway and then into the cafeteria-like dining room.. . So we loved our beers -- the apple ale and the framboise. I've had framboise before and at $11 a glass it was a serious rip-off considering you can get an entire bottle at Trader Joe's for less than $10. The apple ale we'd never tried before and it was lovely.. . Our truffle fries arrived and hmmm..... yeah there was indeed truffle flavor, but the fries themselves were unimpressive. Both BFF and I looked at each other and grimaced a little and then we both agreed that it was just O-K-A-Y.. . The sausages arrived....... . Duck, bacon and jalapeno -- okay this was definitely more flavorful than the one at Valhalla Table, although I couldn't taste bacon in it either.. . Artisan blue -- BFF said it was way salty to which I replied "you're supposed to eat it with your beer I guess" to which she made a face. This sausage had a nice snap to it which I liked, the casing was nice and crispy and the texture of the sausage was good. Flavor-wise, I was expecting something spicier seeing the description on the menu said it was spicy. . . Rattlesnake and rabbit -- for something that sounds so exotic it was rather boring. The spicy peppers condiment was not spicy at all and the caramelized onions was kinda anemic looking, not caramelized at all. . . What was the biggest ripper was that our meal came to $42 -- that's $21 bucks (tip not included) for beer and sausage!?!?!?!?!?!?!. . I do admit, this is far better than Valhalla Table, but I wasn't blown away. After all the reviews and my friends telling me about it, I was expecting to be completely knocked out by the food. Maybe I went in with higher expectations than others, maybe it wasn't a good day, whatever the reason, this isn't the place I would drive all the way from OC to specifically eat at.. . And while the sausages are better at Wurstkuche, Valhalla's buns are much better. I'm giving them 3.5 stars and with yelp not being able to give half stars in any shape or form, both Wurstkuche and Valhalla end up getting the same star rating although one is getting 2.75 which the other 3.5. . . As we left and walked to the car, BFF asked me what we should do now and then we were silent again for a minute and then she said "you know, I feel ......" and I said "..... so bummed out?" She said "YEAH! Like my whole day is ruined!". . . And then we said "oh hey, DTLA is right there.... maybe we should go and get a bacon-wrapped hotdog to make up for it".
