ReviewID: XcK9rbwwGl3wb9ZjEyrJow
ReviewerID: Ygr_c6So7Aba0kDQW01FDQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Tender Greens
Category: American (New)
I searched "Salads: Culver City" in the search bar, because I couldn't remember what this place was called.. . It came up at the very top.  Interesting.  Must be popular.. . At any rate.... . The BF had been raving about this place.  I'm not a huge salad aficionado (it's usually just filler or a palate cleanser), but I don't have anything against salads.  Besides, the BF raved and raved about this place, so I was curious.. . We decided to stop in for lunch.. . First of all, the menu is very very simple.  There were a few different salads and sandwich options, or a "meal" option that you can pretty much choose what type of meat to eat it with.. . The place was SUPER happening.  Lines and lines of people were waiting to get their grubby hands on these supposedly phenomenal salads.  My curiosity heightened.. . I ordered the chicken cobb while the BF ordered the beef flank salad.  The salads were HUGE, and I was fascinated while watching the dudes behind the counter grind, slice, chop, grate, and toss the various veggies and meats into giant salad bowls and plates.  The meats were all chargrilled fresh, and they looked very juicy and whatnot.. . My salad was better than my BF's, in my opinion.  It had fresh grilled chicken, yummy bacon chunks, bleu cheese, eggs, and whatnot.  Everything was super fresh and super tasty (though honestly, I think it could've used a TAD more dressing, as it's pre-tossed).. . My bf's salad was pretty plain, but the beef was really really good and... THE DRESSING WAS AMAZING.  I'm a vinaigrette lover, and honestly, his dressing was amazing amazing amazing!. . The crouton SLICE that came with the salads were whatever.  Though they were tasty, I had to chew carefully - I was genuinely afraid that I'd break a tooth.  Why are they SO HARD?. . At any rate, the salads were good.  I dunno if they were worth the price, though.  With two drinks added to the order, the total came out to about $30.. . For SALADS, man.  For SALADS.  T.T
