ReviewID: xcxI0NJML3FglY9dbWh0zQ
ReviewerID: gtkJMWDfspFAnmX8ENPMtQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Parker&#39;s on Ponce
Category: Steakhouses
First off, my friend Alain L.was bringing his dog Katie into town, and since the weather was so great, i wanted her to enjoy the great outdoors as well, so i called the resto to make sure it was ok w/ them. What they said was it was up to the patron at the Patio, so if folks were A ok with it, so were they. Being that Katie was a very well behaved dog I figured it wouldn't be a problem.. . Came here and there was ample room on the patio so Katie would not be a distraction to anyone. Promptly seated.  Our Waiter was super nice and told us the specials,he even greeted Katie Dog.. We both opted for the Day's Special of the  20 oz NY Strip for 20.00 plus 1 side ( I got the Mashed Potatoes) as a side while Alain opted for the Truffled Mac N Cheese, ordered an extra side of Creamed Spinach as well.. .  While waiting yummy wheat bread was brought to our table, piping hot. I only wished they served this bread w/ some honey butter.  Beer on tap is few, but what they did have was good. I got my usual Hefeinizer, and Alain got the white Chimay. Katie dog was even served up a bowl of H2O, when asked for alittle bowl of water! . . Food.. MMMM so good... 1) 20 oz NY Strip Special was HUGE!! (medium for me, though I asked for medium rare, but it was still a tasty). Nicely charbroiled w/ a slight edge of fat. Alain asked for Medium, and he got a bit of Medium Well, rather then Medium.. so be sure to emphasize this! The waiter did ask us to cut into our steaks and asked if we were happy.. and I was completely ok w/ mine ( really appreciated them asking). . 2) mashed potatoes were real potatoes mashed nicely w/ great flavor- a touch of salt perfected it.. ( I'd rather salt my own food thank you!). . 3) Creamed Spinach, pretty good, use of heavy cream but  (wish the cream was abit thicker but it was nicely seasoned and tasty in terms of the whole dish). . 4)  Truffled Mac N Cheese - amazingly good, great cheese, used to make a flavorful white cheese mac n' cheese, with a hint of Blue cheese. Sea Shell Macaroni was used for this dish which scooped up the creamy cheese nicely.. . Everything was very good. We did order an appetizer of Calamari that never came out before out entrees so we asked to cancel it w/out hassle.  The steaks were cooked a bit more then what we wanted, but it was still tasty!. . What was very nice was the co-owner Chris Scott came out to say hello to us, introduce himself, say " Hi Tulie" we spoke on the phone- and also said hello to Katie. I mean that means a lot . Says to us as patrons, that the owner cares that patrons knows he works at his own resto, and cares how we perceive the food and service!. . Overall experience . Food: 4 (if the steaks were cooked to order in terms of medium rare, and medium,  would have been a solid 5). Service: 5. Overall 4.5 ... . Come enjoy the Patio.. and Keep a look out on . http://Restaurant.com.  or  Savvy Shopper for the Great Deals for this place!
