ReviewID: xD5kjzBDiMcyRKT-PpNw8w
ReviewerID: 8oGH52Y1QtJUXZCB4HJKWQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Kitsch&#39;n On Roscoe
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Kitsch'n on Roscoe is another classic case of GREAT food HORRIBLE service.  A friend and I decided to go there for brunch on Sunday, knowing full well they would be busy and there would be a wait.  When we walked in, the place was packed and there was a couple  a head of us, but no where to move to not be in the way.  To get out of the way we moved in front of the couple as someone was passing us with food.  The waitress/hostess came by at that point and very rudely pointed out that the other couple was there first and we would still have to wait our turn.  (once again, fine by that we were just moving out of the way!)  .   When we finally got seated it took the waitress over 15 minutes to even come by and ask us if we wanted something to drink.  We ordered mimosa's and still didn't recieve them until 15 minutes after that. .   Having not been there before, my friend and I ordered 3 things to share.  This apparently was a problem with the waitress, for she sighed while writing down our requests.  When it came to choosing what cheese we wanted in our low-carb scrammble - we asked her what they had and got a long eye-roll accompanied by a sigh before she listed them (Sorry, I am not a mind reader, I don't know what you have to offer!).   It didn't take too long for the food to come (yay!)  Everything that we had gotten was DELICIOUS!  Biscuits and gravy, low carb scrammble, hash browns, and green eggs and ham...oh my!  The food was to die for!  Unfortunately, that is the only good thing I could say about this place..   We were almost done with the food when the waitress decided to come by and ask us how everything was while dropping off the check.  We wanted another round of mimosa's and had to practically beg to get them - since she didn't bother to ask us if we wanted anything else in the duration we were there. I'm sorry, I just assumed you would want to make more money.. . I would go here again, but maybe on a day they have someone else working, I would not want that waitress again.
