ReviewID: xDkijSRciU_uoDEehMImCA
ReviewerID: w-w-k-QXosIKQ8HQVwU6IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
Located in the Arts District in Downtown L.A. (which is East of Little Tokyo), Wurstkuche does not look like a restaurant or gastropub.  The area is a little barren with no one on the streets.  The exterior features the name "Wurstkuche" on exposed red brick.  Red and stained yellow wood accompany the entrance.  Other than that, there is nothing.  You may think you are walking into a dive bar or maybe a pool hall.. . Once inside, the first room is pretty no frills.  It kind of feels like a quickie grocery mart.  There are no tables--just a small glass counter showcasing assorted sausages and a nearby shelf featuring napkins, various condiments, and other things people would need for to-go orders.. . Wurstkuche has a wide variety of sausages from your basic ones like bratwurst and hot Italian (which are the cheapest) to gourmet ones with more unique spices/ingredients (which are a little more expensive) to finally exotic meat like buffalo, rabbit, and alligator (which are the most expensive).  Sausages run $6 to $8, and you get to pick two of four potential toppings--caramelized onions, sauerkraut, sweet peppers, or spicy peppers.  I went with the rabbit, veal, and pork sausage and then topped it with caramelized onions and sweet peppers.. . I also ordered a small order of their Belgian fries (which is the only side they offer).  You can get a dipping sauce (free of charge).  They have a good variety including BBQ sauce, curry ketchup, and chipotle aioli.  I went with the chipotle ketchup.. . For beverages, they have quite a few draft beers (Belgian, German, and American).  They also have a wide selection of bottled sodas.  Though they are expensive (and not that big), the flavors are interesting.  They recommended the Fentimans Seville Orange Jigger and the Fentimans Victorian Lemonade.  I kept it simple and went with the Manhattan Special Vanilla Cream Soda (which had a strong vanilla taste; it was creamy and quite good).. . After ordering at the counter, you walk through a long, dark hall (kind of like what you would take to enter a club).  Here though, the dark hall leads to a rather large dining room.. . The dining room is casual, but a lot of attention went into the design to give it a fresh atmosphere.  Exposed red brick covers one wall.  Alongside the red brick is a long wooden bench.  Little circular, outdoor coffee shop table/chair combos are evenly positioned along the wooden bench.  The setups can seat 3 to 4 people comfortably. In the center of the dining room, there are a few long communal tables (kind of like picnic tables, which are covered in cheap brown paper).. . There is also a bar.  The ceiling is prominent as well with the use of wood rafters.  There are several speakers hanging from the rafters.  I imagine at night, the scene is loud and buzzing with people and music.. . Food is prepared to order so you are looking at a wait of 12 to 15 minutes.  The sausage (served in a slightly grilled roll) is a decent size.  I can imagine some might want bigger though.  They generously top the sausage with the onions and peppers.  They have several bottles of condiments including ketchup, yellow mustard, dijon mustard, spicy brown mustard, and whole grain dijon mustard.  I topped my sausage with ketchup, spicy brown mustard, and whole grain dijon.. . The sausage was good.  Nicely browned with a good and mild/light taste.  The peppers and onions were also good.  It didn't really need the condiments, and since the sandwich was very flavorful, it was kind of hard to distinguish the the ketchup and mustard.  Next to the bar, there is a steel water cooler and a collection of silverware.  A sign reads that  silverware is not necessary; however, after a few bites, the sandwich kind of fell apart.  Overall, it was a good sandwich.  I would be curious to try their other sausages.  While the sausage was good, the individual ingredients in the sausage were not that pronounced.. . The french fries are served in a red-and-white checkered paper cone.  Even with the small size, you get a lot of fries.  They are thickly cut and slightly softer than most fries I've had.  The fries are very browned, and they taste strongly of the potato skin.  I like fries with the skin on.  I think the oil they use here really brings out that potato skin flavor (which can be a little strong).  It may not be for everybody.. . The chipotle ketchup was good but very sweet.  I alternated between using the chipotle ketchup and regular ketchup.  If I knew regular ketchup was served, I would have went with a different dipping sauce.  Maybe next time.. . Service was good--very friendly and casual, which went well with the vibe of the decor and the "backyard barbecue" food.  I usually like this type of food only at a cookout or a ball game, but I may make an exception for Wurstkuche.  A meal will run you about $15, which is more than reasonable.. . By the way, parking is easily available on the street by meter.
