ReviewID: xDOEGUxSuf3pEpSfMiRtoA
ReviewerID: EpiRFTpmnjMon_sll0xjXw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Rating:  8.25 (out of 10). . Fresh, simple, appetizing, delicious.  These are adjectives that are often commonplace in many people's reviews of various different restaurants.  Because of their over-usage, it's easy to overlook these meager adjectives as mere fillers to fluff up reviews, to add bulk and help make appear more meaty their appraisals.  . . I'm here to reclaim these stalwart adjectives in the name of good taste, and apply them to my review of Pizzeria Mozza, Nancy Silverton (La Brea Bakery) Mario Batali (Iron Chef) and Joseph Bastianich's (food network) casual foray into the Los Angeles Pizza market.  Though some would call this pizzeria pretentious (those of papa john's/domino's fan base), I call it wonderfully APPETIZING.  Their use of SIMPLE, FRESH ingredients, along with each of the executive chefs' prodigious talents of melding the perfect Italian flavors, help create pizza's and salads that are, I dare say, DELICIOUS.. . I highly recommend the Mozza Caprece to get started, a brilliant mix of FRESH (almost half cultured) mozzarella topped with baby, still on the vine, almost over-ripped tomatoes and bitingly FRESH basil.  Couple this with some cleanly sliced Speck or Prosciutto di Parma and you'll have your tongue dancing with glee.  . . As pizza's go, you can't go wrong with whatever catches your eye on their menu.  I'll point out a few that have had my mouth watering as I've been writing this review.  The Prosciutto di Parma with rucola, tomato and mozzarella satisfies the need for meat without leaving you stuffed.  (I would recommend not ordering the Prosciutto for an appetizer if you plan on ordering this pizza).  The Gorgonzola dolce with Fingerling potatoes is also an interesting blend of flavors.  The Wild Spinach, Finnochiona and cacao di Roma is for the more adventurous, but you won't be disappointed.  . . For desert, you have to try the Butterscotch budino, but don't think of sharing, as each of these are served in tiny cups that offer the perfect sweet counter-balance to the savory meal you've just enjoyed.  . . If you plan to go, try to make reservations.  The wait for counterspace is often an hour or longer (though worth the wait, in my opinion).  I would try to refrain from going on large groups, because seating is very limited here, but do go with some close friends and enjoy!  Bon appetit!
