ReviewID: xDz2NtQS1xUzGir6BoPE3g
ReviewerID: ERbvtBequSV6YQaaHunAVA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Hatfield&#39;s
Category: Restaurants
Some meals linger in the senses and on the tongue for weeks, years, lifetimes, some begin to fade away on the drive back home. I would classify my meal at Hatfield's in the latter category. A month ago I shared a meal here with two other diners and I remember our conversations about food more than the actual meal. A seven course tasting menu was our pre-agreed choice that evening and I was looking forward to it, having just returned from New York and some memorable meals there.. . Not that a $79 meal (we chose to go without the wine pairings) is either overly expensive or inconsequential but, call me old fashioned, for that price I want to eat in a room that feels more like a classy restaurant and less like an design school student's final thesis, on a budget. Grey stained glazed concrete floors, bargain price table and chairs, some recessed shelves with a few candles sprinkled around do not impress; and if the intent is to highlight the magnificence of the cuisine with the minimum of artifice, the understatement only serves to underline the failure on that count. . . To start, an amuse bouche of a warm vichyssoise with quail egg - a good, rich classic taste, enhanced by the addition of egg, served in a shot glass. Then a Croque Madame, quite amazing - prosciutto and hamachi served on a grilled brioche with a lightly cooked quail egg, again. This hit all the right notes, incredibly rich tasting, salty and buttery, the different flavors blending together in that perfection known by the Japanese word of 'umami.' Hands down the best dish of the night. Unfortunately, after that it started to go inexorably downhill.  Course # 2 was lightly grilled octopus with orange zest and a blue bean puree. While I loved the combination of octopus and a sweet citrus, I was not as excited by the bean puree; it did not add to anything and was not particularly exciting in its own right. This, I was to discover, was going to be a theme that unhappily occurred all too often. . . Let me say also as each course was served, the waiter recited the laundry list of ingredients in each dish, and exhausting task of itself, and was happy to answer any further questions we had. But other than that, we were left to the efficiency of the busboys and platers; I had to call him over during my meal to ask for another glass of wine, which had been noticeably empty for one full course.. . Course # 3 was an off menu hamachi collar dusted with hempseed and a Brussels sprout puree. The hamachi was perfectly cooked and I love that part of the fish, but I was not excited by the puree. I felt that during the course of the meal they were trying to give me a specific dose of winter vegetables to emphasize the season, while the protein portion had nothing to do with it.  Course #4 was for me the defining plate and the one that crystallized what I think does not work at Hatfields. They aim to create layers of taste and design in the fashionable architectural cuisine style, but here particularly, it fell apart completely. Simply put, the technique was lacking and the intellectual process too prominent. I think just by naming the ingredients one can see the effort of thought behind the intent: pan roasted duck breast, quinoa and hin shimeji mushrooms, butternut squash puree and a whiskey prune smear. Enough! And the taste was as if it had been put in a blender; nothing was distinctive, each ingredient negating the other, a souffle fallen flat. Course #5 was a comeback of sorts, relatively simple, slow cooked beef rib with baked spaetzle, Chinese broccoli and mustard infused garnet yam puree - yet again. But because it was a basic dish cooked very well - the meat was tender, excellent- essentially a comfort food course, I was pleased to have it.  . . The last two courses were desserts, a panna cotta with pineapple and lime sorbet and a caramel chocolate tart with caramel coffee ice cream, both very good, nicely complementing each other, sweet, needing no further description. And thus ended my evening at Hatfields. I went with high hopes and left wondering at the mountain of praise heaped upon it.  As I said earlier, there is too much intellectualizing here, generally not enough technical skill to carry it off, resulting in a lack of consistency that needs to be rectified to merit the prices charged and the accolades rendered. At this point, Chef Hatfield's cuisine reflects the history of their training without the soul of personal discovery.. . see pix posted. 2.5 stars
