ReviewID: XF6NqX4oOwAMqYxmpr-sXg
ReviewerID: oVomceBgCbXiEFx1z94DRw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Sotto Sotto Restaurant
Category: Italian
I admit it, I am an Italian food snob. Since dining in Italy a few years ago, I have a hard time accepting "Italian Food" in the US and Atlanta, I have found, has a decidedly bad reputation when it comes to Italian cuisine.  We first went to Sotto with a group of friends and were blown away that this place was underneath our noses for so long.  . We decided as a table that we needed to try as much of the menu as possible, and Sotto Sotto encourages that with appetizer portions of all pastas and risottos. With no dissention amongst the diners, we got appetizer orders of Risotto Mantecato (caramelized onions, 12 year balsamic, Reggiano) and Risotto al Funghi (wild mushrooms, Reggiano).  When the Risotto was served, there were a few anxious glances around the table to see who was going to be first. Not wanting to lose out on the good stuff, I immediately shoveled some of both onto my plate and rudely began before everyone had a chance to serve themselves. . I usually don't get risotto in America because for the most part, no one can cook it. The last time I had it, the chef literally took Uncle Bens, put some Kraft Parmesan, butter, cream and overcooked shrimp on top and called it risotto. The Mantecato was sweet, creamy, lusciously delicious and left me wanting more. I moved on to the Risotto al Funghi and, had I been standing, would have collapsed in a heap due to the weakness that was now consuming my knees. It was savory and earthy with the same velvety texture as the Mantecato, but somehow, someway, it was better. The texture contrast between the chewy mushrooms, the perfectly cooked rice and the creamy broth was something that only a true chef can master.  It was, in a word, luscious.  . We have since been back many, many times and along with the two Risotto's, other favorites include the Seared Scallops and the Tortelli di Michelangelo (veal, chicken and pork ravioli in brown butter and sage sauce).  . Sotto is by far the best Italian in Atlanta.
