ReviewID: xfeg2TnOe73tdBYmmDEYjQ
ReviewerID: 8N1rkiMQ0X1yaBh1TSjslg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
I will start this review with this: Pink's Hot Dog's is without a doubt the most delicious hot dog I have ever had...ever.. . The people who know me well know that I am the biggest fan of hot dogs roaming the planet. I live in the Bay Area (California) and I've been to pretty much every single hot dog place within a 30 mile radius of where I live. I think it's truly sad that Pink's is 380 miles away from where I live, so I only get to enjoy a Pink's hot dog whenever I am down in the Los Angeles area...which is very rare. Maybe once every two years or so.. . The first time I ever went to Pink's was...many, many years ago. I can't remember how long ago. My father and I waited in that Pink's line for like...30 minutes. It was ridiculous I tell you. I believe I was either 11 or 12...so it means it was probably 12 years ago now. I remember waiting in that long ass line, thinking to myself "This better be the best hot dog ever". . . So we got up to the line and that's when I saw it "Bacon Hot dog" and I shouted "A bacon hot dog?!? This is blasphemy! This is madness!" And sure enough a Pink's employee stood up and said "Madness? THIS IS PINKS!" and then proceeded to kick me really hard in my chest.. . Okay, okay...so none of that really happen, lulz. But I was like "Holy god, Jesus WTF"...bacon on a hot dog?!?!? They are combining the two most delicious foods?!?! I gotta get in on this.. . And it was hella delicious. I mean, I might have been young, but damn I CRAVED another Hot Dog like that for many years until I finally was able to go back. But by then, I was well into my obsession with Michael's signature Hot Dog (Which is a foot long with Mayonnaise, BBQ Sauce, and cheese....don't ask, I'm hella weird). But, when you add bacon, it makes it more delicious.. . To me, a great fan of Hot Dog's...Pink's is always worth the wait. Maybe because I don't live in the L.A. area, the magic of Pink's has a more profound effect on me, but whatever it is...I simply love Pink's, and every single time I am in the L.A. area, I make sure to get four hot dogs from Pink's. I firmly believe Pink's has the best hot dog in the world.
