ReviewID: xgi2nD4U0VLcmhmA2jaIUA
ReviewerID: lByMP4tkeruOw5HdjtXTpQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Roy&#39;s Restaurant
Category: Asian Fusion
Other restaurants:  Pay attention.  Roy's has figured out how to master Restaurant Week.  And now we are bigtime fans of theirs.. . It astounds me that restaurants go through the work of participating in the various "Restaurant Week" offerings (three I'm aware of in the last year, including Yelp's), and then gyp the customers.  What do I mean by "gyp?"  I mean offering three feeble entrée choices - typically a pasta, chicken, and a boring fish.  I mean one nickel size scallop in a mixed grill (yes, I did read your review of Devon, Katherine R), or similar skimpy servings.  Don't you understand this is your chance to attract new clients?  Serve your best, not your cheapest.  Can't you tell your waitstaff that maybe these new customers will still give you a good tip, and if not, it's still good for business, so be nice?. . Wow, did Roy's get it right!  We're big Hawaiian food fans (go there several times each year), so have been talking about Roy's for two years, but never gone.  When I read their published menu for Restaurant Week, that made up my mind.  Three interesting appetizer choices.  Three great entrée choices:  short ribs, grilled shrimp with gnocchi, or crab-crusted mahi mahi.  Pineapple strudel or Kona coffee crème brulee for dessert.   . . We had a fabulous time.  The pineapple martinis and mai tais knocked our socks off.  The appetizers turned out to be a sampler plate, not "pick one."  So I had a nice piece of tempura spicy tuna roll, a large perfectly-prepared coconut crusted tiger shrimp, and a tasty piece of Mongolian grilled baby ribs.  Each was delicious and combined made for a filling appetizer.  By then we'd moved on the a great South Australian blended white wine, which, for me, also went great with my blue crab crusted mahi mahi.  Their mahi-mahi was as good as any I've had in Maui.  It was so soft ("fork-friendly," I'd call it), so tasty, so perfectly cooked, and so lightly crusted - it was perfect.  Are you getting the picture?  For $32 each (plus the cost of the booze) we were having a magnificent meal.  We were becoming not just customers, but devotees, of Roy's.  What my wife didn't finish of her teppenyaki grilled shrimp with house made gnocchi, Shimeji mushrooms &amp; Asiago cream made a great lunch for me the next day.  We each ordered a different dessert, so I got to try both the crème brulee (very tasty) and the pineapple strudel (misrepresented - it was pineapple and apple, but taste wonderful with a perfect pastry shell).. . Roy's décor is weakly Hawaiian, more Asian.  But it's good, a bit formal, not encumbering.  Service had slow spots, but was good for a busy mid-week night.  And was always friendly and pleasant.. . When the Restaurant Week list came out, my wife and I each ID'ed the restaurants we were interested in.  Then I checked the menus for each, and dropped two.  We ended up going to Roy's (a new restaurant for us) and Riccardo Trattoria (already a favorite of ours).  Both offered great selection (Riccardo offered 7 appetizers and 11 entrées).  Both gave us great meals.  Both servers we tipped as if we had paid full price.  And Roy's gained not only a 5-star Yelp review, but new fans who will be back soon.. . Can restaurant week organizers get Roy's people to give workshops for other participating restaurants?
