ReviewID: xGiXa1SW9Y8VASlokf76bw
ReviewerID: wsEo7QUn6fenj8SwAlp5qQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Square One Dining
Category: American (New)
A standard, perhaps even substandard, brunch place. The three stars are only for the french toast and the proximity of scientologists.. . PROS:. -French toast is made with fresh bread and seemed to be soaked in butter--very fatty but very good.. -Right across the street from Scientology's LA center ("L. Ron Hubbard Way" is a dead giveaway), which makes waiting for a table easier--you can spend your time gawking and trying to avoid getting suckered into a free stress test.. . CONS:. -Terrible muffins. We had the "apple" muffin, which turned out to be a very dry bran muffin with a few stray chunks of apple (whose taste was overwhelmed with the bran), and the blueberry muffin, which was better than the apple but still dry and crumbly. I think they probably sacrificed taste to make them low-fat, or maybe used sub-standard ingredients. When I make blueberry muffins at home from a can they turn out much better.. -The wait staff sometimes doesn't seem to care about the customers. Example: They seated us at a table outside directly in the sun (everyone else outside at that point was seated in the shade). I grabbed one of those umbrellas and dragged it over myself to shade our table. The next group seated (a couple of guys) was also seated at a table directly in the sun, and they ended up both sitting on the same side of the table facing away from the sun. At no time did the waitresses ask if they could shield them or us from the sun.. -Kind of expensive for what is, when it comes down to it, generally hard-to-screw-up breakfast fare (except for, apparently, the muffins). Like the egg frittata, which was ok, probably worth $7-$8, but is listed as $10.75 on the menu.. . I may go to this place again if it happened to be in the neighborhood, and I wouldn't object if I was having brunch with a friend and they really wanted to go there. But I wouldn't want to drive across town just to go there.
