ReviewID: XGoQDr-yrXu8jG7pIhCSWg
ReviewerID: dUzt4saw5wb7a2Os1kX1VQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
4 stars for the service. 2 stars for the  food. . I've been a big fan of Top Chef since season 1 and have always wanted to try out Tom's restaurant. Hubby took me for Mother's day weekend as a treat, but I was mildly disappointed. The restaurant was beautiful with the dim lighting radiating from the hundreds of hanging Edison light bulbs and organic drapes and table setting. The dress code was casual, but there were lots of people dressed for for a night on the town. There was also outdoor seating, 2 bars, and lounge seating. The dining area was a lot smaller than I thought his restaurant would be. . . I enjoyed the freebies: lobster bisque amuse bouche, chocolate covered sunflower seeds on a biscuit, and horchata drink. The portions were tiny, but hey they were FREE!. . We had the large prawns for the appetizer. It was $18 for 4 shrimps. Please do not get it. It was overrated and a complete waste of money. It tasted like caramelized Vietnamese shrimp, except it costed 3 times as much. The prawns came with heads and eyeballs intact. I could have made this easily at home.. . I had the duck breast, medium rare. It was good but fatty and greasy. For the price I could have gotten 2 full size ducks from Sam Woo. Both taste the same. It was very salty and heavy. Part of the duck breast was too rare for me. I am surprised that the food is considered American when the prawns and duck tasted like Asian fusion. . . Hubby had the $54 sirloin steak which was precut into slices off of the steak bone. The medium rare came out as exactly as he ordered. It was caramelized and came with greasy bone marrow. He adored his steak. I did not enjoy because it was so fatty. There was lots of greasy fat on it and the outside of the steak was extremely salty. Mind you, I love salt but this was too much. . . In fact, everything was extremely salty from the butter for the bread, to the duck, to the steak, and the gnocchi. The gnocchi portion was tiny and did not taste good. It was kind of raw in the middle and the texture was not pleasing. . . The only redeeming thing about the menu was the side of baby carrots which came out sweet and tender.  Let's not forget the sorbet. it was so amazing! I had the tangerine which tasted like a frozen tangerine. It was so refreshing and did not have the weird chemical taste that other sorbets leave behind. Hubby had the berry tart with the lemon thyme ice cream. The berries were fresh and very sweet, but the ice cream was gross. It reminded us of eating lemon thyme chicken, but in ice cream form. Eww...... . The service was great and the staff was attentive. Unfortunately, the meal was not worth $180 for 2 people plus tip. Tom, your restaurant disappointed me. I thought as head judge your food would be impeccable but I was sadly let down. I've had much better food for much better prices. It was not worth the experience.  The portions just just too tiny to justify the outrageous price. The whole meal was too heavy and salty. There's nothing special about this place. There's soooo many better restaurant in LA . It was 8:30 and the restaurant was half empty. There were more waitstaff than guests. I felt ripped off. . . You park in the parking structure and you get free validation. It's a bit of a walk to the restaurant.
