ReviewID: xI01fypdZfETAfMIGj-h0g
ReviewerID: mytkOxFAZst4F0_WtsHp-A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
I can't pronounce the name of this restaurant, but I think it's tops.  My friends and I hit up this trendy-looking spot in the heart of the LA Downtown financial district (right across the street from the Westin Bonaventure, which we half expected to explode in a ball of fire, followed by Arnold or Bruce rappelling down the side of the building with a machine gun blasting) right after a day of conventioneering and an evening of stuck-in-trafficking.  Despite the prime hour when we arrived, we were seated immediately out on the patio, right next to the stage where an excellent Latin trio was playing an odd mix of sultry Spanish love songs and covers of the Police.. . Two of my friends went in for a tapas sampler, and my other friend and I opted for their steaks, mine a skirt steak with mashed beans, and his a... steak of some sort, marinated in some kind of drool-inducing mix of spices.  All the food was excellent; I found my particular hunk of cow flesh especially tasty and well-prepared.  I'm sure the outdoor atmosphere (heat lamps + very mild fog = crazy delicious) helped immensely.  I got a glance of the interior, and it's nothing special, so if you're going here then you're going for the food.. . You're also going for the mild celebrity factor.  About 3/4 of our way through the meal one of the chefs came out to ask if everything was okay.  It turns out this chef was a contestant on Iron Chef America against Bobby Flay.  (I admit to not knowing who this chef was; my friend the Food Network junkie recognized her.). . About the only thing I *could* ding this place for is the pricing of the food, which skirts the high end of the range.  However, if you ask me the quality of the food and the atmosphere make this place well worth checking out.. . (Note: We did not partake of dinner wine, but the glass of port I had for dessert, along with the desserts themselves, were priced well within what you'd expect for this type of restaurant.)
