ReviewID: xI3R-Z3NBD8GFG606yfvtg
ReviewerID: SkW8jFlIgl9Ng3JBA9hHCA
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Bari
Category: Grocery
This place is good enough, I guess.  But with all the 5 star ratings, it's time for a reality check.. Yes their frozen pasta's are good.  Yes they have stuff you can't find anywhere else.  Their prices are high though (for grocery type stuff, not sandwiches) and though the cashier is generally nice, some of the other staff is downright rude and unpleasant.. I used to absolutely love their sandwiches and ordered from there all the time.  Then, I had a very unpleasant experience.  Knowing they would be busy and that I was in a hurry, I ordered two sandwiches ahead of time.  When I arrived 20 minutes later to pick them up, there was a ridiculous line.  I walked to the counter to tell them that I had a pick up and was told to wait in line.  I told him again that I had an order waiting and didn't want to wait 20 more minutes so he could hand me my already made sandwiches and he told me again, but ruder "You don't get to jump the line.  I don't care that you called ahead.  Everyone waits in line."  So I said thank you and walked out.  As I walked to the sandwich shop down the street that makes similar food but is ALWAYS NICE, I called Bari to explain my displeasure.  The person on the phone told me that the guy at the counter was wrong and that I can just pick up the food without waiting, I told her that I wouldn't be coming back and that they should probably make sure to tell the counter guys what she had told me.. So a few weeks back (months and months later), I ordered ahead again.  When I got there, of course, there was a line again.  Once again I walked up to the counter and once again I was told to stand in line even though I could see my order sitting there (all he had to do was turn around, pick it up, and hand it to me).  This time, on my way out, I stopped and explained to the cashier (a family member of the owner) and told her that I won't be coming back.  Though she apologized and offered to give me my food for free, I declined.  I never wanted free food.  What I wanted was for this place to give good service.  I'll happily pay a little more to be treated like a customer instead of an a-hole.. Either dump the ordering ahead, retrain the numbskulls behind the counter, or expect me never to return.. I'm not waiting 20 more minutes in line so someone can hand me an order I placed 40 minutes prior.  The bread gets soggy, the freshness is gone, and I get pissed!. If you like it here, walk two blocks west and tries "Vinnie's".  The owner is always working, ridiculously friendly, and super sweet.  She remembers my name and is a gem.  Their food is just as good, but the experience is far far better.. Avoid Bari.  I only gave them 2 stars because what they sell is good.  How they sell it isn't.
