ReviewID: xi9R_Kgtr2njw8iNrf0Y6g
ReviewerID: tXenUy5kek5EKsVQAjnkFw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: HB Restaurant
Category: American (New)
Finally tried this place after having it bookmarked for months!. . Made our reservation for a Friday night and headed over pretty early. Because parking is scarce with no valet, we were actually a couple minutes late. We had to wait a few minutes for a table which isn't a big deal, but since the place is so small, if there were more than the two of us standing at the hostess stand, it would've gotten very crowded. . . It seemed like we kind of got lost in the bustle of the night. There appeared to be two servers, both who were incredibly nice, but we were often overlooked. I'm sure this is a rarity, but again, I'm reviewing on the experience we had. . . I love the atmosphere of the place, tiled mosaics and fun food quotes bordering the ceiling. Though it's small, you don't feel like you're sitting on top of the table next to you and it didn't get too loud. Perfect volume. . . We were seated and after 15 minutes of confusion (I think each server thought we were taken care of by the other.), someone came over to give us glasses for our Belgian beer. . . We had to ask about the specials since I'd read they have great ones and none were offered to us (though again, our server apologized and said he thought the other server had explained them to us).  The specials sounded good, but we were already leaning toward some regular menu items.. . We ordered the almond stuffed, bacon-wrapped dates to start. They were good, but for all the gushing, I was expecting something different from the usual bacon wrapped date I've had at many tapas restaurants. They were tasty, though. . . We shared the mussels with truffle fries and the pork loin. Another quick note, we never got napkins or silverware either, so had to ask for that after our food was brought out.. . The mussels were great. Not fishy at all and there were a TON of them. There had to have been 25-30 mussels in my bowl! Alongside those tasy mussels came the most amazingly addictive truffle fries. I made the server take them away because we were stuffed, but half of the giant bowl was still left! I would go back just for those.. . Despite the appeal of the truffle fries and the mountain of mussels, the pork loin was my favorite dish. It was served with a cheesy baked scalloped potato side and spicy, mustardy collard greens. Everything was topped with baked, spiced apples that were heavenly with the cheesy potatoes and the tender, moist pork. . . We were too stuffed for dessert because this is truly a place you won't leave hungry. The food was 5 stars, but the service was a little sketchy for our experience. We were often overlooked and had to wait quite a while to sit, for the menus, to order, then to get our check and pay. Again, I think this was maybe a fluke, and won't stop me from coming back, though it did make me knock off a star. . . Still, great, unpretentious food in a fun part of town. The BYOB aspect makes the meal very affordable and fun. I will be back.
