ReviewID: xIA0aY7LQ15-klnclI48Xw
ReviewerID: yPc9nWYIASNZPCugct6WAA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Sushi-Gen
Category: Sushi Bars
Sushi Gen - The Review by Toshiro D.. . Well well well. You are reading this because you want to know the truth about this wonderful little spot called Sushi Gen.. . Let's review stage by stage to be fair to the whole establishment, so that certain aspects which are good don't suffer under those that are not so good.. . 1. Food: Los Angelians are quite obviously starved for quality food in all sectors. Why is that? Hollywood and California by its very nature places form over function, exterior over interior, so things usually look pretty and once you've been married for two weeks, the truth emerges. Well, food, business partners, Hollywood agents, fancy used cars, all have this in common in La La Land.. . As Californians were some of the first risk takers to attempt to eat raw fish on rice, they also still believe that they can get decent sushi in their restaurants, or that they even know what decent sushi is. They can't. They don't. . . Sushi Gen is one of those few spots that pulls ever so slightly above the basic absolutely rubberific quality of most sushi joints, that everyone raves about it. They also rave because like that most disgusting hot dog joint pinks, lots of people like to line up for it. Call it the Studio 54 syndrome. Followers bring followers. And so lots of people run here. . . Moreover, as Korean culture has seemingly displaced Japanese in town, this place functions as an anomaly as many Koreans like to eat here and yet, there are a few Japanese chefs and servers around (probably because at one point this was a Japanese run restaurant). Also, the Chinese seem to like the place too. One thing I did notice and this is always a tell tale sign - there were no Japanese people around. Hmmmmm. Oh wait, sorry, there were some Japanese looking people. But they were clearly born here the way they garbled their "sumi-masen" in that showy "I speak Japanese- Valley girl" sort of way.. . Well, that said, the food is good. It is nice. It is better than ok. It is not worth though the likely 100 bucks it will cost per head to eat what would amount to a 17-25 dollar meal at the best sushi restaurant in Vancouver. Vancouver - where they catch the fish and walk it over to you, kill it and serve. Yes. Really. WTF??? Oh, but let's leave that to the price area. . . So bottom line, I like their food. But I don't love their food. The red snapper was tiny. The salmon was good and the uni (sea urchin) was the one thing that really stood out. But not for the price. Not at all. . . Verdict on food - if you have never had good raw fish on rice prepared by Japanese chefs, try this place after you have first tried Matsuhisa and in Little Tokyo, the more reasonably priced and better tasting Mako Sushi and Hama Sushi.. . 2. Sushi Chefs - They are polite, attentive, friendly, engaging and yes, actually Japanese. They seem to know their stuff. I was impressed but clearly, they have been dulled down and let down by the environment that they are in. You can clearly see the frustration on their faces when they suggest something in answer to a customer query and the response is "um like, do you have spicy tuna rolls". Yes. No Japanese culinary education going on here and that obviously sours the mood. Go down the street to KokeKokko and ask that question. The answer may be Sepukku. . . Anyway, I give them 5 stars on their chefs.. . 3. Servers - Rude, arrogant, obnoxious Yep. Several experiences. All the same. They are not Japanese. And the attitude reminds me of my experiences living in Hong Kong. When I asked about the cost of the bill which was incomprehensible, the waitress took so much glee in trying to humiliate me by loudly running through the price of each item while I, in a low voice, kept saying that it was fine, no prob, ok, stop, please, stop. Yah. What is this about? Well, it sort of works in a chinese or korean spot where you expect the abrupt, rude, funtime experience. But in a restaurant where you just spent 500 bucks for 2 people and want to kill yourself, no, not really acceptable at all.. . So, 0/5 for their staff. And this is based on multiple experiences. The hosts are better. But actually, if they don't watch and manage their staff, they suck too. And believe me California people, Asians know when they are being rude. It is not part of the culture. Especially not when you are paying. You get treated this way because you encourage it. It's the Rodeo Drive, spit on me, sort of mentality. The more spit, the better it is.. . Price - Hahahahahahahaha! Like lol times 1000. They have to be kidding. Honestly. Like 10-15 bucks for a piece of uni. Let's all go away, catch some sea urchin and choppy choppy. The prices are bloody insane and totally out of whack with reality. I like how no amounts are listed on the sushi menu. It's all a big "face" scam. Read Noble House and learn about "face" sometime. . . Ok, so that's the review. It's the truth. Go elsewhere. Go to Mako Sushi.
