ReviewID: XIrom4zi03DQoD9WtI05iw
ReviewerID: 4OH-U9PWeBa9HOPM4f3-zg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: 4th &amp; Swift
Category: American (New)
GF and I managed to hit up a few highly Yelped places this past week/weekend and this was right at the top of our list. . . I'm not a fan of valet parking and bypassed (drove past) them completely. Was glad they didn't make a scene or guilt us about avoiding their "service" upon our arrival or farewell.. . 4th and Swift is a very attractive and well laid-out restaurant. The bar cleanly runs down the center of the building and leaves two distinct areas. The bar side, where we sat (sans reservation), was dark and echoed ever so slightly with the conversations reflecting from the opposing dining room. The dining room is quite spacious and much lighter/brighter looking than the bar area. Honestly, I'm glad we were in the bar as the darkness and seclusion was a nice touch to our evening.. . We looked at the menu online prior to coming but knew that with the promise of a market menu, we shouldn't concern ourselves too much with what we wanted until we could see all of the offerings. After perusing all the options, we decided on two small plates and one large. . . They start you out with some delicious cheddar biscuits (still not Red Lobster) and some really spectacular artisan cracker type things.. . From the market menu, we chose (and forgive me for forgetting the name of the dish) a pasta dish featuring fresh scallops. This was the highlight of the meal for me and the flavor pairings in the dish were some of the most satisfying I've had in recent memory and it was prepared perfectly. I could eat this happily almost every day and it wouldn't get old.. . Dish # 2 was the Duck "Pot Pie."  This small plate was delicious as well. It tasted a bit like a sweet amalgam of Asian and southern BBQ. The presentation was a little underwhelming however - Rather than the entire filling being wrapped in dough and baked, they threw a puff-pastry biscuit in top of the duck. Hardly how I envisioned it, but can't say it didn't taste good though.. . Last, we had the quintessential "Three Little Pigs." The pork loin, which I expected to enjoy the most, left a little something to be desired. Also the slice was a tad meager. The belly was amazing. I'd never had pork belly in a thick cube like this and the fat had literally melted (imagine creamy fat) in the cooking process and was even more flavorful than initially anticipated. The house-made sausage was also a standout and while it featured the simplest flavors of the bunch, it delivered exactly what I wanted. The macaroni and cheese was pretty good as well.. . I almost forgot (and logically for good reason) that we also ordered one of the dessert specials that evening. It was a chocolate tart featuring chocolate-chip whipped cream and caramel almond pop corn. This dessert was a fail for me. The tart wasn't chocolaty enough and the caramel popcorn was tough and stuck to my teeth.  . . One last thing. Since we were just a party of two and ordered three dishes, the waitress did a more than fine job of turning our order into a three-course meal. Props. This service was more than appreciated.. . When we return to 4th, and we will, I would opt to go the route of small plates altogether; it seems like one has many more options to choose from and they run less than half the price of a large plate but are still decent sized portions.
