ReviewID: xK0YEV-Tl3m8aMehxVCb9g
ReviewerID: DtztwkQDPXb6fIVA35VTPQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Definitely a celebration dinner, we had made reservations 4 weeks in advance.  They have a fairly small seating area, so i can only imagine, with the high demand, how reservations at the last minute could be difficult.. The atmosphere:  it is very modern, but I think if I had to say anything negative about this place, it was the ambiance, the music was turned on so loud that you couldn't hear anybody talking, and the music choice, sort of 80's rock music.. . The service:  our waitress was nice, but we got some strange vibes from her.  Other than that, depending on how much you order, you can have up to 5 different waitstaff (each person brings out one dish, so you could have a line of people bringing food out to your table).. . Food:  Immediately, they bring out some dainty cheese sticks.  I swear, it tastes just like cheese-its. They also give you a choice of bread, the onion bread:  ooh i could eat just that, and pretzel bread, served with a pat of butter with herbs and grey sea salt on top.  The evening started well.   I had to start with the bone marrow flan.  I love osso buco,  but this is nothing like that.  They take the bone marrow out and mix it with cream butter and eggs (or something), and they fill it back in the bone, and....spread on brioche toast points along with the mushroom tapenade -like sides....very rich, and very heavenly.  My bf ordered the tasting: it comes with waygu, kobe, and cornfed american:  the bite i got of the waygu, felt a mouth of fat, beef flavored fat.  If you you like fat, go for it.  The american kobe, now that was the perfect marriage of beef and flavor.  I ordered the kobe braised short ribs.  I happen to love Indian spices, so it was delicious.  The meat was so soft that i literally just had to flake the meat with a fork.  Sides: we shared the creamed spinach, the fried organic egg on top was mixed in at table side by the waiter, which was a nice touch.  And the herbed french fries, wasn't the best, but it was crispy on the outside and soft potato in the inside.  Dessert: had to go with the brioche doughnuts.  Light sugar dusting for sweetness but the inside, nice and fluffy.  Along with two glasses of wine, total was only $275.. . Celebrity Sightings:  Terry Bradshaw (with a cowboy hat), and Joy Bahar (the redhead from the view).  Sadly to say, Wolfgang Puck did not come to our table.  However, our waitress told us that whenever he is in town, he is at the Cut.. . Sidenote:  the bathrooms are a little bit far from the restaurant,  but worth checking out, marble floors, floor to ceiling wood stall doors, and hand rolled towels instead of paper towels.
