ReviewID: XKHGDdmeN1NJ15CPezZDUw
ReviewerID: gOyQKofujZ0wUpLQDq65Eg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: El Tesoro
Category: Mexican
A refreshing new restaurant in Decatur offering traditional Mexican fare, with some dishes sporting a contemporary twist.. . The space is awesome- formerly operated by Jake's (ice cream parlor), it's basically a large, single story house with an expansive, wrap-around front porch.  Due to this, there is no large open dining space to be had.  When walking in, you're first greeted by the bar with a small area of seating to the left and right.  In addition to this, there are approximately four other "rooms" of dining.  This allows for a more intimate dining setting and keeps the noise down as well.  In addition, their logo and menus are great!  Who ever did the work should be congratulated.  Top notch!. . Either the owners or several of the employees (or both) are from Cantina La Casita in East Atlanta VIllage, so a few of the dishes carry over from there (.  El Tesoro's menu however offers many more options.. . Our two-top started with the chips and salsa, which is similar to La Casita (fire roasted tomato and fire roasted tomatillo) although the chips are more authentic to what you would get at a traditional taquera (slightly thicker with more of a corn taste).. . As is tradition with our visits to La Casita, we ordered a pitcher of the blanco marguerita.  There was something different- not as good- about El Tesoro's version but I couldn't put my finger on it.  Just remembering it not being as good.. . On to the food...I ordered one of the tamales (pork in chili guajillo sauce), a pollo verde taco, and sopes de pato.. . If you are a fan of tamales, you absolutely must try this place.  Simply put, these are the best tamales in town, bar none.  Perfectly moist with an abundance of flavor, it will knock your socks off.. . The pollo verde taco, as well, is a winner, with poached chicken, lettuce, and two salsas- the tomatillo and mexicana.. . The most interesting dish of the night was the sopes de pato, loosely explained as "thick &amp; crispy corn-masa boats" (a little larger than the size of a hockey puck) smothered with citrus-braised duck, refried beans, and red onion.  Although the menu said it was also supposed to come with queso fresco (most likely drizzled on top), it didn't, which might explain why I thought this dish was a tad on the dry side.  Still enjoyed it, but it could definitely use something to "wet" it down.  We put a little of the salsa tomato on there which really helped.. . Overall, this is a must try whether you're looking for an authentic Mexican taqueria or interested in trying something a little different.  There's still some tightening up to do (they only opened as of this past Wednesday- 3/19) however I have no doubt that there will be lines to compete with in the very near future.
