ReviewID: xkJBhmGiu7ho7sEarnJUhg
ReviewerID: 5gHEhQ6RuuiDLfMPDYYtVQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Giordano&#39;s Pizzeria
Category: Pizza
I am either uneducated or have no taste... because I am clearly on the other side of the fence on this one.  I like pizza.  I like pizza a lot.. which guy doesn't?... but clearly there are connoisseur's out there that appreciate this place exponentially more than I ever could.  Part of me feels like it has to be about the "chicago pride" you chicagoans have about the culinary marvel that is deep dish.. because the "you have to try this pizza if you visit chicago!!" statement makes me want to hit their head against the Bean and throw them off Sear's tower.. . The ambiance is pimp.  I'll give it that.  It comes across as a rustic place with lots of personality.  You can see right in to the kitchen(which I prefer)and It's cool to see all the authentic mexican chicagoans flipping the dough up in the air and swirling it around with their sanitized hands.  Here's the thing though.. you have to wait... and wait, and wait some more.  I know it's been talked about before.. but when you're really hungry, and you have fallen victim to the Pavlovian response that is the smell of fresh baking dough.. it seems like eternity.  This dilemma is compounded by the fact that you're waiting in a space that is clearly holding more peeps than the actual capacity of the building.  Fortune smiled on me during my visit, because I was with hot chics, good company, and I wasn't that hungry.. so all of these factors didn't phase me like they normally would.. . So.. the food.  mmmmm... blah.  We ordered three different types of pizzas.  All of which leaked a tenth of their weight in water... Yummy!! Soggy pizza.  And.. is pizza suppose to be served cold?  Wth??!?  We ordered the family appetizer.. which is way too much food for any family I know.  The fried food on this plate is equal to the weight of a small cow... and the fried mozzarella was undercooked.. I mean seriously!??  How much patience does it take to drop something into a fryer and wait for a couple minutes?!. . In summation.. an insanely above average wait.. for less than average pizza.  No offense Chi-town... long live his Airness, I guess you can let Harpo monopolize my daytime television for another 10 years, and congrats on the efficiency of your mass transit system.. but if this is Chicago style pizza..  Keep it!. . And... I voted for McCain.
