ReviewID: xKlSECwLDVgpJze53d-kVA
ReviewerID: 4onOpH9wisGW0VEofGNPjQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
November is important because it is the month of gluttony, overeating, and food galore. More importantly it is birthday month for Susan. A wonderful month of goodies and treats, last night was no exception.. . I got to have dinner at the restaurant of the moment: Osteria Mozza. Sitting at the mozzarella bar IN FRONT of Nancy Silverton I was delighted to not only have her smile at us, but poorly attempted to make some conversation with her (I clumsily asked her about the La Brea Bakery...lame, I know). BUT, more important was the food of evening:. . -Grilled Octopus- good, but a little bit too smoky for my liking. -Burricotti- DELICIOUS. AMAZING. This was gooood! The mozzarella literally melted in my MOUTH! Loved LOVED this dish!. -Complimentary Prosciutto with Pomegranate and Persimmon- The pomegranate added great flavor to the dish and was an excellent mix of savory and sweet. Delish!. -Complimentary Mozzarella with olive tapenade- Mozzarella was AMAZING...I could however passed on the olive tapenade (i'm not a big fan of olives). -Garganelli- i LOVED the bolognese sauce! meaty and flavorful!!. -Oreccheitte- the flavors were a bit too strong for me, the Garganelli was my pasta of choice. -Beef Brasato- the beef was good!! the beef also went well with the polenta, however at this point of the meal I was already stuffed beyond belief.. -Bombolini- little "donuts" with sorbet! a great closure to an amazing amazing meal. . My meal was absolutely wonderful and ended my birthday month with a bang! I am so happy I was able to enjoy a great meal here and hope to come again!!. . P.S. If you get a chance to sit at the mozzarella bar, I would suggest taking advantage of these "first row seats". The funnest part of my evening was not only the food, but to watch Nancy Silverton working away. Possibly the most interesting dining experience and not to mention a once in a lifetime opportunity!. . P.S.S. Star appearances- Mark McGrath (Sugar Ray), Dave Grohl (Foo Fighters), Danny DeVito and wife Rhea Perlman.. . P.S.S.S. Thank you Frank K. for a great culinary eating extravaganza!!!
