ReviewID: XkUG-YpS5nsYNutoyVlV5g
ReviewerID: -1bEp1hZ9EtrLUlwtUfCBQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Gingergrass
Category: Vietnamese
My Vietnamese friend Julie had been talking this place up for a while, being that she is Vietnamese I decided to trust her that this would be pretty good Vietnamese cuisine and we trekked our way over to Gingergrass after a couple of hours meandering at the Getty. . . The first thing I noticed were the hipsters, my god the hipsters!! The place was crawling with them. But let's get past that, although the place was cramped we were seated in about 5 minutes, albeit it was next to two creepy old men who kept sneaking glances at us enough that I kept having urges to shift five feet to my right. We were given an appetizer of some odd chip that looked like styrofoam and dip concotion that was suprisingly scrumptious. My friend ordered the shaking beef and I ordered the bo sate. . . Minutes had passed and before we knew it, 20 minutes had passed and we noticed customers who had come after us had already recieved their food yet our table was empty. The waitress apologized profusely almost every time she walked by. She explained that the kitchen was undergoing a new direction and it was jamming up some of the orders. We sat there patiently, slowly becoming exasperated. I finally recieved my order but felt it would be downright rude to stuff my face while my friend was foodless so I waited with her. About 40 minutes after we ordered we finally both recieved our order. . . The filet mignon in my order was so soft and tender and went well with the peanut sauce, yams, and long beans. Although I was pleased with what I had ordered I just wish we had both gotten our plates in an appropiate time span so that when I did get to enjoy my food it wasn't lukewarm. We also ordered the fried banana spring rolls and those were delicious and I would recommend those for dessert. Our waitress was extremely gracious and had my friend's order as well as the dessert removed from the bill for our trouble. . . In conclusion if  you have an aversion to large doses of hipster, cramped spaces, and long waits for your food I'd find another spot for dinner. But if you don't mind these things then go to gingergrass for the bo sate and the friend banana spring rolls
