ReviewID: xl2flJqy0o_7fM-8KkoazQ
ReviewerID: OJEG4nUEmhU6Po3DaBxdoQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bocado
Category: American (New)
We had a very good experience on a relatively quiet late night at Bocado.  Rather than going for the entrees, we shared a few small plates, which turned out to be the perfect amount of food.  . . We each got soup, and we agreed that the sausage/lentil soup was the better one -- thin but flavorful broth with mirepoix, spicy italian sausage, some kale (which didn't do much either way) and lentils.  It was perfect for a chilly night, well-seasoned and greater than the sum of its parts.  I had the sunchoke soup, which was creamy (although our waiter said there was no cream involved - impressive) and had the essence of a sweeter, more interesting potato soup. The dots of crouton were good, although they began to get soggy quickly.. . For the rest of our meal, we had chicken thigh over polenta, crab fritters, and roasted brussels sprouts.  The sprouts were unique and flavorful - shot through with some kind of vinegary marinade, but not soggy and very well-cooked.  I would have liked a little more char from the roasting, but that might be too much to ask.  The fritters were outstanding.  The crab wasn't overwhelmed by the breading or frying, as is all too common.  The three fritters rested on a bed of asian-inspired slaw, which was a little skimpy but very flavorful.  The chicken was fine, but nothing to write home about.  . . We had a little room for dessert.  My friend enjoyed his apple tart dish.  I got the chocolate pudding on a recommendation from the waiter.  Good, but it wasn't what I expected, based on the menu's description - "peanuts, caramel, chocolate."  Half the dish was whipped cream, which was tasty but unbalanced given the amount of pudding.  The "pudding" was really more like a mousse, and I never found any peanuts or caramel in there.  The best thing about the pudding were the two cookies that were poised on top - wafer-thin, lightly sweet.  . . The waiter was very helpful without being pushy, and we found her recommendations to be well-placed.  Most important for me, we never went without water or tea.  We left happy, sure to return.
