ReviewID: XLa7F6BM_PrjRecDzYU2og
ReviewerID: DiYCGCJEMG87PC0Va_5Ojw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
On a whim, the bf and I decided that on date night, we wanted to eat outside.  Also, I have an obsession with frosty treats like gelato.  Thus, we end up at Ugo.. . Good things first:. The outdoor seating is nice, good view of downtown and people watching, nice little lamps when it gets dark.  The tables are not on top of each other so it's pretty comfortable.  The bread was awesome, and the staff was very attentive in general.  We got 2 rounds of the bread, which is out of the ordinary.  Water always filled and wine was good.. . The food:. We had the Insalata Mediterraneo.  This was tasty, although a little heavy on the kalamata olives and a little light on the tomatoes.  BF and I split a special - the Fettucine Al Mare.  Now, I'm pretty hard on Italian food, I know what I like and I know how I like it cooked (blame Nonna).  I thought the sauce was tasty, but not an arrabiata, as advertised.  It didn't have a lot of kick.  Also, the fettucine itself was a bit overcooked and stuck together.  Shrimp, clams and scallops were juicy and plump, but the calamari was a little chewy.  Lastly, we got a side of polpette.  The menu says the polpette are 2 big meatballs.  We got 4 little meatballs in a whole lotta overly sweet and boring tomato sauce.  We debated whether they'd run out of homemade polpette and substituted pre-made frozen ones.  . . Bad things:. For dessert, we ordered Gelato Affogato.  This is basically a scoop of gelato with a shot of espresso poured over it.  When I ordered it, the waitress told me that it was served with vanilla gelato, which I don't like, so I asked her to sub hazelnut.  I was told that they don't do that, but she'd check.  Now, I'm not usually demanding, but they have a gelato bar...so what does it matter which flavor we scoop.  Especially given that the espresso comes on the side, and you can order plain dishes of gelato.  The real beef was that she brought back a vanilla gelato and told me "they just don't do that" when I asked where the hazelnut was.  I told her I'd prefer not to have the vanilla.  About 5 minutes later, she brought back hazelnut and told me "they just forgot".  It seems silly, but I love my frosty treats, and it seemed like she just didn't want to go to the trouble of returning it, banking on me just having the vanilla.  That being said, they had a really nice selection of gelato desserts and the hazelnut was very tasty.. . Anyway, overall service was good, atmosphere was nice and the food was...ok.  I might go back for the whole experience, but I don't know that I'd go back for anything involving the red sauce.
