ReviewID: xln5947NjXDDoMNTI39H5A
ReviewerID: 3eeTneovMzz_Z9cWq757ng
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
In a nutshell: Good experience. Ask for your burger cooked through, otherwise it'll be served bloody. The onion rings are too greasy. I liked the garlic aioli.. . (I docked a star because they were out of the Port and Stilton AND out of the mint chocolate chip ice cream sandwiches I went there to try.). . Parking: 2.50 valet or look for limited parking on the street. . Experience:.  I was ready to try the Port and Stilton only to be disappointed to find out that they were sold out for the night, so I went for the Umami burger. They have exotic bottled soda like dark root beer and chai cola. Everyone in the place seemed to be drinking Bubble Up so I ordered that which tasted just like 7-up.  Each entree comes with your choice of dipping sauce and I chose Umami ketchup. I wish the server told me that the fries and onion rings each come with Umami ketchup because I would've been more adventurous in choosing a sauce instead of getting stuck with 3 cups of Umami ketchup. Skip the onion rings, the breading was crunchy but very greasy. The fries were overshadowed by the Umami ketchup but complimented the burger nicely. My date ordered the Manly burger which he didn't specify to cook through. It was hard to ignore the bloodiness of the patty because it drenched the bun. Overall, the burger was tasty and I enjoyed the onion straws that were in the burger far more than the onion rings. Other than that, it was an ordinary burger. The Umami burger was a different story, in fact it was different. I enjoyed it more not just because I asked for the meat to be cooked through but also because the Umami ketchup in the burger completely transformed the burger into a something unique. It was hard to put my finger on it, so I finally asked the server what Umami was. He explained that it was the fifth sense of taste (there's tradionally four: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter). Umami leans toward the savory. Understanding that gave me a new appreciation of the burger and trying to understand the flavors. I doubt that this will be a place I would crave for, but definitely worth trying.
