ReviewID: xlq60mUVBf9RbD4nWUaaYQ
ReviewerID: -DzFz9GenXYqkkHy0HmgVg
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Jerry&#39;s Sandwiches
Category: Sandwiches
In one word..mehh.. I'm standing here on my soap box today because I had an awful Jerry's experience, which came to an utter surprise to me! . . This my third time dining at Jerry's so obviously they're doing something right at this delicious sandwich spot on Division(the food is amazing!!) I love that every time I go I get 2 little perfect portion sides with whichever perfect, juicy sammy comes to my mouth. The mac n cheese side is definitely my favorite &amp; I always have half a sandwich to eat later, but this past Sunday the customer service was the worst. . . I brought my dog, London, so outdoor seating was a MUST. I had to wait for an outer table so not to disturb anyone else with my little 10lb heavy weight. Right! We waited about 30 minutes. Finally seated the waiter came to my table ready to take our order only to notice no one had given us menus to look at and we'd been seated to 20 minutes or so with only waters in front of us. . My Mr. finally asked for a drink list &amp; I just order iced tea. It was very bitter. I tried to fix it with some lemon but it was intolerable to drink! I politely ordered a Bloody Mary instead letting him know that their tea was no good. . So I waited 15 minutes for my Mary &amp; we ordered our food when my drink arrived. I wanted a side of apples for my dog and the waiter gave me a hard time about it. Saying "they're very picking about how many sides are ordered per person". I don't understand why if I'm willing to pay for something why I can't have it. In this economy I can't believe there would even be a thought to turning down your request. . So needless to say we ate. Sandwiches were awesome as usual. But I got my bill &amp; I had been charged for my iced tea the server took away(glass totally full) because I didn't like it! Amazing!! . I hate to be so hard on such a great place but in the food industry it's all about customer service, and Jerry's just doesn't measure up.
