ReviewID: XMNO3X564Cjj16S7Nq1StQ
ReviewerID: WN3FQ5lNz5q8FFbeH42OxQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Miller&#39;s Pub
Category: Steakhouses
It's probably more like 3.5 stars, but since I'm in a good mood, I'll round up.. . I went here for lunch today after not having been here for an eternity. My college roommate used to work in this area of the Loop and we would come here drinking with her coworkers at least once a week. My boss also used to frequent this place in the "good ol' days", so she was excited when I suggested it for lunch today.. . Miller's is such a great slice of Chicago. You will see natives and tourists alike. Lawyers, construction workers, and civil servants all eating in harmony. I love places that don't cater to a specific clientele.. . The decor is great. Old artwork on the downstairs level, and vintage theater posters (A Chorus Line or Jesus Christ Superstar, anyone?) hang on the second level, which I didn't even remember there was a second level.. . I ordered an iced tea and it was served with an honest-to-goodness iced tea spoon, something I rarely see. This made me happy since I always have to be gauche and stir my tea with a knife or a straw. . . Moving on to the food: huge menu with a lot of choices ranging from ribs to salads to sandwiches and everything in between.. . I didn't eat much dinner last night so I was plenty hungry when we sat down. I settled on a prime rib sandwich. It came on rye bread which I thought was odd since I was expecting a french roll or something along those lines. The rye bread was a little overpowering, but it was a decent sandwich. Served on the side were mashed potatoes, which were a little cold, but not bad enough to stop me from eating them.. . My boss ordered a cheeseburger and I had serious food envy when it arrived. It looked just greasy enough.. . The service was friendly and you get the feeling the waitresses have worked here forever. I love places like that.. . I love the charm and history of this place and look forward to going back.
