ReviewID: XnQUM5lv4bE7U_LOZ9q8Rg
ReviewerID: ZQXjCtNKJfDOP-B5HXKRAw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Shed at Glenwood
Category: American (New)
You know you're a fat fuck when you run out of restos to eat at because you have eaten everywhere. Scrolling through Opentable like a fat chick scrolling through the ice cream flavors at Baskin Robbins, I saw this joint pop up and my pouch said "Baby needs to eat!" . . Since, I haven't been in here in awhile, I wanted to see what Lance has been getting his grubby hands into. Let me just say, he can put his hands down my pants any day with the magic he's putting out from the kitchen these days. I'd put out for him... Only after a few Moscow Mules made by Cindy, of course.. . Butternut Squash Soup - Smooth consistency, not too thin and not too thick. Down that shit like it was a shot. Another Whiskey Old Fashioned, pweez. . . Foie Gras Torchon - Is this Velvet? Coulda fooled me, it was velvety smooth and spot on with the warm apple jam but the country bread was a little too large for the 2 medallions. Why am I complaining about too much food? Dumbass.. . Oysters - Sea snots to some but these Appalachian bivalves always gives me a blood flow. You old dudes can kept your Viagra and $2 whores. Real men eat oysters and then clam.    . . Pan Fried Chicken Hearts - As Lance would say, "This dish may not have mass appeal, but those in the know can find it here." This is prolly the most adventurous dish on the menu and I'm glad. I love this shit especially with the raw egg mixed in. Give 'em a shot and have a heart. Yum.  . . Sweet Potato Raviolis - I ain't no vegetarian but these little pouches of goodniz mean bidniz. Dough was toothy yet delicate. Sage and pecans in a light brown butter sauce completed it. No, Lance... You complete me.. . Skate Wing - I once thought about getting a grill like Lil Jon because it looked so cool... What's even cooler would be a grill made of these skate wings. I tried them on and they were a perfect fit... Then I swallowed them. I love skate and these were some of the best I've had.. . This joint has improved so much in consistency, execution and creating a comfort food menu that just says "Hubba Hubba". The only thing that could use improvement was the cocktails, not that they were bad, they needed polishing on technique. As y'all know, I like my booze and I like it proper. Speaking of drinks... I just made myself a Whiskey Ginza Hard Shake. Fuck yeah.. . Burp.
