ReviewID: XoJ0LLACAKgAEK837JOpZw
ReviewerID: -4bnDNfFPWKS1_aOkaCosw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Hungry Cat
Category: Seafood
short story: finely crafted food - absolutely phenomenal... and perfect for a date... (but pricey)... but such a treat.. . details:. we sat outside on the patio - which we had mostly to ourselves (yay)... it was way too crowded, too bright, and much too loud inside - i couldn't even hear myself think - let alone have a chance at any conversation. hence we opted for the patio - with a heat lamp cranked-up... it was lovely.. . Service was top notch - and Jeremy humored us by fielding all of our (mostly my) silly questions regarding the sources of their seafood... domestic vs. imported - farm raised... yeah - i'm one of those... . . food: . seafood is not my strongpoint... i really don't know much about fish - so i mostly yielded the decision making to my date - though i did exercise my right to veto... the caviar he wanted was on the endangered list... so he went for oysters instead.  . . Oysters  -  i actually had an oyster... 2 to be exact! and I feel fine! anyone who knows about my marathon and why it took me 7 hours and 14 minutes to complete it would be stunned that i deigned consume another oyster in this lifetime... well, i couldn't veto 2 things in a row... besides, they were pretty good.. . Appetizer - it was a special - fresh sardines atop a bed of polenta with this Meyer lemon reduction sauce.  So good!  And i love me some meyer lemon.  I really wanted to try this, to see if it was anything like a similar recipe i'd had once before years ago (over at Osteria La Buca when it was still a tiny 22-seat hole in the wall)... I think this was better.  If it is ever on the menu again - get this!   . . Dinner - another special - we shared a salad with braised Octopus... the salad featured the best of what's in season now at the markets - it was so good that when i went to the Santa Monica Farmers Market this morning, i tried to find similar items to recreate this dish at home (sans octopus)... it had fennel, wild arugula, pommelo, and a meyer lemon dressing.  did i mention how much i love meyer lemons already?. . This was definitely one of those meals that you eat slowly and really savor every bite. all of it was delicately prepared and finely crafted.  the flavors complemented each other so nicely... i would expect nothing less from a place somehow associated with Suzanne Goin (my cookbook hero).. . drinks - inventive and well crafted... using fresh local seasonal fruits for the juices... that drink i had with the blood orange juice was dee-lish.  . . desserts - all had dairy... boo.  some of us don't tolerate dairy that well.  sigh.. . so why is it 4 stars instead of 5? i guess i feel bad about the seafood from the endangered lists... and that there were no non-dairy dessert options... it also seemed kinda pricey - but i have no idea how much the specials were... i don't think i want to know either... but all in all, i loved everything i had.
