ReviewID: xOPrIP2ngcc23dJZ-mpC-Q
ReviewerID: Gru52_1cuMMkmYDHK9VgWg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bakeshop
Category: Restaurants
After a wonderful brunch downtown, a friend and i decided to explore this wonderful bakery that we had heard so much about. So after a few wrong turns, we finally got directions to this wonderful little bakery known as "Bakeshop" in Midtown, ATL.. . Wednesday, June 09, 2010:. .      As we first walked in at 11:20 am Wednesday morning, the wonderful aroma of freshly baked bread quickly filled our noses as myself and a friend walked in. Looking around, there were not many seated at the tables when we walked in (most likely due to the busy work schedule of Atlantians.) . .      As we made our way over to the counters, my eyes scanned the restaurant. Many baked goods lined the counters and the kitchen was wide open so i could barley peak behind the shelves of bread to see the baking of chefs in the back. . .      Looking over the pastries i could not see any items that looked healthy besides the breads. Knowing how much my mom likes scones though, i quickly noticed the delicious looking pecan-apricot scones. So grabbing one of those, i stepped aside to let my friend pick out what he would like.. .      He got a pistachio-fig tart. It was a small and moist square cake that had two pieces of fig, and pistachio. He said it was very moist and soft. It was still warm too as it just came out of the oven about an hour ago.. .      So after paying the lady, the price of the scone and tart equaled to less than 6 dollars. Not too bad for something so enjoyable.'. .      Though i did not have a chance to experience this restaurant due to my healthy diet, i gave this restaurant four stars due to the wonderful atmosphere, the great service of the wonderfully happy cashier, and my friend's extreme happiness to his tart.. .      So this restaurant is not for the health nut. But if you have a sweet tooth and want something hand crafted and baked fresh to fit any craving, i with out a doubt  would recommend this restaurant.. . -Andrew D. Morrison-
