ReviewID: XozFbqNiNmMs7cqwEa3M6w
ReviewerID: DgQQh4VqBG-9zQhc776a2g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun In My Belly
Category: Caterers
I don't give out many 5 stars ratings...but I've never been blown away by a breakfast joint before!  So before you call me a shill, I'll concede that maybe...just MAYBE I caught this place on an EXCELLENT day.. . 4 of us decided to try out this place as a good foodie friend tipped us off on how good it was.  We made sure that each of us got to try food from everyone else's plates.  . . 1) Chicken salad sandwich w/ pumpernickel bread &amp; hashed potatoes-  This salad was tasty- the mix of ingredients in the chicken salad was just right- not too much chicken, not too much celery, not too much cranberries- awesome.  That being said, I'm reviewing this one first because despite being quite a solid offering, it was perhaps the most 'ordinary' of what we ordered.  (3.5)  . Hashed potatoes are usually the highlight of my breakfasts- but today they turned out to be a sideshow.  Good, but my attention gets pulled for what follows.  (3.5). . 2) Portabello mushroom/vegetable sandwich w/focaccia &amp; red potato salad.   I usually shy away from vegetarian sandwiches at any restaurant establishment- but my buddy Wes C. took it on- and man, were we glad he did!  Tasty, soft focaccia around sauteed veggies that were not overcooked, topped with a layer scallion mayo- GREAT stuff. (4.5) . The potato salad though...that made our taste buds go through the roof!!!  I used to consider Maddy's potato salad the standard by which all potato salads are judged, but I stand corrected.  Contrary to being weighed down by overusage of sour cream (like Maddy's rendition has a tendency to be), SIMB's potato salad manages to balance multiple flavors (including that of bacon!!) perfectly, and I promise your taste buds will DANCE.  SIMB's red potato salad now rules the roost...at least in my book!!! (5). . 3) BBQ pork omelette &amp; Southern Mac 'n cheese- When it comes to incorporating BBQ where it's not usually found, I usually expect butt-loads of sauce in all the wrong places.  Not here.  There was no sauce in this omelette (and that's awesome)....because the flavor was all in the pulled pork- OMG.  Are you frickin' serious?  I asked for caramelized red onions in the omlette, which was also supplemented with monterey jack cheese.  Ridonculous.  (4.5). And the Mac 'n Cheese?  I'll admit that at first, I wasn't quite used to the taste.....because I was too used to eating lesser renditions of Mac 'n cheese which used Velveeta (or some other cheese food product).  These guys used real cheddar...and lemme tell you, real cheddar makes it better!  So good.  Greasy? Yes...but I don't care.  All kinds of awesome.  (4.5). . 4) Fried green tomato BLT- YOU MUST TRY THIS.  Fried green tomato slices with a fried egg with slightly runny yolk, topped with scallion mayo, all between two slices of some kind of great tasting bread with a slightly crunchy crust.  My eyes went O_O after I took my bite.  "DAAAANG"   I wish I ordered it myself....alas, it was the wifey's.  :-)  (5). . We'll be back.  I hope we don't experience what others have described as some sort of "letdown"....because for the four of us, this place is heads and shoulders over any other breakfast place we've had in ATL, easily.  True, the wait staff seem a bit aloof at times...and we had to wait about 15 minutes to get our seats....but it's worth the wait, peoples!!!!!
