ReviewID: XPOASKiMBDnbdvzYKVyNvQ
ReviewerID: _uqIpl5tzucKuIlZZPBZRw
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Taco Mac
Category: Sports Bars
It was the 4th of July, we were on vacation in Atlanta, places were closed for the holiday, and we were running out of options for dinner.  We decided to give Taco Mac a try, having seen many different locations around the city.  With it being a local chain, we figured it must be good.  . . I walked into the empty restaurant (but slightly busy outdoors) and expected to be greeted by someone.  I made eye contact with a guy standing by the bar who looked like he was the manager.  He just looked at me.  I finally approached him, since it appeared he wasn't going to make the first move.  That should have been my first clue.  I asked him if we could just seat ourselves outside (see my review for Taqueria del Sol).  He said we could, not moving an inch from his leaning spot against the bar.  Gee, thanks.  . . We grabbed a high-top table outside.   We sat there for a few minutes and were finally brought menus.  Being from Western NY originally, I was happy to see Beef on Weck as a menu option, but sad to see it only available on Wednesdays.  It brought back memories of my youth.  . . Our server came back in a couple more minutes to take our drink orders.  I asked if they had any beer specials.  "Didn't you get one of our beer menus?"  Uh...no.  Was there an invisible one in front of me?  She grabbed me one and I was overwhelmed by about 500 beer choices.  I told her I'd need a minute at that point.  The selection was awesome, but that made the decision so much more difficult.  . . After ordering, and especially for it not being that busy, we seemed to sit for longer than I thought we should have for boneless buffalo wings, a chicken sandwich, a children's taco, and two children's spaghettis.  When the food finally arrived, everyone got their dinner except for me.  The expediter asked me, "Did you order anything?"  I told her that I had ordered the boneless buffalo wings.  A couple of minutes later (after everyone had already started eating their delivered food), our server came and told me that it would be another 7 minutes because she had forgotten to put in my meal with the cooks.  Ten minutes passed (not 7) and my boneless chicken wings with Three Mile Island sauce finally arrived.  Everyone was practically finished with their meals by now.  The food was definitely delicious.  The TMI sauce was tasty and spicy, and the fries were fresh and hot.   Too bad everyone had to watch me eat them.  Not once we were visited by the manager to apologize for the inconvenience, and the server couldn't really care less that she made an error.  . . Then the check came and it was a bit disconcerting to not only see my meal on there after waiting so long for it (due to the server's error), but to see that I had been charged 50 cents extra for the TMI sauce and the kids had each been charged 40 cents for parmesan cheese on their bland, practically sauceless spaghetti?  How about asking, "Would you like parmesan cheese for an additional 40 cents?"  Or saying, "Sorry your meal was late due to MY error.  I've taken it off the check as a courtesy for the inconvenience."  Or even, "Sorry I screwed up. I didn't charge you the 50 cents for the TMI sauce."  Instead, she went with "none of the above."  Plus, we didn't get any water refills at the table and the manager obviously wouldn't leave his post to apologize for the delay for fear that the bar might tip over if he wasn't there to hold it up.  We paid, but left a less-than-average tip for the less-than-average service we received.  . . In hindsight, we should have kept driving around on the holiday to find a different place that was open.  During a future trip to Atlanta, we'll be sure to avoid all Taco Macs in favor of anywhere else where quality service is appreciated.
