ReviewID: xQkKifKqTg2hsH2onQfG4A
ReviewerID: fjYVwNchRBecpcvqR_bAlg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ann&#39;s Snack Bar
Category: Burgers
The experience: 5 stars, The cheeseburger: 4 stars. The aftermath: 2 stars... for a grand total in my mind of 3.75, so I'll round up to 4 stars. . . When I say "aftermath" I mean that this is definitely not a stop for the weak of stomach. My stomach isn't the weakest, and I've always prided myself on being able to consume grease with the best of the bunch, but this trip to Ann's put me out of commission for the rest of the night. So, just be forewarned and have your TUMS ready. It's worth every bite, but you need to be ready. . . When my husband and I walked up @ 3pm yesterday there was a group gathered on the screened in patio. After reading Yelp reviews prior to our visit, I knew Ann was strict, but I didn't realize to what extent. As we reached for the interior door, everyone on the patio in unison said "don't do it..." and we were like "don't do what?" as we opened the door. "Get back out on the patio" came the voice of a stern and experienced little woman on the inside. Supposedly she was pretty easy on us. . . At that point, we waited about 40 minutes for a man to come out and take our order. A few minutes later two stools opened up at the counter. We took the opportunity to get the full Ann's experience and sat as our burgers were slow cooked with spices, and onions added, flipped, added more spices and onions, flipped, added. The process was at least 45 minutes, and unlike any other kind of burger cooking process I have ever seen or heard of. It's one that made me really appreciate the patience, and love Ann really puts into each meal she serves. Once we were sitting at her bar, she treated us with all the care and concern of my own Grandmother. It made me truly understand why she and this place has become an Atlanta staple. . . My husband claims that his Ghetto Burger was the best burger he's ever had. Mine was delicious, but not the best I've ever had...unlike any other burger I've ever had; yes, and I highly recommend you make a stop by Ann's soon. . . ***A few tips***. 1 - Be wise on what day of the week and what time you go. She pretty much only serves 8-10 people at a time. A very small flat-top and the slow-cooking process is pretty much the reason why. Find a day where you have some time to spare and your lack of patience won't get the best of you. . 2 - All the burgers are HUGE, so don't let your eyes win over your stomach, and maybe opt to share a plate of fries vs. getting your own. . 3 - Listen to your fellow patrons, and take a seat on the patio until it's your turn. This is Soup Nazi type service (Seinfield reference), and after the 30+ years Ann has put into this place, her rules deserve to be adhered to with a smile. . . That's about it - Thanks Ann for a great Saturday afternoon!
