ReviewID: XrQrL7svfU8sg-JEobpGWw
ReviewerID: LcK70TpZ51KKuBGxJpAtnQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
Gimmicky.. . I've been to Orochon twice so far (both within past four months) and it reminds me of Kitchen Nightmare with Chef Gordon Ramsey.. . Both times we didn't wait too long in line, but waited a while AFTER we were seated to get the menu and water, then for them to take our orders. . . And both times, our food came at random times. For example, the first time we were there, my date ordered shoyu orochon and I ordered miso orochon, both 4s. My miso came about 15 minutes after her shoyu came. . . On top of it, her shoyu was ridiculously spicy, we were wondering what something like Special 2 would be. Turns out, when mine came, it was just a little spicy but much milder than hers. So what we figure is that they actually gave her something a lot spicier than 4. Definitely an order error. (Our tolerance ain't that wimpy, at least I think.). . The second time we were there, our shio ramen came first, the fried rice second and gyoza last, I mean way last. . . The fried rice was probably the worst crap we've eaten in a long time. Not only was it wet and soupy, and it was coated with what tasted like old cooking oil -- like something that was stuck in a frying pan that hasn't been washed for a month. It's the first time I actually thought of sending my food back to the kitchen. But then I thought, meh, what's the point. It's a $3.50 dish.. . Gyoza was edible, but way too steamed to a point it was just mushy.. . Ramen itself, at the end of the day, when you remove the gimmick of spiciness, is really not good. The soup has no depth, the noodle is nothing to rave about and the toppings are just random stuff they throw in there. At best it's a decent snack food.. . This whole ramen craze in the US amazes me. I don't understand why people would actually wait in line for this. I always try to give most things the second chance, and I think this last time was it.. . Next.
