ReviewID: XtTY3aUdWX6LtFIpQx4nEQ
ReviewerID: dlQk03MstQOBlwqVqMwx7A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
4.5 stars. Enjoying your experience at Father's Office is all about knowing what to expect and planning your trip here wisely. It's not a place I prefer to go on Thursday-Friday-Saturday nights, but rather off nights when I have no problem finding myself a table (because it's cut throat open seating) or getting the bartender's attention to place an order.. . You will maximize your enjoyment here if you come hungry and ready to taste a few microbrews that you may not be able to find elsewhere. Just a few years back, the Santa Monica location was one of the only places you could find certain IPAs and other small distribution microbrews. However, nowadays, it seems more bars and restaurants carry these brews than do not. So what sets FO apart, and specifically this location? The food. . . It's more a restaurant where you happen to order from the bar in my mind. Very sleek looking and way more spacious than the original location. The large outdoor patio is a major plus as well. You get what you order here, by now you know there are no substitutions, but it is all of the highest quality, with a distinct attention to detail that you don't find at many casual establishments. . . It's a classy joint, and what's best is you can always rely on the Office Burger (one of the best in the city and very unique when it comes to burgers) or go for one of the 3 or 4 daily specials they offer. From mussels and shrimp to lamb and pork belly, even a duck confit salad, I have never been disappointed by a dish here. Both the sweet potato and shoestring fries are some of my favorite and the garlic aioli (no ketchup here) is a condiment I could eat in endless quantities. . . Lastly, I must mention they offer a good number of high end sodas from Boylan's and Bubble-Up to Fever Tree ginger ale.  If it's a slow night, this is a great place to grab a bite and a few drinks. If it is packed and you're hungry and with a group of people, it can be a miserable experience. Plan accordingly.
