ReviewID: xub8QH01UD9WJTRqidNTFA
ReviewerID: 4Ai9d8Nw51MwBi85DQ1QQQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: David Burke&#39;s Primehouse
Category: Steakhouses
David Burke's was the last stop on my tour of restaurants for Restaurant Week and it was a shame that the week had to end on a slightly sour note. Perhaps NAHA and NoMI set the bar too high, but I left lunch at David Burke's today so disappointed. It was the only of the three restaurants were I felt I was treated differently because I was not paying full price. At least I hope they were ignoring us because of Restaurant Week, because I would hate to think that is how they serve everyone. The service was terribly slow and when the server did find his way to our table he was rushed and uninterested. We waited over 20 minutes to place our orders, we got our appetizers about 30 minutes later. We ordered coffees with our desserts and they arrived as we were taking our last bites. The timing was just wrong. I think the pop-overs and our appetizers were the highlight of the meal. I agree with another reviewer who mentioned the kobe beef sashimi. It was incredibly good. However, the entrees were definitely lacking. We had 3 delmonico steaks (2 rare, 1 medium rare) and 2 filets (medium rare). They all looked completely different (some round, some square, some thick, some thin). There was no consistency in appearance or temperature. My "rare" steak was medium on one half and a deep purple raw on the other. It was chewy and poorly seasoned. It was so, so sad. The sides, though tasty, were cold as we scooped them onto our plates. I was just so disappointed and a little sad to have picked David Burke's over all the other choices in the city. The desserts were alright, but nothing special. I thought the atmosphere was strange, as well. Techno/House music was a poor choice for lunch, or anytime really. Our table was also not a fan of their odd mural. Overall, it was just just an ok experience and I am definitely glad we did not pay full price. I won't be back.
