ReviewID: Xxl7s55xGYUvRhM2QWh7xA
ReviewerID: yXZq2jLatMMxZ8L-Rzp7nQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
As a resident Los Angelino, I have been here at least seven times, and each time I get coaxed into going by people who know no better, I wonder to myself "why did I agree to this?!" This has to be one of the most overrated grease-pits in America. As I stood in line for 45 minutes under the blazing sun waiting like a sheep to slaughter, a chromed out Chevy truck passed by on La Brea honking his horn with the driver pretending to eat an imaginary hot dog while screaming "KEEP WAITING MORONS!!!". To be honest, I couldn't blame him. He knows the gimmick. At one point in his life, he was probably just like me faithfully waiting in line for "the best hot dog in LA". That was just the beginning of a familiar nightmare that I seem to go through once every two years.... After waiting in line for 30 minutes the menu finally became visible. Even though I was starving and would've eaten my arm off to satisfy my pangs, I quickly became disgusted by some of the sloppy offerings on the menu. One selection known as the Three Dog Night consists of 3 hot dogs, wrapped in a giant tortilla, 3 slices of cheese, 3 slices of bacon, chili &amp; onions... I can feel my posterior artery clogging as I write this. Who eats that and lives to tell about it?. So, I finally make my order which was a standard 10" chili dog, a spicy polish sausage, and some chili cheese fries. I made short work of the chili dog which was tasty but not mind blowing... certainly not worth 45 minutes of waiting and harassment from passersby. I also put a good dent in the fries with the help of some coworkers. I had a hard time finishing the spicy polish sausage and then it hit like it always hits when I eat @ Pinks... hard and fast! Uh oh, get me to a bathroom now!! It burns so bad... ouch! Too bad for me it was a Friday. That night I had plans to go out with the guys and pay for overpriced drinks at a reputable establishment that would hopefully harbor some hot feminine clientele. Thanks to Pinks, the rest of my day and night was ruined. I went from classy to ashy. For the rest of the day I was either suffering in the bathroom at work or praying at my desk for a miracle that I'd be okay to go out by nightfall. Unfortunately, the only action I got that night had to do with my Sony Playstation... I won the Superbowl on Madden 2005 for the twelve season in a row. Thanks again Pinks for that quality experience ;)
