ReviewID: XYEOc1OrEohlSm7Qezx_OQ
ReviewerID: 7z3DGjKdgexTwmRLMb3iFw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
Ahh, Father's Office.  You restored my confidence in finding a good place to get beer in L.A., which for those of you who are not Angelenos is not a big beer-drinking city.  It was my second week in L.A., and I'd been looking around for someplace that reminded me of a brewpub I used to frequent back home (Baltimore)  I'd also been told that it was also home to one of the best burgers around- . . First off, the location is sweet- there's always ample street parking, and its tucked down a little road where you can stumble around drunkenly without getting run over-  The space is fairly big (I've only been to the Culver City one) and pretty well-designed for a gastropub-  The atmosphere is classy, without being obnoxious.  The lighting is dim, and the decor is pretty swanky.  It can be tough to get a space as there are no reservations (I prefer it that way), but its tough to find a place to stand and drink while waiting for a table to open up without being in a lane of traffic.  The outdoor seating is nice as well, as there are heaters to keep you nice and toasty-. . I ordered a Deschutes Black Butte Porter, a burger, and shared a basket of both the fries and sweet potato fries with 2 friends.  All in I think my split was around 25$, which is a bit pricey; but hey- its L.A. Don't like it? Move to the sticks!  Its actually not bad considering how few places there are like this in L.A. aside from chains like B.J.'s- who thought that name was a good idea anyway?. . The burger was great, and its' interesting that you can't change (at least I think) anything about the way its served- no condiment subs,  nothing-  you either eat it the way they give it to you or not.  My burger was served medium with bleu cheese, caramelized onions, and spinach leaves on a very soft bun.  To be honest, I don't know if I could even think of a way that would have made it better with the fries, dipping sauces, and beer I had. The thing just melted as I bit into it, sweetness from the onions flooding my mouth- props.  The fries are served in a mini fryer basket (very clever kids), and come with a great mayo-based dipping sauce.  I remember it being mildly sweet, but not sure whats in it.  The portions maybe seen as small to some, but its quality food, and quality food usually doesn't come in Applebees' portions.. . The beer selection is pretty standard for a gastropub, and my Deschutes tasted like it was supposed to-  I've had many of their beers in other bars, and its picked by people who know beer.. . The crowd is young professionals, college kids- pretty friendly the few times I've been there.  . . Last but not least, the bathrooms are sweet- there's a glass partition that reflects the light in an interesting way, and the sinks are uber-modern- just one of those things that adds to the overall experience, and why the place costs what it costs- the attention to detail.  I do think their website needs some more details, like a beer list and menu for their kitchen maybe?  There's absolutely nothing up there, and I am baffled as to why-
