ReviewID: XYoXxDszai13IcZGm1B4aA
ReviewerID: PhcOymnCDWdLpHSbny3amw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
So this is my first official Yelp! review and although I have a backlog of restaurants I need to review, I thought I'd kick it off with the latest one.. . I came here this past Thursday night with some old high school buddies to have a post-college grad reunion.  A couple of them live/work in downtown so we decided on Cobras and Matadors because of it's good reviews and location.   Unluckily, my carpool crew coming from the suburbs ran into hardcore rush hour traffic and Lakers fans trying to get to Staple center for the NBA Finals.  Parking outside was tough and we decided to get the valet (weird that there was valet for such a small location) to save time.  . . On to the actual place:. . AMBIANCE: small, intimate feel but more chill than romantic.  Interesting decor, a giant "love" in cursive with skulls holding cellphones...Our rowdy group definitely stuck out from the hip 30-somethings having quieter discussions. . SERVICE: the waiter was helpful, although he hustled us into buying "triple-distilled" still water - basically BRITA filtered water in a fancy jar.  he also recommended that we start w/ 8-10 dishes for a party of five, waay too much.  Although once it got busy, they were overstretched and we had to grab the waiters attention to actually get the bill.. . FOOD: i've been to two other tapas bars before, both in London - but that was a while back so I don't have a good frame of reference...I will say that I really enjoyed the BYOB policy, gave me a chance to use some wine that was sitting around unused.  I actually preferred the vegetarian dishes over the meat ones, but the ones I'd recommend are:. - non-veg paella: although a bit greasy, the saffron rice was booomb, and the sweet clams and mussels complemented the saltier chorizo, good stuff. - asparagus: the manchego cheese and walnut vinaigrette made this one of my favorites, I'd order two plates of these. - socca cakes: anything covered in cilantro is automatic good eats, but the crisp texture and just-right amount of saltiness was great. . Overall, I'd say it was a decent place, relatively inexpensive as far as tapas bars go, BYOB was great and the food was pretty good.  Definitely more for laid-back get-togethers than dates.  I'd go back maybe once more.
