ReviewID: xZqJksE_9cuoZBPkyohGow
ReviewerID: 8_GSnrTYzuS1GqHkkahTMQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
I have never been to the Santa Monica location because I heard of the long lines and parking in that part of town is challenging. This new location is walking distance to where I live, although both times I did drive there. I've read and heard about FO for over a year and was anxiously awaiting when they would finally open their Culver City location, just so I could finally taste what all the fuss was about.. . Lets go right to the important stuff: burgers and beer. I don't drink beer or alcoholic beverages, so I can't comment on their wide selection of beer offerings. I do love a good burger and while it is a pricey burger at $12.50, I still like the taste and texture of the hamburger. I don't crave for ketchup when eating this burger either. When you say 'rare', the meat really is rare (unlike most restaurants which overcook meat to be on the safe side), so I order medium rare instead. I've noticed that usually one side of the hamburger has more cheese flavor on it, so maybe the cheese slides towards one side during preparation. So now I have a local place to go to when I crave burgers.. . I have taken my older brother and bf with me on separate occasions. they both prefer the shoe string frites over the sweet potato fries. I like the sweet potato fries. They also like the diet Cane Soda that FO offers. I don't drink diet drinks, but I love the Mexican Coke they offer, since its made with real sugar instead of corn syrup.. . The ambiance is like a modern bar. A little homey but definitely with a modern vibe, especially the shared open washroom from both genders. I don't mind going up to the bartender to place my order, but I don't like the challenge of finding a table. I think the line manager lets in too many people during the busy periods, forcing people to try a find a spot to sit in. Or maybe they do this purposely, so that people are forced to interact with (gasp!) total strangers. Luckily, both times I have visited, the people we shared a table with were very friendly and nice to talk to. I do get irked when a group of 4 hogs up a table that's meant to seat 6. That's just plain rude and selfish. If you don't want to interact with strangers, then go to a restaurant with reserved seating.. . People are complaining about the prices, btu I am glad that it is pricey. If they charged less for their food, then there would even be more people and longer lines. It also prevents me from visiting this place too often because that would be devastating to my waistline. So like the nearby Honey's Kettle, this place is best to visit in moderation.. . The wait can get long during dinner time, but if you want a shorter wait, then come by for lunch, especially on weekends. Parking is plentiful, especially across Venice Blvd.
