ReviewID: Y-B9L65COxX-WUsRmY-0Xg
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Little Bangkok
Category: Chinese
There's not much to say about Little Bangkok that others haven't said already, but I've got to throw my two cents in.  No, not because I feel especially passionate about it (though I do love coming here), but because after looking over my reviews, I noticed an abundance of Mexican and Italian restaurants.  That's funny because those are my two least favorite foods.  Yeah, yeah, blasphemer.  Sorry.  I think I've been to so many Mexican places because I'm always searching for something I'll love.  That and it's the fiance's favorite.  (Yes, married men, I've learned quickly.). . Back to Little Bangkok, thai food is one of my favorite cuisines.  I know, here in the aughts, that Thai is played out.  So sue me.  Wait, that's one of my favorite Chinese dishes.  Anyway, when I first had Thai those many years ago, it was love at first bite.  Spicy, Asian food...whoa.  I love Thai food so much that Tom Kha is one of my favorite dishes in the world....and I hate raw coconut with a fervor reserved for Nazis and boy bands.  And Little Bangkok, my friends, has one of my favorite tom kha soups.  I'm also addicted to the larb which I order, not just because it tastes good, but because I like to say the word "Larb." Larb.  Larb.  It's a fun word to say.  Try it.. . OK, parking here sucks.  Park next door at that brick building that I think are law offices.  (As long as it's after hours, though.)  Waiting here also sucks as there is NO waiting area.  Be prepared to stand on the doorstep or the sidewalk, two things that I tend not to recommend when on Cheshire Bridge.  (Unless you want to make some extra money on the side, if you know what I mean.). . Little Bangkok is worth the wait.  Make sure to order the specials though.  The standard curries and basil beef plates are good, but nothing to write home (or write yelp reviews) about.  If you just stick to these plates, then you'll wonder what the fuss is.  But if you order one of the ubiquitous daily specials then you'll understand.  Ah-HA!  The thai'd has turned and now you understand!  Even though I've been stingy with my five stars lately, when you take into account the value, the pleasant service I've always got, my favorite soup in the world, and the Filipino peso that's smack dab in the middle of their world currency decor near their cash register, Little Bangkok earns five.  Awesome.  And with that, I leave you with one last thing before I go:. . Larb.
