ReviewID: Y0xXs7jjx1WJ04A1ilCQ0w
ReviewerID: 3uJootQ876cXOb4Q2H39IQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
Adorable set-up, Milk is fashioned after an ice cream parlor circa 1950s.  I can completely see David Lynch digging the place, possibly using the venue for one of his quirky, surrealistic dream sequences in the vein of "Twin Peaks."  It has a wholesome as apple pie veneer that would work perfectly to introduce some offbeat, impression-making characters.  The way the place works is:  You stand in line, place your order and pay, and they give you a number that you take to your table, and they will bring your order to you.  Seating is limited, as the place is kind of snug.. . Even though they are the cheapest items, the best thing are the red velvet popovers.  They are perfect and so addictive.  The frosting is made out of buttercream instead of cream cheese.  You literally want to just pop them into your mouth ad infinitum.  Among the ice cream sandwiches, my pick is the grasshopper, which comprises of mint chocolate chip ice cream encased by two traffic light green macaroon cookies that are half-dipped into chilled chocolate sauce to create a chocolate shell.  The shades of green make you feel like a lucky pig of a kid.  I enjoy this feeling and work to rekindle it on a weekly basis.  Finally, to fully downsize into that Toys-R-Us kid, get the blue velvet cake.  This is not just your run-of-the-mill blue.  It is a screaming cobalt blue, the hue of giant gumballs; you know, that Easter egg food coloring that will smear your lips with hypothermia.  Blueberries are ensconced inside and the loudness of the blue hue makes me smile.  It's fun to eat, but it's a bit too saccharine sweet for my taste.  I prefer desserts in a more European tradition, which are not as sugary, but air-light whipped and rich in decadence.  Still, it's too fun to resist.  I'll probably order it again.. . As far as food items, I have tried the chicken salad, and although it is made with fresh ingredients, I find it lacking in flavor.  The lemon vinaigrette is too watery and the green marinade adds no zest whatsoever.  The chicken is of good quality, but they are cut into these thick slabs that are hardly conducive to eating on the run, as I was trying to do.  Still, this is a cute corner shop that is across the street from Lulu's, a block away from Susina, and Insomnia is next door.
