ReviewID: Y1A9JsYf_vD-8_do_c4ZzA
ReviewerID: BfBC_x7SL7K2THafF6IM2w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ford&#39;s Filling Station
Category: American (New)
Last week a friend of mine was in town for business.  Well not my town but Beverly Hills and she had a few hours to kill before she had to hop on an airplane at LAX.  She suggested lunch somewhere between Rodeo Drive and the airport and it was my task to pick a good place to eat.  So I opened a map, drew a line between the start and end points and realized that it bisected Culver City.  Well now things got easy.. . I've been wanting to try Ford's Filling Station for years.  I went to college with chef/owner Ben Ford.  But back then he wasn't one of the most respected chefs in the country.  He was the son of a famous movie star.  But I couldn't pass up the opportunity to support the Trojan Family and cross a restaurant off of my "To Try" list.  . . Let me say this about Ford's Filling Station.  If you are a fan of God's tastiest animal --the PIG-- then you will love Ford's Filling Station.  There is an abundance of swine related options for all including a whole pig feast provided you can give them 8-10 days notice.  You know they are serious about pig if they are willing to prepare the entire beast for your pleasure.. . So since this was kind of a last minute outing, I didn't get to order the entire pig.  But I did have the shrimp curry which was topped with a few strips of crispy bacon.  I have yet to find a food that wasn't enhanced by bacon.  The curry was pretty good but I think the girlfriend, J, had the best dish of the day because she ordered the burger.  As many of you know J is a picky eater so she went for the bacon and cheddar toppings instead of the blue cheese and onions option that the waiter recommended.  But even then it was heavenly.  My friend had the polenta cakes which sadly did not include any pork products.  But the polenta was wonderful and I would consider it on a future visit if they ran out of swine.. . We did try some dessert.  I think there was a fancy name attached to it but it was two types of chocolate ice cream sitting one a bruleed banana.  It was pretty good but like the polenta dish it was pork free.  Let me tell you dear reader, candied bacon is the best ice cream topping EVER!!!. . I'm looking forward to heading back to Ford's Filling Station soon and if you haven't tried it yet, well....what are you waiting for?
