ReviewID: Y1m14hVmHJIKyE1v8KRBtg
ReviewerID: eOEDBLlZsBai88w9UchouQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Uncle Julios Hacienda
Category: Mexican
Even though it's a chain restaurant, this place does some amazingly delicious and AUTHENTIC Mexican food.  Seriously.. it's a contender for "Steve's Favorite Mexican Food in Chicago."  It gets crowded and loud, but once you're sitting down, it's soooo worth it!. . Two of us got there around 8 without reservations.  We ended up waiting about 40 minutes, but it was plenty of time to cozy up to the bar, enjoy some margaritas and chips and salsa.  Friendly bartenders, and somewhat expensive drinks.  (Marg/rocks/salt was $8 before tip?  Somewhat par for the course in a nicer Mexi spot I suppose.). . We were seated at a table close to the awesome tortilla machine on the West side of the dining room.  How I love that machine...  seeing the little flour tortillas get popped into the machine, spiral down the heated glassed-in area, and then get conveyor-belted out into a basket, ready to be served.  So cool!. . Our server was friendly and very knowledgeable.  She made some great recommendations (leaning towards Shrimp... she was a seafood person.. and her strategy worked!), but didn't get too much in our faces the whole time.  That perfect balance between being attentive, but not too in-your-face or an absentee server.  She was good.  . . The food:. We started with some queso for the chips on the table.  This was FREAKING DELICIOUS!  We were both in agreement that if we had had straws, it would be easy to just drink the queso straight from the bowl.  Damn it was good.  . . After that, we decided to split a bunch of stuff.  Pork tamales.  I'm not usually a huge tamale person, but for some reason it seemed like the right thing to get at the time.  And, we were NOT dissapointed.  They were a bit spongier than the tamale guy's product, and in that way were interestingly delicious.  Good salsa with those bad boys too.. . The other plate we split was a combo of beef fajitas and shrimp that were stuffed with cheese, jalapeno, and then wrapped in bacon.  That's right.  I said it.  Shrimp/cheese/jalapeno/bacon.  Oh yea. There was a drawn butter, lemon and garlic sauce to dip in.  Seriously, my mouth is watering just remembering it!  . . It was a really fun time, with a fun person, and excellent food.  Seriously delicious.  Can't wait to go back!
