ReviewID: Y3k-PBusER92rLV0MhV3og
ReviewerID: nJ6_4VXENum3Uuuf-jifjg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
It was actually not packed on a Sat night and we got a table relatively fast.  The service here has it's ups and downs.  One of the girls working here was scary and I had a feeling she'd be spitting into our food.  Paranoia fear all night.  @_@ Eeep!. . My friend was SUPER LATE! Luckily the 4 of us were there together and had a lot of fun while our friend took her SWEET TIME getting there.  So while she was out, we had some stuff to drink O=) then we chowed down on appetizers.  The Wontons were super good! Maybe because we were hungry since it was late, but those suckers were delicious! They are just your regular wonton skin but the teeny weeny chicken piece in the middle was delicious.  We scarfed it down ^_^ . . The Fried Calamari was not bad.  They were very tender and lightly battered.  It was a pretty big portion.  The Veggie Egg Rolls were not bad either.  They had finely shredded vegetables and a reasonable amount of seasoning.  I still prefer Chinese or Vietnamese egg rolls.  I got the Thai Sausage that I loved last time, but it just wasn't as good.  It was a bit sour.  The wontons were the winner of the night! ^_^. . For entree, I wanted to get something similar to what I had last time but it was a total failure.  They brought out an entire fried Pompano that was fried to DEATH... I could barely get the meat off and there wasn't that much to begin with.  The sauce to dip was not too bad, but I wished the fish was prepared better.  . . We also got to see the Thai Elvis and the other girl who performed... WAY OFF KEY! lol At first my pal thought she was hot, but after a few more notes the fascination went away with the cringing.... . All in all the appetizers were great but the entree I had failed to please... service was about the same.  I would definitely come back again for food in the future.  We have to because we missed out on taking a picture with the Thai Elvis! When we asked he had already left and my other friend was deeply saddened.  So I will have to come back with her for the photo op! ^_-
