ReviewID: y6belOq0MwfteXtioNP_QA
ReviewerID: KHhwbBtto8KvS3sXEAxW6g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
It's a culinary experience, that's what you're paying for. Yes, the food is good, and the booze selection is sufficient. But it's the experience. Really. How many times have you sat in front of your tube, watching Iron Chef, and wondered what they heck those dishes taste like? We all have, more than once. With that said, what's more better than taking in din at one of the Iron Chef America's eateries? It's Mario effing Batali! Orange crocs and all. When in Rome, ya know? It will cost you, but I suggest ordering up an item from each menu. And after tasting each, critique it like you would if you were in Kitchen Stadium sitting with the chairman himself.. . The first star is given for ambiance reasons alone. I like it when people can't make me out, the right kind of lighting lends to privacy. It's like being on stage and seeing a blanket of darkness instead of a theater packed audience...or maybe it isn't, what do I know. Although having Allagash Curieux on your table sure helps with the stage fright!. . Having a Mozzarella bar is a nice play on the more common Sushi Bar, we ordered the Caprese off the Antipasti menu, it was tasty. it was like a bruschetta with Mozzarella cheese and oven-dried cherry tomatoes.  To go along with the Caprese, the Afetati Misti was a nice platter, putting together all the necessary meats and frits. Yum. 2 stars.. . Thankfully, descriptions of the dishes accompany their names. It made it easy when choosing the Beef Brasato from the Secondi menu.  The meat was so tender, no knife required. All the sauces and flavors that tie this dish together are perfect. If you're a meat eater, this is a safe bet. To go along with this, I had the Insalata Mista and sauteed spinach with fried garlic...in retrospect, unnecessary orders. But hey, what recession. Third star.. . I don't have a sweet tooth, so as deserts go it's all the same to me. We had the Bombolini, and accompanied that with a cup of joe (which I am a fan of). The java  was served proper, with raw sugar cubes among the chosen condiments. At this point, the coffee could have been Foldgers and I would have been happy, no disrespect to the Foldgers people. I'm just saying, the experience up to then was over the moon. 4 stars. Not even was the amount on the bill able to knock me down. Good times.
