ReviewID: Y6CowPvmbPUkUCXpSqFQKw
ReviewerID: tXqVduTJHLbrrwVEO8JX6w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Boiling Crab
Category: Seafood
I've been to the Boiling Crab a few times now. One time at the Garden Grove location. I generally prefer this location not only because it is closer but because I get a better vibe here. Let's not joke about the wait. On my last visit, my party got there around 6:40pm on a Friday night and we got our table about 8:40pm. No exxageration. This place is small and it gets packed. I would highly, highly recommend you going early, especially if you have a party of four or more. You can send someone early first to put your name down for a table but they will from time to time check up to see if your party is there. They will not generally seat you unless most of your party is present, so don't wander off too far while waiting. You must have patience when you come to eat here because you may not get seated for a long while.. . As for the food, I'm not a big fan of crawfish. I rather just get the shrimp. You work so hard peeling and getting messy, the crawfish just doesn't cut it. The shrimp size is fairly generous so I usually just chase that. As for the crabs and stuff, I only order it if I'm really in the mood to get down and messy. Remember those days when you were young, your parents took you to Redondo Beach and you guys would tear up the seafood on the pier? When I think about ordering the crab here, I seem to reminisce about those days. I'm not dogging on the crab here, just lazy.. The service here last time was pretty good considering they were packed. Our drinks were always getting refilled and they were always on top of our requests. All smiles, especially from one particular waitress. She was pretty awesome, forgot her name. . . Anyhow, the company that went with me that night was born and raised in New Orleans, Louisiana so I ask them what they thought. They said that the flavoring is different from what they're use to back home but it was still good.. . Minus the wait, this joint serves up a great cooking and gets my approval. However, I don't think I can be eating it weekly. I usually have a nice gap in between the times I go eat this. It's one of those types of places where it's great to have from time to time. Don't forget to wash your hands before using the restroom then wash again afterwards of course! It's all hands on here.
