ReviewID: y71hcTCUYm9YjSEKlWhZBg
ReviewerID: rUV1FUhji5xMjNBpcq5SXg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ugo: An Italian Cafe
Category: Italian
The food was so fresh - not sure if it's organic or not but it certainly seemed like it.. . I'm not crazy about Italian restaurants - I love Italian food but I can take it or leave it. So I didn't really expect much walking into this place. I love pasta but that is never a huge craving for me. When my friends and I are trying to  decide where to go or what cuisine we're in the mood for? I never say I am craving a big plate of pasta. . (I think I tend to shy away from pasta because the circles of oil &amp; butter &amp; cheese oils always seem to turn me off - after you have the plate in front of you for 10-15 minutes. ). . Anyways, this place - was simple and good and not just all about pasta. It was light yet hearty.  I didn't feel guilty eating here at all.. . I went for dinner and it was delish and great for those trying to stay on track with a diet but also being able to enjoy dining out.. . Pros. 1. Candlelit - gives a warm romantic feel. 2. Grilled Veggies - So Fresh. 3. Food - actually the food there period. . . Cons. 1. Seating is horrible - tables are so small - cafe style. But i guess this is what you get for a "cafe" . What's weird is that this place is a restaurant trying to be a cafe . Or a cafe trying to be a restaurants. But it's not really a cafe either because it's too upscale to be a casual cafe. This is all due to the small tables. . You can barely fit your 2 plates on there without having to try to make sure nothing else falls off (i.e. small candle, salt &amp; pepper shaker, etc). . 2.Menu is outside on a board so you have to walk outside (if you are seated inside) to go take a look. . What we ordered. 1. Filet Mignon with grilled veggies- was drizzled with some mushroom gravy  - They both were delicious . 2. Pesto Salmon with grilled veggies - the pesto was almost chunky &amp; not oily at all and tasted really fresh . 3. Linguini with Clams in white sauce - buttery but not overly . 4. Gelato - Pistachio, Chocolate, and Spumoni - SO yummers. Came in a parfait cup/glass. 5. Fruit Tart - Good. 6. Strawberry Shortcake - Might have been the best I've tried. . * * *. . Have since gone back for desserts-a-palooza. I'll just break it down by stars.. 1. Lemoncello - Lemon cake 4.5 stars. 2. Strawberry Shortcake - still sitting pretty at 4.5. (Only thing that could make it better is more cake, less cream, and better strawberries - FYI, I'm a strawberry snob). 3. Strawberry Chocolate Profiterole? - 4.5 stars . 4. Marscapone Gelato - 4 stars. 5. Cassata Gelato - 3.5 stars. 6. Cappuncino Gelato (comes with chocolate bits)- 3 stars. 7. Amaretto Gelato - 2.5 stars. 8. Panna Cotta - 2 stars (Note: not my type of dessert but just a heads up to those who do like it - this was wayyyyy too creamy and milky - to the point where it will make you nauseous if the whole thing was eaten or at least have a chocolate chaser or wine or soda or something to help you digest or forget that u had it). . All of this came out to roughly $41 sans tip.. . * * * . . Brunch . It's best to order the breakfast paninis or salads.. Do not get the pancakes or french toast. They do not do a good job with breakfast foods. So if you are craving breakfast foods - do not come to an Italian cafe. . Bacon is way too oily. . . * * * . . Peep the pix
