ReviewID: Y8jBm58wMEi84Pd8EUXSpQ
ReviewerID: 1EiP4lBBtN25BB9dP_dWnw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mediterranean Grill
Category: Greek
As an alleged hipster, loving on a place like The Mediterranean Grill is tantamount to admitting I DVR Dancing with the Stars. Which, for the record, I don't do. Anymore at least. Hey, my wife made me record it! I feel your judging eyes on me, staring, unblinkingly, judging. OK, fine, I once watched an entire season of DWTS (that's what the fans call it) because I wanted to see how good a dancer Emmitt Smith was.  I did that. I'll cop to it, just like I'll cop to eating at TMG.. . It's not the best Mediterranean food in town, but it's by far not the worst, especially when you factor in the price. In fact, when I used to live in the Poncey Highlands, I used to drive to Emory to partake. Then I moved from the Poncey Highlands and they opened a store off of Monroe to prove that I continue to live my life like some half-assed O. Henry story.. . The gyro meat isn't as good as Nick's To Go. It can be dry sometimes. However, the kabob meat has never disappointed me and that applies to both the shish and the kufta. It's some good stuff and comes as part of the "business lunch combo." At less than $7, it's a good deal. (By the way, I seem to remember them calling this combo the far less politically correct "businessman lunch combo." Now either they changed the name or I'm imagining it wrong, which may say more about me than anything else.). . Anyway, this place isn't perfect. The rice could use some work. It tastes waxy.  Oh and TMG has counter service or as they say in the biz, "fast casual."  Now I wouldn't call it "fast" per se. Sometimes they are, other times it's more like "bring a good book casual." Interestingly, they're usually faster when they're backed up. I think the guys at the grill need the visual of tons of waiting people to kick it into gear.. . Despite some of these problems, I'm going to grant TMG a solid four stars especially for the kabobs. As I said, I like this place and it's a welcome respite to the many, many burgers I tend to consume.
