ReviewID: y_GAk3u5-z8-k4yxg8HkOg
ReviewerID: Ox0BcuSxuV4zzCCNGLO_Ow
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
A friend wouldn't stop badgering me to take on the Orochon Special #2 Challenge.  If you haven't read all the other reviews about this place, it's a large bowl of ramen that's so spicy that they have a challenge where you're supposed to finish the entire thing in less than 30 minutes. If you accomplish this ungodly task, you are rewarded with a photo on their Wall of (Digestive System) Bravery for maybe a month.. . After debating doing it,  I decided that having my photo tacked on a corkboard was worth stripping my stomach and intestines of their lining.. . Somehow I managed to eat all the noodles and other stuff in the bowl of Hell. Now was the hottest part: the broth. I had less than 15 minutes to completely slurp down a small tub filled with liquid evil. The problem was about halfway through the broth, I was completely stuffed. So not only did the inside of my mouth feel like I was drinking the sun, but my simmering belly was about to burst. To make matters worse, my friends were snapping photos, recording videos, and dabbing my sweating face and neck with napkins. Despite all these distractions, I managed to chug my way to the finish line in 25 minutes.. . Right after I was done, my extremely stuffed and flaming stomach was putting a frown on my face. I contemplated going to the bathroom and throwing up. But first, I had my picture taken with my vanquished nemesis. I never did vomit, although I kept regretting it for an hour as a Japanese volcano rumbled furiously inside my innards.. . By midnight I was strangely fine. I even ate a plate of fries at a bar. But although I felt okay, I wondered if I would be sitting on a toilet on Saturday morning biting onto a wooden spoon as my ass gave birth to a dragon. The next day, I got several text messages and inquiries about the well-being of my colon. I think they were all disappointed when I told them that it was just an average burn.
