ReviewID: YBvYVM2hrmasJa1req0Tmw
ReviewerID: -YTRULDBBCvhr7RYnDwjBQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Sun Wah Bar-B-Que
Category: Chinese
Can anyone say, "The best Peking Duck in Chicago"? I sure can!. . Sun Wah at 1134 W Argyle St. in Chicago is the place to go for what I call the best in Chicago. Not only is it good, it's AFFORDABLE. This $30 Peking Duck, for us, fed my girlfriend and I to the brink and had leftovers for 3 people. Yes, it's massive.. . The dinner is surrounded by one whole duck. The waitress will cut you small slices of the duck then set it down nicely on a large plate. These small slices will be eaten with slices green onion, carrots, special sweet sauce, and chili sauce wrapped in a steamed bun. The duck here is very special. It is the most juicy Peking Duck I've had in Chicago and even the skin wasn't dry. Nothing, absolutely nothing was wrong with this duck. Even microwaving it and having it the next day proved this is one (damn) good duck.. . Then with the rest of the duck, the leftover meat is made into an excellent fried rice and the bones are made into a delicious duck soup. The result is food fit for 5 people. We attempted this with 2.. . This dinner started during Chinese New Year this year (2009) so it is still relatively new. Our waitress told us that it's been a great hit and they had recently been featured in the Chicago Reader. I found them through Yelp, but they are getting great exposure! The restaurant probably fits about 75 people max and is pretty dirty, but they are not paying much more for renovations because they will be moving just around the corner on Broadway for their new store. Be on the lookout for this as well :). . I'm really glad this restaurant is taking off because I visited them a couple years back for their awesome BBQ pork. It is a little out of the way for me so I hadn't gone back since then, but I'm glad I did this weekend. This family owned restaurant has a great atmosphere: the waiter and waitresses are all down to Earth and are friendly, friendly people. It was nice talking to our waitress while she was cutting up the duck and they really do enjoy serving their great food.. . Come here for great duck (obviously) but also for a laid back atmosphere!
