ReviewID: ycV0nBIsNEEbgqG7jH110Q
ReviewerID: Yl3rlIIH3Qy_XcFRvYNacA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: A Taste of Heaven
Category: Bakeries
I LOVE~LOVE~LOVE A Taste of Heaven! . . I've been going to a Taste of Heaven since College, and that was years and years ago. (Like, 10. Yikes...time flys!) To this day, I remain one of their BIGGEST fans. Although I now live far~ far~ away, in the city of Woodridge, IL, whenever an opportunity arise, I always go back and pick up their delicious baked goods before I head back out to the suburbs. . . Being a total foodie, I have not yet encounter a bakery that is of this kind; an unpretentious and scratch kitchen that makes generous and delicious baked goods that are, simply, solid. The pricing is not the cheapest. BUT, one always gets what one pays for. . . Here are some of my favorites: . . Bread Pudding with Caramel Sauce - I was not a bread pudding person until I tasted this. This bread pudding was what got me to becoming a fan 10 years ago! This is not your typical bread pudding, it is REALLY very SPECIAL. Give it a try, just once, and you'll understand WHY. . . Jeanine Cake - A white cake with triple berries. The cake is moist, the frosting is light and fluffy and the berries brings out the deliciousness in making this cake a stand out! (I'm not sure if they still make this regularly but, just ask!) . . Banana Bread/Pound Cakes - You will be hooked! . . Cupcake varieties - I think they are all DELICIOUS and they're not super expensive like others that are trying to tap into the cupcake trend. Some of their creative flavors that I can't get my mind out of are: Melted Milk Ball &amp; Boston Cream Pie. There are many flavors to choose from.  One should go and chose with their heart! . . If I were to live closer to a Taste of Heaven, I maybe in trouble. (because I would stop by, everyday!) A Taste of Heaven now serves breakfast. But, I have not yet had the opportunity to try them. I am, however, confident that Dan (the owner) will not put out a disappointed plate out without it being DELICIOUS! (I say this because I got to meet him back in the days when he offered his baking classes in his bakery kitchen at another location. He really is passionate in what he does...and he's awesome at it! Way to go, Dan!) . . A Taste of Heaven ~ Really is, what it is. . . Happy Eating!
