ReviewID: YD76GXO0eGPIpOyqvlWLWQ
ReviewerID: zuY8nzjSF_vpXvWRZs0Adw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
I was very excited to make this the second stop on a trip to LA. We rushed to make our dinner reservations through excrutiating traffic.. To summarize:. - Bland pizza (Had the Bianca with fontina, mozzarella, sottocenere &amp; sage) . - NO soda options so if you dont drink wine you end up with a grapefruit soda which was actually oddly satisfying. . - Horrible service.. at first.. when manager was alerted service was better. - Amazing desserts (Had Butterscotch budino, Maldon sea salt &amp; rosemary pine nut cookies and Caramel copetta with marshmallow sauce &amp; salted Spanish peanuts ). . The long story:. We were CRAMMED next to our neighbors, I went to the restroom. I waited for the restroom. 5 minutes later I returned and  we had not been greeted. Another 5 minutes passed. We laughed, just our luck to be suffering of starvation and dehydration from our 6 hour ride to be treated like dirt. Finally, a man arrived. He said "Water?" we said "No, soda" he said "Ill be back to take your soda order". Finally, I stood up, ready to go to the nearest gas station, but I really wanted that pizza, we went to the front and asked "How long have we been here?" they said "15 minutes" .. without soda... with barely a greeting. I couldnt stand it, I asked for the manager. Then my experience got better. He was a geniunely nice man, and talked me into staying (I was going to get pizza to go and go to a gas station for a drink). Wonderful service from there, was checked on appropriately, pizza came out fast. Pizza went from crisp crust to soggy mess within minutes of being out, it was alright, but bland. I guess I should have gotten something with meat on it. Still mark of a great pizzeria is their cheese, right? Still crammed next to our neighboring table. Then dessert was offered. I had already read the menu and knew what I wanted.. I took one bite of the spanish peanut heavenly morsel of OHHH I cant describe it it was SO GOOD. My twin described it as "Tasting like peanut brittle" what I say is yes but like the best peanut brittle ever times 2948239084. My twin adored the butterscotch thing, I just thought it was so so. We tried two types of gelato and both were ok, I am just not a big fan of gelato, especially fruit gelato.. . That sums it up. If the manager is my waiter, I'll go back there for the dessert. But a better pizza is made in grocery stores. Ok, the pizza wasnt AWEFUL the crust was AMAZING but I only had one of four slices.. I hope if I ever go back Ill get a more falvourful version.. . Still, dont expect service, dont expect a comfortable seat, its crammed, its busy.
