ReviewID: YF-8aVsrdhsJ7O3vIYPJYw
ReviewerID: jykujKfidFvIMMgOT0VLIg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Tank Sushi
Category: Sushi Bars
A tasty location, at a fun and busy spot. I've been here a number of times, a number of enjoyable times, but this is the first time I've had a chance to review it properly. Along for the ride, was one of my more adventuresome foodies friends, so the possibility of exotic choices was very much in play on this Sunday night.. . Despite getting in a little bit late on a Sunday evening, there were an ample amount of folk out eating. The seating is a bit close, but the constant conversational chatter will serve as a sound barrier to all but the loudest of conversations. . . Food-wise we tried the Seared Sea Scallops as an appetizer, a Sashimi Ume (12 pieces of assorted fish only), a Robusuta maki and a Strawberry Benkan maki.. . The Seared Sea Scallops were prepared well, though I think I might have liked the asparagus that came with it slightly better than the scallops. The Sashimi Ume was wonderfully selected. Well-sized pieces, and tasty picks of salmon, ebi (shrimp), tuna, white fish and snapper. . . The Strawberry Benkan maki was a decent combination of flavors, relatively bite sized, and just the right amount of sweet, without being overwhelmingly so.. . The Robusuta maki was a bit of a what-if maki for me. Conceptually it sounded delicious. A combination of sweet and savory, with a crispy outer shell to add texture, and a light amount of spicy honey mayo. Taste-wise, I really liked it, but the crispy outer shell and the size of the cuts will make it less of a bite sized maki for most folks. Despite the taste, I wouldn't recommend this highly to people that prefer one-bite maki pieces.. . Service was attentive, and somewhat reliable. As a public service reminder, you shouldn't be surprised if you stay close to closing time, and have the restaurant try to pack up for the night.. . Otherwise, this is a decent add to anyone's neighborhood sushi lists.. . Accessible by public transportation (bus), and with decent access to parking. You may have issues in the summer when there are events at the nearby park, or when Old Town School is in full swing.
