ReviewID: yF9a4W5Fd4wBriqtlPQldw
ReviewerID: 3dug0atll6agplAb6h0O_w
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Resto
Category: American (New)
Resto is one of those places where you've probably passed a million times while meandering around New York City, but never bothered to stop in.  Well, next time you just happen to be on 29th Street, and feel a grumble in your belly, you may just want to do your hunger a favor and get yourself a table there.. . At first glance, it's nothing special.  Every square inch of the place is drabbed in expresso colored furniture that looks like it came right out of a Crate &amp; Barrel catalog and the lighting is a bit too dark to be considered cozy.  But the food, when it hits your table, will light up your eyes with a colorful splendor, as you find yourself reaching for a napkin to wipe the drool that has managed to get passed your lips.. . Now you won't find anything complex here.  The recipe for everything is simple... straight forward food, cooked just right, with portions that leave you satisfied.  Now, I've only frequented Resto for brunch and lunch, so I can't comment on the dinner menu... but for the meals that my wife and I have eaten here, we find ourselves thinking about them all day long.. . In the mood for a decent burger?  Well why not try it Resto's way topped with a fried sunny side-up egg and guyer cheese?  In the mood for something to cure that heavy night of binge drinking from the day before?  Then may I recommend Resto's Hangover Pasta (I mean they do call it "Hangover Pasta" for a reason)?  No matter which route you decide to go, you'll find food that is just as pleasing to taste, as it is pretty just sitting in front of you.. . One thing that I will tell you is a Resto's must are the frites.  Have I had better frites before?  Well of course I have.  But at Resto, when that quaint cup of double fried goodness gently kissed with course salt is standing before you, followed by an assortment of mayonnaise-based dipping sauces... you'll start to appreciate Belgium cooking like you never have before, all because they make simple food fun to eat.. . The wait staff gets a thumbs up.  Always kind.  Always attentive.  And are great at making recommendations to the Resto newbies.  It's one of the few places that the Mrs and I tip just a bit bigger than normal because when we leave, we feel like we have been cared for, and not just served.. . For beverages, the coffee is very European, dark and rich.  The juice (well at least the orange juice) is fresh squeezed and made to order.  But for those requiring something stiffer mid-day, they do have a full bar that can serve or make anything your taste buds will want to greet.. . So, the next time you happen to wander in that not-so-cool section of Murray Hill, then treat yourself to something unexpectedly good at Resto.
