ReviewID: yFrq6sIjjQnArvqhWFcAlA
ReviewerID: 4rTYoRQlKggUqmP_fe905A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
With over 500+ reviews under their belt, I don't think mine will add anything new. So I will just share a little adventure.I had when I visited Daikokuya.. . I've been meaning to visit Daikokuya for so many years, even moreso after reading the reviews on yelp. But I've always been put off by the long waits and the long lines. I have made previous attempts during the summer, so I have experienced the heat inside when waiting. I've never been too patient when waiting for food, even if its a good restaurant. Even since changing jobs to a downtown location, I've made fruitless attempts at eating lunch here. I don't bother to wait because there are plenty of decent places to eat just nearby.. . One evening after work I had an unusual evening of drinking. I don't do the happy hour thing, but this evening I joined a friend to have drinks while he had to kill time before an evening meeting. Strangely when he left I bumped into other co-workers and joined them for drinks. LOLOL. Strangely a couple of buddies I had been meaning to get together with, after reconnecting with them after 10 years, called me up and wanted to have drinks. LOLOLOL. I joined them at a nearby pub with a slight inebriation already in swing.. . I started to head home when hunger started to overtake me. Who doesn't get famished after some good drinking? Ramen kept  popping in my head, especially Daikokuya, but I kept dismissing it like an evil little red devil on my shoulder.. . Ok if the next light is red I will make a right turn and consider it.. . Alright alright... if its a green I will go to 1st Street.. (At this point I was fully content on finding a taco truck. Mind you I don't like to shift food types if I am stuck on it.). . Ok ok,,, I will pass by and if its not too crowded I will stop by.. (Dammit.. .it didn't look too crowded). . FINE. If I find good parking then I will stop. I turned the corner and found rockstar parking right on the streets.. . I headed over and noticed the the black curtains must've hid some stragglers. Or they might've dribbled out after signing in on the wait list. ARRGH. Maybe its not too late to just turn around. Ah screw it... I've been receiving signs that I have to go eat this damn ramen. I'm stuck.. . I didn't look to happy when I signed the wait list and there were at least 8 names ahead of me. GREAT. I barely sat down when I heard the little waitress call my name. I forgot I was rocking solo so I could sit at the bar. (I did smug a little at the others who were glaring at me).. . The staff was helpful and friendly. Even the cooks behind the counter were sociable and nice. I didn't bother with the menu and just asked for "it". The guy sitting next to me came solo and he ordered the same thing. We even split an order of gyoza.. . The ramen came out and I must say: its very good. Its not the food of gods, but I can see why people rave about it. The broth is rich and flavorful. There is a depth to it that is very nice to sip on. The chashu could've been a little more tender, but it was still very good. The noodles *are* al dente as others have described, but I enjoyed them as such. What I really loved was the egg they gave me. The egg wasn't cook through entirely. It was soft boiled enough to have a little sunshine peek through when I bit through it. Delicious.. . The ramen here is very good. I would come again. Maybe its the interesting evening that added to the experience. Apart from that, this restaurant holds up to its reputation - both good and bad.
