ReviewID: yGsIfhpvtRRuWWBv0w0RAQ
ReviewerID: Ymh9K9vfsV-9Dl2TGPtGiQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Fat Cat
Category: Bars
Before checking out a show at the Aragon this weekend, we tried another restaurant recommendation from a friend who has yet to steer us wrong.   Fat Cat, on Broadway just north of Lawrence, was a perfect pre-show spot - from the eats to the setting.  And apparently lots of people seem to agree with us; when we got there at about 6, the place was hopping.. . Fat Cat has one of those great retro vibes - very 50s mod, starting with the cool neon sign outside.  The open dining room, with a bar placed prominently in the middle, is dotted with vintage prints and ads.  And while the menus are an afterthought for a lot of restaurants, these guys got it right - the cover of Fat Cat's narrow, rectangular menus looks like one of those worn hardcover books kids might have checked out of the library when our parents were in grade school.  They complete the whole atmosphere.. . While we weren't in the mood to stuff ourselves stupid we were almost seduced by the appetizer menu.  It's packed with all the bad (read: good) things your doctor would freak about like fried mac and cheese, corn doggy a trios, and reuben balls.. . But we were here on a mission.  Clark had decided what he was going to order about five or six days earlier (note:  this is not unusual) - the Thanksgiving Day sandwich.  This sandwich proved to be a really, really good decision. The menu describes it as a turkey sandwich, with bread stuffing and cranberry between two pieces of toast with light mayo. And that is exactly what it was (sans mayo, at Clark's request). The turkey was just a tad bit dry (the cranberry gave it the moisture it was missing), but the stuffing knocked my socks off, and anything with cranberry is amazing. The toast wasn't just toasted, but also pressed on a grill, giving it those nice little hash marks and a bit of the gristle taste it needed. Instead of fries with this dish, it came with a side of green bean casserole. This too was really excellent. When we first took a look at it, we thought that it was just green beans, French fried onions, and what looked like cream of mushroom soup, but upon further inspection Clark found that there was "a bunch" of cheddar cheese underneath it all. Now that was a nice surprise. And to top it off, he washed the whole thing down with a "dead guy ale".. . I, on the other hand, was dying for a good old fashioned cheeseburger (or Straight Up Burger as they call it here) and fries.  The burger was great (and served on a cool square plate).  I ordered it medium with a slab of melted cheddar and they definitely delivered -- slightly pink on the inside, but with a kind of crispiness around the edges and cheese dripping down the sides...and, oh yeah, the perfect amount of grease.  It was a good size for me - I was able to eat the burger, about 90 percent of my fries (Clark stole the rest) and didn't feel like slumping over in the booth and taking a nap afterward.  The fries were pretty standard but crisp ; while they're advertised as seasoned, I didn't detect a ton of flavor.. . We dropped about $33 here (plus tip) for the two meals, a beer and a Coke.  And it was worth every penny.. . By the way, if you're just going for drinks and diversion, Fat Cat seems to have plenty of that too. We hit this place on Final Four night and found there are several TVs for watching sports as well as a pool table or two in the back, not to mention that they were also playing the movie "Heavy Metal" on the TV right above us. Rock!  Drinks and beer are reasonably priced - and looks to be a decent variety of them.
