ReviewID: Yh1ZLu3YeBQOnKEzNfgphQ
ReviewerID: UuuB4DLVTyoaDwvhddBrww
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bocado
Category: American (New)
For perspective, I have been to Bocado six times and have had the opportunity to sample many items on the menu. Bocado  is less than a year old, evolving and quite good. In simple terms......highly recommended.. . I am a little perplexed at the audacity of some "reviewer's to make overly strong negative comments about Bocado's service when they have been but, perhaps, one time. My advice - take those reviews with a grain of salt and don't let them deter you from visiting Bocado. If the packed house on the weekends is any indication, many have found this new restaurant and many find the fare to be as exceptional as I do.. . As with many new restaurants that get overwhelmed with business - and Bocado IS packed on the weekends - Bocado's  service has taken time to come together. On my last visit, the service had arrived. I think they have their act together now.. . A quick blurb on the atmosphere before I comment on some of the dishes. It is perfect for midtown - contemporary and just sparse enough not to appear........sparse. A bit loud for my middle aged ears, but that is solved by eating in the private area or on the back porch. . . On to the food! . . If you can sample but one item, go with the Poblano  and pimento cheese sandwich - no kidding! Swear on my mother's grave - it's to die for! And If the name does not titillate you, one bite will. Why is this simple sounding sandwich so special? The blend of flavors explodes in your mouth. Spicy poblano with buttered toast and, yep, plebeian homemade pimento cheese. I will go so far as to say that  this is THE best sandwich in Atlanta. And it is served at dinner! . . Chef Todd Ginsburg also makes one of the best burgers in town. Certainly one of best $12.00 meals in Atlanta. Ginsburg mixes chuck with brisket and short rib and then only adds salt and pepper and, surprisingly, American Cheese. I love that he only adds those two "herbs" as it shows he understands  the point of a burger is to feast on the meat. (BTW - he would not reveal the percentages of each cut of beef and I understand that the recipe is guarded by the same group trusted with the recipe of Classic Coke!) A toasted, buttered bun rounded out the Bocado burger to deliver a crisp cover for the delicious 6 ounce fare. It is a double stack and, perhaps, the only criticism from some in the group was that a few would have preferred a single pattie instead of two. Chef Todd explained that a double stack gives four areas of caramelization - thus increasing the flavor. The Bocado burger has two options for fries Take the garlic and herb fries - really, really fantastic fries.. . But don' t let my comments make you think this is a sandwich and burger joint. I began my last  meal with the foie gras which was served with a small cooked apple. Outstanding!. . Bottom line, Bocado is a "go" and a proud new addition to serious Atlanta eateries.. . Congratulations to Chef Todd on this new midtown restaurant. Might we see Bocado listed as one of Atlanta's best new restaurants? Well, I believe it has already been listed on the AJC's best new restaurants!
