ReviewID: YHhH9h0GHoWbec4bAwzEtQ
ReviewerID: Ta3V5b98z48RaV3fmmlqrQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: The Foundry On Melrose
Category: American (New)
Straight up went here solely because of the Blackboard Eats coupon for 40% off, though I had been eyeballing this place for a long time and just didn't really feel up to experimenting on a place that was this pricey.. . It's funny, I completely agree with other reviewers that said that this place is mostly a 30+ crowd and indeed it was. I am positive we were the youngest people there (this made me happy). Not that this is a negative thing! It made for a subdued, grown-up atmosphere which I would next expect considering the rest of the area. . . The outdoor patio is charming and classy. Heat lamps make it even better and the servers are all very obliging and want to keep you happy (and warm on a chilly November night). I really liked how cozy and intimate the setting was but not overly pretentious. . . I was very interested in their absinthe drinks (never had it) and I had the "Madame Butterfly". I have nothing to base it on but it was strong so I was pleased. No hallucinations though, too bad (haha). . . On to the most important part: the food. We ordered off the tasting menu and had the three courses. I went with the potato soup, the monkfish and the chocolate brownie with ice cream. The way I described it, it all sounds rather plain but I assure you it was not. The soup was absolutely delicious. Rich and thick and a perfectly velvety texture and don't forget the bacon. BACON. When doesn't bacon make a dish better? The monkfish was divine. Flaky and perfectly cooked. First time I've had it and it was delicious. My boyfriend had the pork belly which was also delicious although it was a bit smaller as I don't think  it was meant to be a main course. The desserts, both the brownie and the pumpkin cheesecake were good but not as good as the other food. I liked the fun ice cream flavors (almond, graham cracker) but there was this odd topping on the cheesecake that was odd and unpleasant. . . It was overall a very nice experience. Excellent service, lovely atmosphere, and the food was very rich and I felt very full which is not always the case at nicer restaurants. I wish there were half stars on Yelp as I don't think it deserves a flat three but more of a 3.5. It was good but it didn't blow me away or anything.
