ReviewID: YhHNRO2PDRlwjT0li8XpPA
ReviewerID: qKVLocEUZUvceYXkiFX9BQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Top Flr
Category: American (New)
I've been interested in trying Top Fleur for a while now - mainly because it's right there where Papi's is but also because I just wanted to see if it lived up to the hype.  I kept my expectations low as I suspected Top Flair was going to be an all-style/no-substance type of place.        . . We had 5 minute wait for a group of 10 on a Saturday night. That's really not bad at all even though it was maybe 10pm or so.  We had a pretty big table down near the bar in the bottom level.  Décor - well, just look at the pictures.  It definitely had a hip/trendy vibe, but it wasn't too bad.    . . I was starving as it was a weird day where I actually hadn't had a meal yet (just toast!) so I ordered the tuna tartare flatbread and pork tenderloin.  I also split a mixed greens salad with my dining partner in crime and had a bite of the mac &amp; cheese.  . . The flatbread isn't a type of thing that I would normally order, but it just kinda jumped out at me from the menu as it sounded really good.  I was not disappointed.  The flatbread was very light and thin, but it had a tendency to fall apart pretty easily.  The tuna was good.  I think they were a little too heavy-handed with the sauces on it as it obscured the taste a little too much, but that may have just been mine.  Overall, it was a little difficult to eat, but very tasty.  I'd definitely get this again.    . . The pork tenderloin was very good as well.  It had a nice little sear to it and was pretty juicy, but it damn well better have been since Top Flour charges 13 bucks for it.  Quite good, but I thought it was a little too pricey. . . The mixed greens salad was good, but slightly odd.  It had goat cheese, pistachios, berries, and honey lavender dressing.  Everything tasted great, but - this is very weird - I got this taste of vanilla frosting from the salad!  It wasn't overwhelming, but there was something distinctive in there that really made me think of vanilla frosting.  I had some other people taste it as well and they all agreed.  I think it must have been the salad dressing - maybe they threw a little Duncan Hines in it or something.  Not a problem at all as it wasn't bad taste - just unexpected and slightly bizarre.  The m&amp;c was solid as well, but it came with spinach mixed in (it was not mentioned on the menu - it should be though).  That wasn't an issue for me since I like spinach, but I could see how it could be for someone else.      . . For dessert we split the chocolate caramel tart with olive oil ice cream.  The chocolate caramel filling and the ice cream were both good, but the tart crust was too thick and hard which made the dessert difficult to eat.  Something closer to the thinness of the flatbread would have been preferable (though a little thicker).  . . Also, the beer list is pretty tiny but at least it seems like they are trying.  . . All in all, Top Flyer was a pleasant surprise.  It was a lot better than I thought it was going to be.  Not many places offer that caliber of food that late so it is definitely a place I'd be happy to go back to.  The food was good enough to make me look forward to going back there again.        . . Oh, and apparently it is actually called Top FLOOR.  Whoops.. . 4
