ReviewID: YihNtmlZlf4_ZzBMEoxCNA
ReviewerID: pTBTemibLrNhoTejk4ZKZQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Rathbun&#39;s
Category: American (New)
This is simply a first impression, as I am fresh off my first experience with Rathbun.. . I went to Rathbun on a quest to order four desserts. I did not go with anyone else mind you, these treats were all mine. However, upon entering the space, I became so excited about the environment, and the non-dessert menu that I had to try one of the daily specials--lobster corn fritters. They were amazing. Creamy and crispy and the lobster was just the right flavor and texture, enough that you knew it was there but it didn't dominate the fritter. The fritters were served on a skinny rectangular plate in a savory sauce (of which I couldn't determine the ingredients other than the fact they were good together).. . Anyhow, let's get back to the desserts. As of right now, Rathbun's has a deal where you can order four desserts for $12.00, which is pretty outstanding, especially as they have a legitimate, talented pastry chef. From the nights menu, I chose the Banana Peanut Butter Cream Pie, Fired-to-Order Sugar Donut (with warm chunky peach jam and sweet cream, Mini Chocolate Cube (filled with Mexican Chocolate Mousse), and the daily Sorbet selection (this day's being lemon sorbet with a pineapple confit of sorts). The PB Banana cream pie was fantastic. At once creamy and sweetly peanut-buttery, with the whole pieces of banana centering the dessert quite well and keeping it from being cloyingly sweet. The sugar donut almost seems like it doesn't need justification for how delicious it was--but I'll give it anyway. The donut was light and crispy on the outside, with the sweet cream and peach jam melting in the center and in my mouth. The sorbet was perfect, as good a lemon sorbet as I've ever had, smooth and tangy with the added benefit of the pineapple and was served with an almost paper thin cracker made with a seed I cannot recall at the moment (that made this the most interesting and perhaps best executed dessert second to the cream pie.) And I saved the Chocolate Cube for last, not wanting to ruin myself by eating the chocolate first. I have had mixed experiences with people trying to make Mexican chocolate. Rathbun's pastry chef did it justice, and more. It was quite nicely spiced, almost reminding me of eating habanero chocolate at a patisserie in Portland. However, it was just spicy enough, the mousse being sweet and creamy with a perfectly square dark chocolate casing with a raspberry and raspberry sauce drizzled artfully on top. . . I was thoroughly impressed by everything I tried this particular evening. I'll definitely be back with more of an appetite so I can get through more of their menu and perhaps try four new desserts!
