ReviewID: yizklL5nGnClYBjibvlf3g
ReviewerID: ILvXe0EWKAH45eyUUxlv0g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
First of all.. there's a sign on the door that says "New location opened in Monterey Park. (111 N. Atlantic Blvd Ste 241, Monterey Park, CA)". . In addition there are two more locations. 1) 2975 Harbor Blvd, Costa Mesa, CA 92626 and 2) 15827 E. Gale Ave, Hacienda Heights, CA 91745. . Also, they are No longer taking to-go orders.. . Anyway, I went here with Frank M this weekend since we were in the area.  It had just started raining, and it was already dinner time.  Perfect for ramen! . . We get there, and there's a sign in sheet on the other side of the door, on a little chair.  There are about 3 or 4 groups ahead of us. We waited around for 10-15 minutes before being called.  Niceee.  We also got one of the booths instead of the counters. :). . I got the combination Daikoku Ramen with a small bowl of Pork Cutlet bowl. $11.50 (Also comes with a salad).  The salad was yummy.  Although It might be because there is mayonnaise in it.  Not sure.  A few minutes later, the small bowl of Pork Cutlet comes out.  It's pretty good.  I thought about getting the Shredded Pork, but got the Pork Cutlet instead.  . . I think it's a pretty good deal considering Daikoku Ramen is already $8.50!  You only pay $3 more for the extra bowl.  . . The ramen came out last.  It was delicious.  I've never had any other ramen before except for Cup O Noodles Ramen.. so I guess I'd have to say that this is the best Ramen I've ever had.  (But it doesn't mean much).  Also, these bowls are HUGE.  The bowls are about the size of a salad bowl. . . I didn't finish half of all the food brought out, so I took the ramen and Pork Cutlet bowl to-go.  Once at home, I got hungry again and had some more of the Ramen.  It tasted even better at home.  Although.. I left it in the fridge, and the soup solidified.  Not sure if it's because of all the fat that's in it.. I'd rather not think about it. ;) . . Anyway, the food was good.  The place is a little dirty.. and small, but I would probably go back here.
