ReviewID: yj4_2JGT6cd23-P55dbNqQ
ReviewerID: bvEpYG5DOIej0d3fdwt_Tg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Gastropubs
Man oh man this place serves a good burger. There are other things on the menu but I'm sticking to the burger review. . . Let me qualify that I was not in review mode when I bit into this juicy bit of heaven so I don't have much of a perspective as to the quality of meat, with the exception that I loved the taste, so it couldn't have been bad ... right?. It was a firm burger that held it's shape even though cooked to medium rare. I like that as it means not an overly fatty burger, yet it was moist and juicy, meaning not an overly low fat burger. If I'm eating for health I'm not eating a burger know what I mean.. . Moving on to the burger as a whole. I had the Port and Stilton Burger: blue cheese and port-carmelized onions. It had just the right amount of caramelized onions and cheese so as not to overpower the burger, but nicely accessorize it. I should have asked about the bun because I really liked it, however rumor has it they wouldn't tell me and they outsource it. All I can gather is that they are Portuguese style buns, if you know what this means wright me, cause they were another good accessory. . . Granted this was my first date with Umami so I need more data to really give this five stars, but so far we are off to a good start. We kissed.. . I also like to do a little contrast and comparison so;  My other favorite burger in LA is Fathers Office in Santa Monica. Different concepts here.  Fathers Office is a more complex burger, has a little more going on, it's busy, Umami is a bit more basic, in this case two ingredients a bun and some meat. I appreciate that. Simple is good. . . Umami burger is also easy to get in and out of. No wait, plenty of seating, nice outdoor patio, good energy, and a full bar if I was up for it. . . I say, Go there, check it out. It's good stuff!. . By the way, I am a ketchup man when it comes to burgers, didn't use it!
