ReviewID: yJaFAc0xQt9hbaABGJw78A
ReviewerID: iZtCaAnbgGnEdZSypaD_hQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
Yes, this is the El Tepeyac that is featured on "Man vs. Food" as well as the Travel Channel's "101 Tastiest Places to Chowdown" (#23). It's also an LA institution, having been around for 55 years and if you live anywhere in the LA area, it is something that must be tried. True, there are other fine Mexican restaurants that have similarly amazing and delicious food but I dare you to try and find another establishment that serves baby-sized burritos. And no, I don't mean that there petite and cute, containing the inexplicably charm of "silver-dollar pancakes." I mean that they are the size of a healthy, chubby baby. In fact, it is wasn't for the pounds of cheese and enchilada sauce, I probably would have mistaken the giant tortilla for swaddling cloths.. . The place has an always-filled parking lot but there is a quick turnaround so you can usually find a spot within a minute or so. There is also always a line to get in. Unless the weather is terrible (rare in this part of the world), or unless you would prefer the convenient way they serve extra plates and the burrito at the center of the table with a knife (needed due to the aforementioned burrito massiveness), I would suggest ordering at the outside window which has a much quicker turnaround. You can snag a table on the outside patio, or get the food to go -- which sometimes isn't a bad idea as several of the patrons appear to be regulars that are a little too regular and appear to take on some of the massive qualities of the burrito.. . I usually opt for either of their classic burritos, the Hollenbeck (served with chunkier salsa and a little drier) or the Okie (served drowned in a sea of enchilada sauce). Everything appeared to be good though -- including the guacamole and chips which make a great side to share. Keep in mind that all of the portions are enormous and you can either get something for yourself and eat it for your next four meals, or you can share between about three people. Similar with the guacamole -- they give you enough to ballast a ship and a half-portion is large enough to share between a good sized group.. . Viva El Tepeyac!
