ReviewID: yjka89S5c-hD7SggD5aBaA
ReviewerID: vOuE-XbCbgXfdbvxNCiRDg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Osteria Mozza
Category: Italian
For the prices they charge, you would think the food was great and service would be stellar but that just wasn't the case. . . I wanted to try this restaurant because I'm a big fan of Mario Batali so I decided to check this place out  for my B-day. Well, I must say the evening seemed promising after trying the octopus appetizer but things quickly went down hill as we tried the pasta dishes and the duck. The egg ravioli was waaaaay too rich for me and the Tagliatelle was nothing to write home about. Even the duck that I read rave reviews about was disappointing..it was just waaaaay too salty. After taking only a few bites I drank all my water (which never got refilled during our meal). . . Our waitress, who I've decided not to call out by name but i will say she has blonde hair, was quick to take our order and was nice enough to make a few recommendations. She checked on us once after we got our appetizers but was no where to be found when our pasta dish or duck came. I understand if you're busy and you're trying your best to tend to all your tables but when I see you checking on the table of four in front of me 4 times through out my meal (and i see you filling their water glasses) while you only bother to come by my table only once I think that's complete BS. . . After our table was cleared I wanted to order dessert ..so I waited and waited until i was able to make some eye contact with the waitress. When she came over to our table she just handed me the menu and left without saying one word. No, "I'm sorry for the wait" or "how did you like your dinner" or "hey, i noticed your glass of iced tea has been empty for awhile now why don't I refill that for you".....nothing. . . What I found even more irritating was after she filled the water glasses for the table in front of us for the second time she came over to us and filled my BF's glass and only half of mine then handed us the bill. . . I would dine at Olive Garden any day then come back here. . . Oh yeah, I did have a star sighting here. We were seated a couple tables from Lucy Liu but even that was not enough to distract us from the awful service.
