ReviewID: ykCQVcIn5dI6cFCqmOw9cA
ReviewerID: yYEIePWZlDWuHWxUlir_oQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
3 times I've stepped up to the Special 2 Challenge and only once have I walked away victorious.. . What's sad? My only victory came at my first attempt.. . Translation? I was stupid enough to try it 2 more times even though I've already done it once. And each time got worse and worse.. . Stupidity? Definitely. Who is at fault? 100% me. But that's not the reason Orochon gets 2-stars.. . The staff? Pretty friendly. The bathroom? Small and gives you a disgusting feeling when you walk in. It's cramped and musty - bleghck~!. . The food? For the bits of it that I actually tasted before melting my face off, it seemed like nothing special. I'm not quite sure the noodles could qualify as ramen, as they tasted and felt like .. well.. regular noodles. The quality of ingredients doesn't seem anything out of this world either.. . The upside? They give you A LOT of food. The bowls are very big and the food is quite generous. But honestly? If the food is bad or not that great, what makes you think that giving me a boatload of it would change my mind? It's just that much more mediocre to crappy food.. . Everytime that I've been here, there hasn't been a wait, yet the place was moderately packed. . . Overall: For less than $10, you get a big bowl of mediocrity. If you're going to spend $10 on noodles in Little Tokyo, you have much better options, like Chin-Ma-Ya just underneath on the 2nd floor of Weller Court, or take yourself a few blocks away to Daikokuya. Either way, there are better offerings for 'ramen'.. . Special 2 Challenge verdict: I will never EVER EVER try it again. Why? I puked it all up my 3rd time around. Yes, I'm sorry for those that get disturbed easily, but I chucked that spicyness all up. I went in with a 1/2 full stomach and the sheer quantity of the soup and noodles did not sit well with me. . . That spicyness canNOT be healthy. I feel it literally burning in my gut. Definitely one of THE WORST feelings ever.. . I thank Daniel L, Ken C, Michelle T, 'the dude', and Lei B for cheering me on and holding me up when I was absolutely collapsing. You guys are awesome ;0)
