ReviewID: YKIQoXTS_adsT16gK7u_5Q
ReviewerID: nH2JIFnyU_mrfHtaxxNatw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gato Bizco Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Lesbians know their eggs. Don't believe me? Then hustle down to Candler Park and experience what I feel is the grandest breakfast in town, delivered with a side order of FIERCENESS. As a regular customer for many moons, I can state emphatically that Gato Bizco has never dropped the ball. Oh, occasionally one of their younger, shaky dog servers will allow the hot water for my tea to run out, but I'm not here to nit-pick. Let's walk through my last visit.. . A new paramour, Mr. G, insisted we flee the duplex last weekend. I'd been refinishing patio furniture, and with all the rain, I had to move the noxious objects inside. It smelled like gasoline mixed with embalming fluid (and my huffing days are OVER!) Mr. G. craved a hearty breakfast and I knew just the place.. . Located in Candler Park, Gato Bizco serves as culinary stepsister to the Flying Biscuit, which stares smugly from across the street. The wait for a table inside the Flying Biscuit borders on masochistic; it reminds of huddled Russians lining up for bread before Glasnost. Breakfast at the Flying Biscuit is fine, but merely fine. Were I to spend an hour waiting for ANYTHING there damned well better be singing animatronic creatures at the end of it.. . Mr. G. and I spent only ten minutes lamenting the suckers across the street before being shown our table. The inside is simplicity itself: four booths, six stools, and a wide array of feline portraiture. It truly is a greasy spoon, which may keep some folks settling for the comparatively Crayola setting of the Flying Biscuit. . . As always, tattooed lovelies - riot grrrls with eyes of steel and hearts of gold - fielded our order and fixed our food. I had their simple egg and cheese sandwich served on a biscuit with a side of cheese grits. Here I must stress: Gato's biscuits FAR outshine those vaunted puffs across the street. Each is an adventure in over-sized flakiness (look who's TALKING!), squashing their squat, yellow, plain-jane competition like so many grapes. The softly scrambled eggs were cooked perfectly with a generous helping of cheese.The grits were creamy catnip, topped with shredded cheddar and jack, the perfect mix.. . Mr. G feasted on the Sweet Potato Pancakes, a decedent platter doused in gooey syrup and gobs of butter with a side of Sausage. I couldn't help my fork from thieving from his plate repeatedly. Such a breakfast probably requires a shot of Lipitor afterward, but then Gato delivers such comforting delights, why NOT play Russian Roulette with my LDL levels? . . Mr G. and I continued the day with a Target run feeling completely sated. The duplex may have reeked of death, but with a staunch breakfast and stirring company, the morning couldn't have been brighter.
