ReviewID: yKphwsDzdG3crtoXYdbyBQ
ReviewerID: QtFzBbw_FAIJsv6XNVARXw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Zed451
Category: Steakhouses
Went to Zed for brunch recently and it was.. OK.  The setting for the restaurant is indeed unique for a downtown joint.  It's part ski lodge, part W Hotel lounge, part poserhole.. . I could certainly grasp more completely the reasoning for many of the reviewers on here giving negative reviews.  It wasn't hard to picture a horde or unfortunate metrosexuals swarming on the place (like they do the W Hotel lounge near you) to compete for most popped collar or gayest outfit on a straight man.. . Second place to the ambience is the food.  The dishes were more miss than hit, I think.  Because the dudes w/the mega meatmissiles were either swarming you all at once or taking 20 minute breaks in between "Kielbasa, folks?" rounds, we ate more from the 'harvest tables' than anything.  Those dishes were bleh and felt like the kind of food you'd get at a party with a mediocre caterer or a formal dinner on a cruise ship.  The desserts were mostly without much taste so a bite of each of the mini servings was taken and the rest discarded  The creme brulee was actually liquid..  The cold salads were good, but hardly worth the price of admission.  The crabcake benedict was the best highlight of the day and the only food that really felt like it belonged on a brunch menu. . . I don't know that the formula is quite right for brunch - I think it would make more sense as a dinner restaurant, so i'm giving it 3 stars vs. the 2 I feel it deserves.. . I would add that the current state of the economy makes most of us feel like the douches we've been for the last few years, going to restaurants and bars because of what we think our going there says about us vs. actually having an enjoyable meal/experience with friends.  Being a low-key type who is more comfortable in jeans and a tshirt that allow me room to breathe AND eat a shrimp skewer on occasion, it felt disingenuous to be there.  Next time I'll go for a warmer ambience and a more consistent menu and toss the "What will people think when I say I ate there?" notion.
