ReviewID: ykqVUd8Y9b-mQZXAWs8spQ
ReviewerID: 2nKm_urHROBCbWvbYrZqEQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Devon Seafood Grill
Category: Seafood
The lady and I came here a few weeks ago and left prior to even ordering any food.  The manager was kind enough to extend his apologizes for our experience and that is what brought us back.  Sadly, that is probably the last time we go back unless it is for their Thursday $10 lobster specials and  1/2 price appetizers.  I don't mind dropping cash on a good meal but I really don't like spend money on substandard food and that is pretty much what is going on here.. . We sat upstairs in one of the booths towards the back and it was a comfortable, intimate experiences.  The music upstairs is much more contemporary then the Nuevo-jazz they have going on downstairs.  Our waiter and service was friendly but definitely not on par with other similar establishments around the city.  When you are charging $30+ a plate there is a certain level of service expected, like asking if you would like fresh pepper on your Caesar salad or stopping by to refill our wine glasses.  I don't want to sound like a d*ck or anything but that sort of $hit needs to happen if you are attempting to be a certain type of restaurant.  . . So the mussel appetizer we got was o.k. but I don't like that I can taste the parsley in the sauce.  We also got a Caesar that was average for sure.  After leaving the first time we tried to come in a few weeks ago, we walked about 4 blocks down to Blue Water Grill, I would suggest doing that as well.  Better food, better service, friendly environment and far superior dessert.. . The lady got the mixed seafood grill that was extremely ordinary.  I got a Mahi Mahi Special, so you would assume it was going to be one of the best offerings on the menu.  If that is case, they are in serious trouble.  I know it was Saturday night after thanksgiving but the fish didn't seem fresh, although it was decent.  The bacon, corn slaw that the fish was presented with was mandatory to even make it edible.  The fixin's are always nice but the fish should stand alone, especially at a seafood place.. . All and all I think I would stick to the $10 Thursday lobster specials if we ever go back.  . . Devon, think we are movin' on.. . RrL
