ReviewID: ylDr_EO0hJ-WJDcAHbqsGw
ReviewerID: dUupCXinYWCZUu2v2vmRHg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Cafe di Sol
Category: American (New)
I visited Cafe di Sol fr the first time tonight. The decor of the restaurant is chic and cozy. The left side of the room has about 20 tables, the right side has a bar that seats about 15. There are 2 couches with coffee tables that look like they'd be great to enjoy a drink at. The floor and tables are wood and there are red candles on each table, which makes the ambiance almost rustic. . We were seated quickly and ordered drinks. They have a pretty decent selection of beers on tap. On Mondays, they have BOGO burgers. I had the Turkey Burger and my friend had the Andy Burger. The turkey burger was absolutely fantastic. Easily one of the best turkey burgers I've ever had. It came on pumpernickle bread, which had a great flavor, but got very soggy by the end of the meal...there's a reason burgers aren't served on sliced bread!! The turkey burger came with cranberry mayo, which I got on the side-- let's just say I'm lucky I had them put it on the side. The mayo was aaaaawful. I tried it  and it was gritty (how do you even make mayo gritty??); my friend tried it and said it tasted like band-aids (and now that I think of it, he was right). The turkey burger came with homemade white and sweet potato chips which were very tasty. My friend had a burger with fries. He said it's the best burger he's had in a while, and the only burger he's ever had that was better was at Five Guys. Pretty impressive! He devoured all of his fries quickly, which is impressive considering the portion size! They're thin cut and crisp, but not burnt. . I've read some bad reviews of the service on Yelp, but I didn't experience that at all! Our server was very attentive and timely. . The restaurant was maybe 1/3-1/2 full when I got there (at 7pm on a Monday), but by the time we left (around 8:30) there was a wait! . There was plenty of parking behind Soul Veg and Pura Vida (right next door). . I'll absolutely be back! I'd like to try it out for brunch. They also have a late-night menu from 11pm-2am.
