ReviewID: Yln0yVYtTn-_Ds4LhSFFBw
ReviewerID: 2ALy0Qjcv_J285NGRT_nZg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Lawry&#39;s The Prime Rib
Category: Steakhouses
Another reason to be jealous of Socal - traditionally serviced prime rib with traditional service. My sisters and I grew up on Lawry's since barely had teeth to chomp down the meat.. . Now that I am an old fart, this place is more of a tourist place than for a good dining experience. Notice I didn't say overrated as Lawry's will never be. But nonetheless, whenever I come back, I am never tired of the same stuff they have been offering for years. The spinning salad never ceases to impress. Although it comes with mashed potatoes, I always make sure to get a side of creamed spinach and manage to permanently borrow another diner's creamed corn.. . You can order other stuff if you don't like prime rib. The lobsters are pretty decent - you get three tails with a side of taters and veggies. I managed to permanently borrow a lobster from my mom also.. . Even at peak times, service is still good. I had my college graduation party once here and a little over 12 people, our waitress did an excellent job.. . The hot fudge sundae is a must. There's nothing special about it but when you've grown up with this, it's very special. The side of crushed nuts that you pour yourself makes it special as well.. . Reservations people. Why don't these locals and tourists ever make reservations? Whenever I come through the door, I see these people sitting down who look like they have been there for at least 45 minutes and have that look on their face that the world is going to end. You should be able to make reservations, drop off your car to the valet (don't park it yourself in the garage), walk to the hostess, and be seated instantly or within 5 minutes. If you wait, time shouldn't pass by in which you have enough time to sample their hor' dourves or to get a drink. Make reservations at least a week in advance for non-holiday occasions.. . If you're a tourist reading this review, pick up your phone and make a reservation now.
