ReviewID: yM4u8qD_ZsTjdXiU6eCcQA
ReviewerID: 0h5hqAs8rpM9C7PGf8y00Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: sola
Category: American (New)
Sola does it again. It was sunday, so of course that means brunch! We were heading to Tallulah because D wanted their mascarpone pancakes, but they were closed for some reason. So since we were in the same hood,  I suggested Sola because the others in the group hadn't been and believe me they were thrilled that I did.. . They were much busier than they had expect, but the service was still great. Our waiter was Dale from Top Chef and I thought it was him when he first came by and then K confirmed that it was him, but we didn't say anything at first. . . All the food was excellent, I got the Chiliaquiles again but this time with some chroizo, nice touch. K got the same thing but was a little disappointed that the tortillas weren't actually chips but cut into smaller pieces. So for you fans of Chiliaquiles, just be warned. C got the crabcakes and said they were really good too, but that lead to a 15 minute discussion about what time of the day one should eat seafood. . . But let me move on to the real treat of the meal......since we had four people and no one really wants just pancakes for brunch, we were able to get the banana macadamia nuts for the table after our regular brunch items were done. Incredible!!!  Its one of those things that you just want a few bites of, so having the extra people to split them with was key. For those of your that don't get dessert at brunch, don't knock it till you've tried it. . . Being Sunday, we ventured out a bit on the drink menu. C and I got the bloody marys with the beer chaser, I know classy but still good. K and D got some fruity mango champagne drink. I think they were pretty good, but a little sweet. There was one drink really intrigued the table....the "sneaky pete"!  So being the daring one I order one of those and everyone liked it but having a bartender with us we decided we could make it better. We changed out the spirit for just soda water and that didn't quite work and then figured out that the best combo was half sprite and half soda. So if you get the sneaky pete, go with the half soda half sprite combo.. . So by this time, meaning our 3rd round, Dale makes the comment "I want to have brunch with you guys". K figured this was her opening to ask some top chef questions. Once we confirmed that it was him, he gave us some really cool insight into the behind the scenes stuff about top chef, really cool treat to end a great meal.
