ReviewID: YmBAPyjvpqxgW5k_ULRFXg
ReviewerID: epcif7RR45Erfp7gZ8uhQQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
There's a reason I'm the "mayor" of this establishment on 4-square. I love sweets, I love ice cream and I love that it's in close proximity to my work and home. But let's be real here, it's not just ice cream people, there's a plethora of delicious fresh unique baked goods and if mommy wants you to finish your dinner before your dessert, they give you the option to do so with their delicious crispy skin chicken, home made mac and cheese or hot pressed panini sandwiches. . . Speaking of sandwiches, the main reason I come here, and I shit you not is literally almost always for their ice cream sandwiches. Have you ever had an ice cream sandwich that used a macaroon cookie as their tasty sandwich outer shell? ok think about it and then pour chocolate on that... wait did I tell you that the inside could also be mint and chip ice cream. Ok now you're listening. Yep, thee actual best ice cream sandwich I've ever had (btw, that particular one is called the grasshopper ;-) ). . So why not the 5 star rating? Well two reasons, I wish their set up was a bit roomier with more of a diner atmosphere but whatevs, if you're just getting an ice cream sandwich I guess, and 2 their staff is literally off some nights, and I mean liked checked out didn't get your order right at all. How can you mess up an ice cream sandwich though karri? I know right? just ask the cashier who hands you a milk shake instead of just that. I don't get it... I actually asked them and sorry if this sounds rude... "Do we have a communication barrier?" "How can I make sure I don't have to wait another 15 min. for you to get it right?" "Why do you repeatedly over charge me when I order 1-2 things?" . . They of course never have an answer for me and my guess is they probably hate me, but I come here so much that it boggles my mind. It's not always like this, but 90% of the time I always have an issue. I mean come on, it's just ice cream kids, just be sweet :-)
