ReviewID: ymCsq99-TGupzlfBmGNefA
ReviewerID: gpcHaHjlsRkcgw9modE0PA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Cafe 28
Category: Cuban
After narrowing down my choices for my birthday dinner to four spots, the Yelpers voted and Cafe 28 won by a landslide.. . We walked into the restaurant around 6:00 tonight and were seated immediately by the bartender. He let us choose our table, and I selected a table by the window. As we walked through the restaurant I noticed a fairly strong musty smell that put a damper on my appetite for a bit--I had been hoping to smell delicious food!. . Our server took a while to get over to us and I ordered a mojito after reading the rave reviews. I don't know if the bartender was having an off night, but this mojito tasted like a glass of club soda. I could tell by both the taste and appearance that neither the mint nor the limes had been muddled at all, but rather just tossed into the glass. Such a disappointment and a waste of $9!. . We ordered the coconut shrimp appetizer, which was very good. We were pleasantly surprised by the fact that the shrimp was not breaded. The curry rice that accompanied the shrimp was waaaay too heavy on the curry (this is coming from a half-Pakistani gal, mind you). I love rice but didn't eat too much of this particular rice. . . After much waiting for our server to come back, we were able to order our entrees. I had the almond crusted halibut. This was the thickest chunk of fish I've ever seen and I was impressed by how well it was cooked. Aside from that, the fish was lacking in flavor and the 'crust' might as well not have been there because it added no texture or taste. The jalapeno mashed potatoes were good but overpowered what little flavor the fish had, and weren't as spicy as I'd expected. My friend had the special, pollo relleno, which was very flavorful and tender. I was jealous!. . For dessert, we had the flan and the baked chocolate pudding. Not being a huge chocolate person, I didn't fall in love with the pudding. The flan, however, was the best I've ever had!. . Our server brought us the check and my friend placed her credit card in the holder almost immediately. It took our server nearly 15 minutes to come back to pick it up, and at this point we were her only table. She was very nice throughout our meal but her timing was less than stellar. . . There were also two fruit flies hovering around our table periodically throughout our meal--gross! And I swear, I showered right before dinner.. . I really wanted to love Cafe 28 and while the food was good, it certainly didn't blow me away (aside from the flan). The atmosphere was cozy and the service was friendly, though slow and somewhat inattentive. And I don't even know what to say about the flies.. . I hope they were just having an off night and will definitely be giving Cafe 28 a second chance!
