ReviewID: yMO5Y6K_HPL5aPgVQzI2hw
ReviewerID: 9CPjldVBiMLPEkggSUzOpQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Umami Burger
Category: Burgers
Holy hipsters batman. I felt like I was at Loz Feliz Village or Sunset Junction!. . We showed up for dinner for two at about 9:10pm Saturday. The waiters and busers were overwhelmed by a full house and a short line. We gave our name then sat at an outside cafe table and watched the middle-aged Latinos and Koreans coming-and-going from their nightclub and restaurants, respectively. There was no service at the three outdoor seats. There was also no service at this indoor wall of counter-style seats - I wondered if they were short-staffed... but didn't ask about it.. . We later moved around to near the front of the line when we noticed the right number of tables had cleared to put us at the top of the list. That's when the list dude realized we weren't on it. He seated us next. Thanks list dude! (All the staff were friendly.) The place *smells* heavenly.. . We brought our own wine and weren't told of the $5 corkage but didn't care too much. Of course it was twist-top that we opened ourselves. And my glass was dirty on the outside. I noticed some people got plastic cups and others got glasses. Our glasses were hot from the washer and we waited till they reached room temp before pouring our chilled white. I'm guessing the kitchen was a bit overwhelmed too.... . We ordered the stilton burger and the umami burger, plus onion rings. The burgers were *slightly* too salty. Not like when you eat and at first the item seems very flavorful and later you realize that the heavy salt makes it un-finishable. Thank goodness, because we cleaned our plates! These were definitely fork-and knife burgers as the buns seemed about as supportive as a sheet of paper.. . The onion rings (I think there were 8, including two tiny ones, for $2.50) had been lightly salted after being removed from the fryer. I couldn't tell if that was great or good. It was one or the other.. . When we left the restaurant around 10:30pm our bottle of wine was empty and we were the last to leave. The people behind us in line must have eaten fast! All in all, a great addition to the already fantastic LA burger scene.. . $16ish out the door. These days In-n-Out is $7.50 for burger, animal fries, and a medium drink. So $9 for a fantastic burger and $1.25 each for shared onion rings, and $2.50 each for shared corkage fee, plus tax and $3 each for tip seemed quite alright.. . I'll definitely go back to try the pork burger and sweet potato chips.
