ReviewID: Ymr3ArrnUweontnW44-kEA
ReviewerID: eBWjilI-PhVpTmTOAZfPTg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Casa Bianca Pizza Pie
Category: Pizza
Absolutely without question the best pizza I've ever had. I've stood by this and now I will change my review and offer it in an all-you-need-to-know-guide-form-or-uh-something.... . Waiting:. People are complaining about the wait but that's what happens when you combine a small family run business with absolutely amazing pizza. If the food wasn't good the wait would be non-existant! It's simple math. It's definitely worth the wait but if you're impatient get some drinks at The Chalet half a block up the street and come back down when your estimated time is up! Also, expect to wait for your food once you order as the pizza is made fresh. Weekdays close to opening and close to closing are the best time to go and avoid the weekend nights unless you really want to make a night of it. I think they're closed Sunday and Monday. . . Take-out:. If you want the pizza without the wait you're allowed to call ahead your order and pick up your food. Take it to your favorite make out point and make out with your pizza! But don't play any pizza games because that'd be a waste! Well... nevermind.. . First timers:. If you're going to try the pizza (and you best be, yo!) get the Eggplant Parmigiana because its absolutely the best! Despite the fact eggplant in general grosses me out it's still yum there! You have to pay for soda refills so just go the beer/cheap wine route. Make sure to bring cash but it's okay if you forget because they got one of those machines in the back where you put your arm in it and it gives you $20.. . Cheats, Codes and Secrets:. Oh and here is kind of a local secret since they don't take reservations... call ahead on the way in and ask how long the wait is... in your best sexy voice pretend you don't know what's going on and ask, "can you put my name down for 2?" and they MAY do it shortening your wait! But if they refuse to, don't say, "oh, uhhh, this dude on yelp said I could!", because I'm telling you now that it doesn't work... not. Sometimes. What?
