ReviewID: YnRHAs31yEoiUKUsJnywPQ
ReviewerID: 9eG2axSfO9aynLbGcg2Bcw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
After sooo many years of eating out in LA, from the ghetto hole in the walls to super duper fine dining, I have concluded that Pizzeria Mozza is my favorite restaurant in LA. . . Wow. That is a strong declaration. That's OK, because I really really love this place!. . It's trendy yet homey. Elitist yet not pretentious and oh so obtainable. Pizzeria Mozza takes you as you are - I've shown up with or without a reservation, in gym clothes or going out clothes. Plus it doesn't hurt the wallet. Most importantly, it is OMFG delicious. For a long time, whenever anyone asked where I wanted to eat, a little voice inside of me always said "Mozza Mozza Mozza". Everyone and anyone - if they wanted Mozza, I'm there. . . Honestly, my favorite dish at Mozza isn't a pizza dish. Don't get me wrong. Their pizzas are the best gourmet pizzas in LA. They are simply heaven on dough.. . BUT my favorite dish is their caprese salad. Namely the warm, juicy, sweet, over-roasted cherry tomatoes on their caprese salad. I've tried to bribe the pizza makers, waiters, hostesses, and bus boys on how to make these at home... but all I got was that they reject about 95% of cherry tomatoes from their supplier and that they're oven roasted. I tried and tried to duplicate these suckers with failure. I guess kids nowadays will call it epic fail. So I will keep on paying 50c each to get them on the side since the ones on the caprese salad aren't enough to satiate my cravings. If you know how to make the perfect oven roasted tomatoes from Mozza, gimme a holla. Please. Pretty please. With a cherry tomato on the top ;). . . Now that I've officially solicited recipes for oven roasted cherry tomatoes, let me tell you what is their best heaven on dough pizza. Every pie lover knows that the ultimate judge to a great pie is the cheese slice. No add ons. Just tomato sauce, mozzarella, and basil (or not but Mozza adds basil). The margherita pizza is indeed superb at Mozza. My other favorite is the mushroom pizza - lots of different types of mushrooms, all simply divine. . . To top off this fabulous meal, I always have to get the butterscotch budino. This is heaven in a cup and every dieter's nightmare but you only live once so enjoy. Butterscotch cream pudding topped with fresh cream... I think I'm going to give the nice people at Mozza a call right now and book my next reservation.
