ReviewID: YNVZzr1ncAScugB4PRzwsw
ReviewerID: AftptehJiiIQS7WcydzmTQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
I came here for lunch with some of my co-workers and was surprised to find such an establishment just on the outskirts of Little Tokyo. For those of you who like OBEY or Shepard Fairey, there is a giant mural right across the street from this place. When I arrived after taking the DASH bus, the large wooden sliding doors remind you of a large barn or maybe the entrance to some night club. Lucky for our group there wasn't much of a line and we were able to place our orders pretty fast. . . I ordered something simple and decided to go with the regular bratwurst topped with grilled onions and grilled peppers. Every bite had an small explosion of oil and flavor. Although their sausages are a bit pricey, the quality is definitely well worth it. I've never tasted a brat or sausage that had so much flavor and that was so juicy. I definitely liked the different kinds of mustard and other toppings for your sausages. I remembered there was one that tasted a little Grey Poupon that I really liked. I don't really quite remember everything, so I'll have to make a trip out there probably this weekend. Unfortunately I didn't get to try any of their beers since I had to go back to work. I definitely give them two thumbs up for their wide selection of German and Belgian beers. It's nice to see an establishment with more than just Stella Artois on their beer menu. . . I also like the very modern yet chic decor of the place. Bare concrete floors with uncovered brick and stainless accents such as the beer taps. I like how the interior design is very European and almost has an Swedish Ikea feel to it. The solid wood benches reminds me a little of a German beer hall and wide open rear that has A LOT more seating. Definitely extra points in my book for the chill ambient house music that was playing that day. =). . Final Thoughts:. I'm definitely glad I was introduced to this place by my coworkers and for anyone who is thinking of trying this place, you should just go try it out. Be sure to get the full experience though (sausage, fries, and a cup or goblet of beer). The fare here is a little bit more pricey, but well worth the money spent. =). . Too many tofu eating, free hugging, Green Peace Vegans and Vegetarians complain a little too much. I'm j/k
