ReviewID: YOQN1MRzXYtsIWAuZlrF_Q
ReviewerID: NvabyMZ6o7fUGRSeCCuqqA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Kogi
Category: Food Stands
Finally was able to track down one of the Kogi trucks in Eagle Rock.  The line was almost unbearably long.. . The wait took about an hour and once I got to the front of the line the guy taking orders asked me to wait presumably so he could run inside of the gas station that the truck was parked in front of to use their credit card processing machine.  Yeah so they take credit cards at some locations apparently.  (Food trucks are supposed to be cash only. :-/ ). . I ordered one of the korean short rib breakfast burritos, one of the special chili lime short rib spam burgers, and a chocolate de leche desert.. . The Spam burger thing is absolutely amazing.  It comes with a coconut lime spread, grilled onions, grilled mushrooms, korean short rib, and spam.  I was a little skeptical on whether this it was going to taste good.  There's alot going on in there.  But it is very tasty.  The coconut is not overpower and adds a slight sweet coconut flavor.  The spam is cooked to perfection as is the bun (nice and toasty).. . I honestly did not like the short rib burrito.  The main thing that bothered me was the kimchi.  It's not your normal garden variety napa cabbage kimchi.  Instead it's a less salty and spicy greener variety that is shredded into small pieces.  It's the same stuff they put on their tacos.  There's ALOT of eggs inside the burrito, and they end up tasting like whatever meat you put inside.  I felt that my burrito was sickly sweet.  The potatoes inside were almost absent.  I would have expect some crispy has browns but they were scare and soggy.. . The desert is good to.. . I'll go back but not that soon.  Kogi deserves some credit in that their cuisine doesn't suffer the same fate of most fusion cuisine which is to become non-desrcript culinary nightmare.. . It is a lot of trouble to track down the truck even with the twitter feed, and the line is ridiculous.  Maybe goto the Alibi room instead and have some beer.
