ReviewID: yp3zLXEswZRxyi2NtcC-xQ
ReviewerID: wighYKlVI44uNaIIj-ROKw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Little Door
Category: French
Who knew last year I would stop venturing beyond a 1mi radius of my home?  I know, I know, I really need to go beyond the invisible borders I've recently created lest it gets worse, the borders smaller and I end up a recluse never leaving my home at all.  . . Ok. Yes, I am a drama queen at times.  Anywho, I loved this place when it first opened and I still love it today and tis the reason why I shall review it one more time.  Thank goodness it's a stone throw away from home.  . . Being the creature of habit I am, I usually always start with the butternut squash soup.  I find the creamy texture with subtle hint of spice comforting on chilly, fall evenings but since it's been unusually warm for this time of year, I opted for a salad, the Arugula, Bartlett Pear with Roquefort Cheese and Candied Walnuts in a Walnut Vinagrette dressing.  Both the arugula and the pear were served so cold, any colder they would have been frozen (I hate warm salads).  Dressing - light and tangy, yet sweet.     . . Once again, the Fillet Mignon.My favorite.  What a delightful combination of flavors.    Only recently becoming a meat eater, I don't f$*#k around with different cuts or variety or quality or else I'll get something funky and it's back to being a vegetarian again.   . . We finished with an Assorted Cheese Plate with Toasted Walnut Bread.  I'll be honest, I am not fond of the toasted walnut bread and there was so much cheese... which is not a bad thing.... but should have gotten the Creme Brulee.  . . Dining on the patio with the sound of the fountain and the twinkling lights makes me happy.  I wish I could marry this place...    . . If you're not into a serious sit down dinner but are looking for ambiance, I would suggest finding a seat at the bar (if you can, there's not a lot of room and can get a little crowded).  It's fun to have a drink and a snack at the bar, too. There are definitely some interesting characters hanging out.  . . By the way, it really hasn't changed much that I can tell.  Except maybe the $.  But then again, EVERYTHING has gone up, hasn't it?. . If you are able, always make a reservation and ask for a table in the patio.
