ReviewID: YpF5PvLEDxwCwly69DWP-Q
ReviewerID: uG5R3Rlclb-ygCnyQmcmLw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: STEEL Restaurant &amp; Lounge
Category: Asian Fusion
Oh, man, am I ever a fan! . . While rocking at the Elite Party, and not wanting to stand around in line for the freebie sushi, our renegade party of four decided to go off the menu and make our own exceptionally good time. We shared four things. . . Edamame: Perfectly steamed and salted, served in a warmed bowl to keep the beans warm to the last one. . . Those little dumplings with pork in 'em: I have no idea what the sauce was on those things... but it was INCREDIBLE. . . Beef Tataki: So amazingly delish. A rare beef with jalapeno and a great sauce. . . Tuna Tower: It was so lovely... and then Rick D destroyed it... and make the flavors really pop with the honey sauce on the bottom. . . Dessert Bento Box: banana spring roll with chocolate. Yum. Apple wonton with caramel dipping sauce. Frickin Yum. Impossibly rich and delish lava cake with a scoop of vanilla ice cream. Triple yum. . . The only question is... why did I wait so long to go here?!. . Our server, Angie, was amazing! Really on top of the game, and having the owner come out and spend time talking to us while we complimented everything that we had eaten really put the cherry on top. . . GirlShawn and Steel go together like Chinese Food and Chocolate Pudding.. . ---- We went here again before the Sweet Surrender Yelp Elite event at 595 North and the experience was again top notch. . . This time our server was Shane, who handled our table of 8 with ease. Water glasses were never empty. . . For appetizers, plates were passed between the couples, edamame, vietnamese egg rolls, crab rangoons and strawberry fields rolls. Can you say "delish"? You may think you can... but opening your mouth while letting all of the flavors develop would be a crime. Chew slow, my friends. Enjoy every second of this. It's worth it. . . This time I had the Tornado Roll, which was A-M-A-Z-I-N-G. I also traded pieces of Sushi for the beef tataki and the Mexi-Cali roll, some of the incredible tuna tower, and forgive me, but I can't remember what Corey had, but it was incredible, too. . . The owner wasn't in today, but our compliments to the chef, Johnny and his incredibly talented team of culinary craftsmen. Any chef who will stand in front of me, and tell me their background in food service? So much respect for this. . . Angie, our server from our last visit recognized us, and came over after we had finished with our dinner to see how we were doing. And this is why we will keep coming back to STEEL. We weren't just another gratuity. The staff at STEEL really makes us feel like rock stars in the ATL. It was drizzling rain, and while we were standing by the front door, waiting for a short break so we could walk around the block to the parking deck, Angie offered to take us through the back door so we wouldn't have to get drenched on our way to the car. . . STEEL is a class act, full of not only the classiest servers, the best sushi chefs, and some of the most incredible food in Atlanta. But full of people that genuinely care about your experience dining with them. . . I can't recommend this place highly enough. Definitely a five-stars "plus" in the GirlShawn book of food.
