ReviewID: yQ1cYD_77XplhuUho1gb7w
ReviewerID: nnXSwqVi16E4iOYzA72SbQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Penang
Category: Malaysian
My family has been frequenting Penang since I was in high school. That was many, many years ago. At first, Penang was a novelty, but over time, it has simply turned into a family favorite. I'm referring to the Penang on Buford Hwy, not their 2nd restaurant in Kennesaw (that one is not nearly as good). . . Service here is alright. There used to be a few friendly servers, but that was years ago. The servers now are friendly and annoyed all at once. Also very sloppy. Having them clear the table actually made more of a mess (e.g. bowls knocked over with sauce/soup spilled onto the table). . . The roti canai  is a staple that is ordered at every visit. We like the satay a lot too (you can ask for a mix of beef &amp; chicken). Over the years, I've also tried nearly every fried/soup noodle and rice dish on the menu. We usually go during lunch time, hence the heavy ordering of noodle and rice dishes vs. house specials. . . My favorites include Penang Udang Mee (aka shrimp noodles), Clay Pot Noodles, and Curry Beef Stew Noodles (very flavorful).  Certain people in my household likes the Fish Head Rice Noodles, but I've never been a big fan of that part of the fish. In fried noodles, my favorite is Mee Goreng hands down. You also can't go wrong with the Beef Chow Fun or the Char Kway Teow.  The last time I went, I ordered the Nasi Lemak. It kind of reminds me of a Korean BiBimBap (done up the Thai way). You get coconut rice in the center (yum!), curry chicken, and a variety of smaller side dishes on the same plate. Slightly, just very slightly, on the salty side, but evens out when consumed with rice. In the summer time, I also like coming here for the Ice Kacang. Similar to Taiwanese shaved ice, you get a huge bowl of goodness that cools the summer heat away.. . Not taking any points off for service here because, honestly, they are not much different than many Asian restaurants. Do be careful if you are allergic to peanuts since many dishes include them. Certain Malaysian dishes can also be a bit of an acquired taste so if you aren't ready to venture out of your comfort zone, ask the server for recommendations.
