ReviewID: yQ2cCPaR3lGwgR_7ngMkiA
ReviewerID: tjsJfPe2uni0QQ9PEyHtbQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Bottega Louie
Category: Pizza
DANG GINA!! This place is fanfreakingtastic!!!  . . My friend and had planned a rendezvous at MOCA today,  but after finding  out they are closed both Tuesday and Wednesday, we decided to go drown our disappointment with booze.  Who cared that it was only noonish!. . My friend had gone to the grand opening of this place and had been raving about all their delicious food and decor.  Since we were in the neighborhood and in desperate need for drinks, we decided to walk the few blocks to 7th and Grand and pay this place a visit.  . . We got there at the heart of the lunch hour craze.  the place was packed, so loud (the only down side), and without any place to sit.  The bar was where we wanted to be, but every single spot was taken.  I panicked for a quick sec cause I really wanted to quench my thirst, but was surprised when two stools opened up within the first 5 minutes of being there.  . . We ordered a glass of the house pinot and it was quite nice.  After sitting there for a wee bit, my friend and I began to salivate at all the delicious smelling food that surrounded us, so we decided to get a table and get our grub on.  After a short 5 minute wait, our name was called and we were were seated in a very cozy little table.  . . After perusing the menu, we opted to share the Bianco pizza which had ricotta, mozzarella, granna parmesan, garlic &amp; rocket arugula.  We also split an Arugula salad that had red onions, Reggiano parmesan,. extra virgin olive oil, lemon juice &amp; cracked pepper,  and the best thing we split was their portobello fries.  these things were soooooo dang good!  They were perfectly battered, seasoned with a really great sea salt and they served it with a dipping sauce that was just as delicious as the fries.  . . After the meal and a few more drinks, we get the check and to my happy surprise the meal for the both of us was under $80.  sweet.  . . the last thing we hit on the way out was their pastry counter and we each bought a box of macaroons.  While we waited for the server to box them up in these very lovely pink boxes, another server comes by and asked us if we wanted to try anything from their deli counter.  After having gorged ourselves minutes before we declined, but jokingly said that we'd take anything sweet.  She asked if we liked eclairs and when we nodded yes, she ran back to whence she came and after a minute came back with a little bag for each of us bearing a whole eclair!  This too, was super delicious.  . . Oh and I didn't even mention the decor, right/  well like someone else on here said, the place has huge ceilings, very minimal decor, huge windows, white walls, and it really feels very new york.  the only down side to the place is that it can get really loud in there, but don't fret, just focus your energy on the drinks and the grub and you'll be pleased.  . . I can't wait to go back to try their breakfast menu!
