ReviewID: YQNwVhQ7FE1YO2AblLjtWQ
ReviewerID: RLJX96Lar9UoZ3xsPAidlw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Daikokuya
Category: Japanese
Daikokuya. Word by word translation means "big (dai) black (koku) house (ya)". In Japan, the character 'ya' signifies that that business is a store.  As for 'daikoku', it implicates Berkshire pigs. They're called kurobuta in Japanese, which can also be translated to "black pig". In another word, Daikokuya implies indirectly that they serve berkshire pork (. http://tinyurl.com/2dsgkk. ).. . Anyhow, the first time I've ever truly had a good bowl of ramen in LA was four years ago. While living nearby, I drove down first street and realized nights after nights of long line outside of Daikokuya. At that time, even at 1AM in the morning (they used to open til 3AM), there was still a wait. One night, I've decided to give them a try, their infamous ramen with Tonkotsu soup (pork bone soup).. . As any big ramen fan would know, soup is so important in ramen. Most authentic "ramen ya" would make or brew their own ramen soup with their secret techniques and array of ingredients. Here at Daikokuya, they definitely had shown off how spectacular their pork bone stock is.. . I could recall my very first bowl of "Daikoku ramen". The soup was piping hot. The noodle was thick with a tad firmer of the "al dente" consistency. The marinated egg was half cook witht he yolk semi runny. Then there was the star of the ramen, fatty berkshire pork belly chashu. With smooth texture, it disintegrated on my tongue. That very night, experiencing that combination, especially the fatty berkshire pork, the hot soup and the runny yolk gave me such wonderful experience, words can't describe how phenomenal it was. Should I say orgasmic experience or death-defying-adrenaline rush? It was a killer when I ordered it with the katsu-don (pork cutlet rice bowl). Watching the chefs behind the counter making the katsu don was also another experience I very much enjoyed, as well as the rice fried rice they make. . . That year (2004), I went numerous times after my very own discovery. However, the year following, the quality seemed to have gone down. The egg was no longer runny. The soup, depending on the night, is hit or miss (not piping hot soup). The berkshire chashu was not hot enough. It seems like its been like that since '05.. . However, I might give them the respect and props for the very first experience they gave me. Furthermore, I really enjoyed their sets with the half donburi (rice bowls). These sets were treasurous.. . Comparing to Hakata-Ramen, Santouka Ramen, Chabuya and so forth, Daikokuya is a bit on the heavier side. Regardless, they used to be very very very enjoyable. I would've given them 5 stars if they can give me that first time experience I had again. I didn't want to give them 3 stars for their degraded quality since '05 (I haven't gone for 2 years now).. . I highly recommend this place whether it's for their broth, or simply their star berkshire pork products.
