ReviewID: yqqXJQbxnE6ATtzYBVE9zw
ReviewerID: NBJVYt7sO-2WDg3bPwBT0Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Craft
Category: American (New)
4.5 stars rounded up. . As a HUGE Top Chef fan, I could easily install some sort of reference or joke, being this is Tom Colicchio's, the head judge on the show, restaurant.  But I'll spare you the corniness and won't.. . I had the opportunity, nay, the privilege, nay again, the honor, of dining at such a highly touted restaurant here in Los Angeles.  I came here for the Fall DineLA with a group of 6.  I just have to say, the dining room itself is just absolutely GORGEOUS.  I actually have interviewed for a BOH position here in 2008 and arriving a few minutes early, the pastry chef was kind enough to give me a quick tour.  Along with a stunning dining room, the kitchen as well is IMMACULATE and I would say is maybe about 2/3 the size of the dining room.  Yes, it's quite a large kitchen.. . Service was great.  We always had filled water and bread, had silverware replaced between each course, and all around just really nice people.  They were ever present and we never waited long for anything.. . As for the food, it was great.  I came in here thinking about the last time there was DineLA and it seemed that the general consensus was that the DineLA menus had been dumbed down because of the price.  Not to say that I heard Craft was one of the ones guilty of that, but I had lowered my expectations coming in because of that.  Plus going to a fine dining restaurant, I'm not looking for the best meal of my life, just a good meal.  I think that's a mistake a lot of people have going into a fine dining establishment.  I mean, that's my observation.. . As for the first course, the appetizers, there was the smoked salmon rilette and the endive, apple, and pecan salad.  It had a nice and subtle smokiness to it and was served with a lavash bread.  The salad was good too.  I liked the dressing it had.. . Next were the entrees.  There was a choice of sirloin, braised short rib, wild striped bass or diver scallops.  I chose the sirloin.  As for the sides, we all shared the sauteed wild mushrooms, market vegetables and the potato gratin.  The gratin was quite rich, but very good.  The mushrooms were delicious as well.  The vegetables were pretty standard.. . The sirloin was well seasoned and cooked perfectly.  There wasn't a lot of jus in the pan, but it was good.  The braised short rib smelled good but looked like it was cooked to hell, but I had a bite and it was really good.  The sauce was good too.  The diver scallops looked good, but the lone person who ordered it said one bite was sandy.  Seriously?  Did they not purge those guys beforehand?  C'est la vie.. . Moving on to the desserts, Pastry Chef Shannon Swindle really outdid himself.  First was the Raspberry and almond buckle, which looks similar to a muffin.  It was REALLY good and served warm.  Then there was the Columbian Chocolate Coupe, which was basically a chocolate mousse with some whipped cream and what we were told was devil's food cake, but it was crunchy like an oreo cookie *shrug*  It was good though.  Last was an assortment of ice creams and sorbets, which included flavors such as apple (tasted and had a texture of apple sauce, but in a good way), cinnamon (which we later found out uses a really expensive cinnamon and is sold by the pastry chef at $24/pint.... yeah, that ain't your Rite-Aid ice cream), raspberry(?), what was basically a chocolate chip (but I think they called it "cocoa chip") and... I forget what the other ones were, but they were all good.. . So, you may be thinking to yourself, "Sounds like everything was shared, almost like it was family style".  Well let me tell you, everything was served family style, in sorts.  They basically brought out 2 of each appetizer, which was enough for the 6 of us to share.  As for the entrees, we had our pick, but they still brought them out family style according to how many people ordered of what.  Same with the desserts.  They brought out 2 of everything (though I think there were 3 buckles) and in the end, it was a quantitatively satisfactory meal.. . What was cool was at the end of the meal, we were each given a certificate to receive $10 off our next meal (expires March 30, 2010) for coming in during DineLA.  Yes, $10 isn't much considering how much an a la carte meal at a place like this would normally cost, but hey, it's incentive.. . Who wants to go back to Craft??
