ReviewID: yQZHQTeZ7segRo5lNsyjxw
ReviewerID: ZJ_IIzT1W6NNgh1s-4zXmQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Does Pizzeria Mozza really need another review?  Maybe not, but does it need a Diana H. review?  It most certainly does!  Unless of course there is another Diana H. reviewing in the area that I don't know about... that might be problematic.  . . I really really love this place.  Not because it is trendy and it is impossible to get reservations unless you call a month in advance(although that is highly appealing to the elitist in me), but because the food is culinary genius, they offer quarter bottles of wine, the prices are beyond reasonable, the atmosphere is fun and reminiscient of a New York restaurant (most likely due to the fabulous Mario Batali's influence), and the service is shockingly... wait for it... completely unpretentious!  . . My first visit was on a Friday night at 8 pm.  Yes, my friend and I like to live on the edge, and we arrived starving and sans reservations.  Within 20 minutes we were seated at the pizza bar, where we chatted with our somewhat inebriated neighbors, while watching Nancy Silverton finish off each pizza with a flourish.  Err maybe it was more of a sprinkle than a flourish, but either way she looked very cool and important.  After I devoured my goat cheese bacon leek garlic pizza, I looked up and our eyes met for a heart-pounding moment.  I telepathically communicated to her that I just consumed Heaven on dough and she gave me a brief nod and slight smile.  She understood.  I know she did.  . . On my second visit (again, sans reservations), my friend and I requested a seat at the bar, and again, within 20 minutes, we were seated.... wait for it... at a table for 2!!!  Yes, I DO think the primo seat in the place is the pizza bar, but am I going to complain that my friend and I scored a TABLE at the most sought after reservation in town?  Most certainly not!  My friend and I ordered a delicious Barbera (ohhh look at me, I know my wine!) and the ricotta stuffed squash blossoms to start -- let me just say, if the bacon/goat cheese/leek/garlic combination is Heaven on dough, these tasty suckers are like Heaven in vegetable.  Or vegetables.  I regret not ordering the squash blossom burrata pizza, but my mind was already set on the bad breath inducer (Nancy agreed to rename it that for me), and I felt compelled to order it again.  I know, shame on me, but it was still spectacularly delicious in a way that makes me want to say that this is my favorite restaurant in LA.  GASP!  Yes, that my friends, ... wait for it... is a bold statement.
