ReviewID: Yr6yqfXUgYmw_GHNs2zK0g
ReviewerID: pqlax1pqGMPxt9cAjZ7Q9Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
I've been going to Porto's for years, practically grew up on potato balls (that sounds really bad huh) so now that I've joined Yelp, I think I owe it to them to write a review even though they already have a ton.. . Parking in front of Porto's can get tricky, and in popular hours so can their lot in the back. You can also park in the structure across Sears, get validation so you don't pay.. . The cafe side usually goes by a lot quicker than you think, but any time on the weekends is usually really bad on both the cafe and bakery sides. . . GOODIES. Cheese rolls-- A lot of people rave about them and it's near blasphemous not to try. This is what people request I bring when I go traveling! While it's one of their most famous pastries, I'm not big on it. If you like cream cheese pastries you'll definitely love this.. . Potato balls-- My favorite. Basically balls of potato with ground beef in the middle and breaded on the outside. How can you go wrong? . . Fruit tart-- Kind of disappointed they changed it up a bit, but it's hardly noticeable. This is also really good and comes in small individual portions or you can order a bigger one for an event. Fruits are always fresh and the custard is yummy. Great alternative for someone who doesn't like birthday cake.. . Soup of the day-- in my opinion, their best soup is potato and leek. It's creamy and always has an ample amount of potatoes and leeks.. . Specialty cookies-- I actually bought a donkey cookie on a whim during the Presidential elections (there was a race between how many Dem cookies and Rep cookies would get sold). Didn't think it was going to be all that great since it was for fun, but wow, they sure know how to make a sugar cookie and frosting! Just shows they perfect almost everything there.. . Red velvet cupcake-- No need to trek to Sprinkles, these are scrumptious enough. Honest.. . SANDWICHES. I've tried almost every sandwich, but my usual is the Medianoche and the Tuna Croissant. Medianoche can be ordered without croquettes or with (Preparada). Has all kinds of meat and cheeses in it and is a great lunch meal.. . Tuna Croissant is definitely filling, but for those days you don't want a heavier sandwich like the Medianoche. Croissant is buttery and fluffy, the tuna salad is never mushy like other places.. . Other fun sandwiches to try-- Feta sandwich, Patty Melt (though it gets messy and melty when you bite into it), Potato Ball Sandwich (you better like potato balls though).. . CAKE-ORDERING. I don't know too much about ordering on my own, but this is where my mom got my cake for a few birthdays (including my 18th which was a big deal) and college graduation. She usually opts for the mango mousse and everyone loves it. We rarely go home with leftovers and/or people ask for the leftovers! It's rather creamy cake, but not super rich like others-- just the right amount of richness. I've never had a dry piece. (The fact that this is our go-to cake spot for special occasions says something.). . DRINKS. Mango shake is really refreshing and has a strong mango taste. Hot chocolate is also good and iced coffees are done well.. . I'll have to come back and review again after I've tried these new dinner plates they've come out with-- rice with black beans and meat. You can grab breakfast-lunch-dinner-dessert all in one place... oh my.. . I used to be very wary of changes they would make (like when they opened up the cafe side, added random items to the menu and opened the Burbank location), but it seems like they haven't missed a beat. It does seem very hectic at times, but that's because people know a good thing when they find it.
