ReviewID: yRn2MNI2_5QastelvWHjyg
ReviewerID: sZxXpvmBUN2fSCtK_BZFoQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: South City Kitchen Midtown
Category: Southern
Went here for the "eat like you work here" special they were having... where you got 25% off your bill in celebration of them getting some award  for having employees that like their job.  Not because I needed a good deal, but the food/restaurant sounded good too.. . If the employees ate as much as I did, they'd all be 400 lbs. pretty quickly and limping around... . . I started out with the fried green tomatoes, which were very very tasty.  they were served over some red pepper sauce that complimented it well. . . For my entree, I had the duck, served with sweet potatoes and spinach.  The potatoes were nicely cooked. The duck wasn't my favorite thing in the world.  According to the menu it was smoked.  Maybe I prefer a more confit style of preparation where the fat was a little more reduced and the skin was crispier...  Parts of it were cooked perfectly though, and there was a nice crispyness... while other parts were terrible.  Overall it all could've used a good sear and maybe could've cooked a little longer overall.  It seemed like it was just kind of baked and nothing else.  I didn't specify how I wanted it cooked, I usually would respond however the chef thinks it's best.  It was somewhere between rare and medium rare, which I think would turn a lot of diners off unless executed perfectly.  3/5s of it was quite nice.  The 2/5 is the problem... it was a gelatinous fat that I chewed for about 2-3 minutes before just swallowing while hoping I didn't throw up...  luckily I didn't need to eat the whole thing anyway so it wasn't a huge deal (though that 3 minutes was very trying), and at the same time I had to deal with picking through the parts that seemed really nasty.. . I guess the moral of the story is to listen to yelpers, who seem to think the fried chicken is really great... The duck was what the waiter recommended.. . For dessert I had the bread pudding... It was good.  I should've stopped at the entree though, I felt pretty nasty after.  Way too much food.. . Overall the food was good, and the service was above good.  I'd go back just to know for sure one way or another!
