ReviewID: YrneX0VIrIXUzlCX8cDPAw
ReviewerID: rE5M7MfT9WSn--_Do-Rz0A
Rating: 4
Restaurant: The Apple Pan
Category: Burgers
Burgers are great but not $6.99 great.  . Service: Straight to business no BS.  We got in, immediately sat ourselves at the the opened stools.  Waiter comes within a half a minute and ask us what we wanted.  We said we need to see the menu.  So after looking at the simple minute for about 3 minutes the waiter comes back again.  We ask him whats the best burger...he said the hickory is the most popular..so we..no, one of us became the spokesperson.  Oh yeah...so I QUICKLY ordered (like I said, no BS):. . I: Can we get three hickory  burgers. W: With cheese? . I:  Yes. W: Fries?. I  :Yes. W: two or three? . I:  2. W: Drink?. I: 3 waters . Waiter about to walk away..... I: Can we also get two slices of banana cream pie?. W:Now or after?. I: Now please. (Whenever possible, always have dessert first). W: Yes sir.. . Unless you don't want your burger well done you have to request otherwise.. . Banana Cream Pie (back of menu): Um, I felt like i got cheated with the pie.  The slice was so tiny. It was 1/3rd of slice of marie calender's banana cream pie. The pie itself was OKAY, nothing spectacular.  Nice flaky crust with pretty small amount of banana cream but a good amount of was recently fresh banana.  if it were a bigger slice, I would have been a happy camper. Maybe my expectations (yelp) were too high for the pie. . . Hickory Burger: wow, they put a lot of sauce on there burger....i like it.  Everything is fresh and hot and delicious but way too expensive.  I rather go to In &amp; Out and have myself 3or 4 of there burgers...Taste the same to me. . . However, the service was extremely fast (the place wasn't even that busy) and the waiter kept coming around to pour our ketchup for us and pass out individual tissues and filing up our water....the atmosphere made us feel so rushed...we kinda inhaled the burger...we didn't really get the chance to just kick back and savor our food. . . Western Union across the street. Charges $3 something for service fee.  We went around 11, got lucky with parking.  Seating can be difficult, very limited seats. If your coming with more than a party of three, seating will be very hard.  Ladies, keep your purse in the car and just bring your wallet.  There's barely enough arm room, you'll have to keep your purse on your lap.. . Not a place to plan for.  If your in the area, its a mom and pop old school diner feel, to grab a QUICK burger.  But I rather go some where else and get my money's worth.  There's tons of places to grub around here.
