ReviewID: ySAM_PgTtmCjkmEzoGqsNg
ReviewerID: NPYpeD0kKKuDm-TtmwxhHg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
***3.5 Stars, Bein' a sport and rounding up to 4***. . Broke away from my usual KBBQ haunt(s) and fired up the charcoal at spittin' clean Soowon. . . Or should i say, was fired up to eat lotsa Soowon Galbi and other meaty treats.. . Or should i say, I was all fired and smoked up sideways by a greasefire at my table that the server had overheated the grill and thus caused a charcoal melt-down.... . thanks to the continually cratering economy and a certain easter holy-day, the place was uncharacteristically quiet and sparse, luckily for Soowon's sake--as there were few around to witness my singed mane of hair combusting in plain view..... . ok, so i DO exaggerate (actually, i only exaggerated on the HAIR, just to see if you were still paying attention) :O-{}. . so, digressions aside, Soowon is a welcome addition to my KBBQ K-town arsenal. .  1. Clean and modern.  2. Attentive and friendly service (i was NOT exaggerating when i said they called in the reinforcements with lightning speed for our malfunctioning grill).  3. Prices are about average in comparison to other KBBQ joints in the area.  4. FOOD-- .     The CHADOL GUI beef brisket came in a HUGE effin' HUGE slab, and was pretty juicily marinated and quite delicious, tho a bit too fatty for even my fatty inclinations..     The Soowon House Galbi was also a generous offering, though not as tasty and surprisingly too fatty as well.   .      Don't get the bibim naengmyun cold noodles here. clearly not their specialty (helllloooo, it's a KBBQ joint!), but sometimes i've had a good spicy noodles at KBBQ but this is obviously not the place for that....      The banchan were plentiful and a mixed bag of deliciousness. the seaweed banchan is absofreekin' delicioose, perfect dense crunch and chew and bursting with seasoning. the potato banchan and the cukes were quite tasty as well, while some of the remaining 6 were just so-so.. . as i wagon wheeled myself out to the parking lot, i contemplated another visit in the near future....once i get back from cranio-facial reconstructive surgery rehab.... . OK. I'M KIDDING. JEEZ!. . DONE.
