ReviewID: ysd4ye9_jFeHcFBnYSt7SA
ReviewerID: bI7BeJqPRoV7NiMJu_UbLg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: El Barco
Category: Mexican
My boy Ben H (aka Harvard, Banjo, or Pomade...see his review on this place) took us over here last  night.  I was expecting lots of food, lots of fun, and I guess a "Mexican Hooters".  Took us about 20 minutes to get seated, which isn't that bad considering it was Saturday night, but it was a very tight fit.  I felt that I was in the way all the time as we were waiting for our table.  When we finally got seated, one of the ladies ordered a fru-fru drink called the Miami Vice.  Okay, so I know I'm going to lose my "street cred" right here, but the drink itself is almost worth going to this place.  It's one of the frozen blended things, and it made me immediately reminisce to lazy days on the beach in Hawaii drinking a Lava Flow.  Anyway, let me take my skirt off and continue.... . The drink was delicious, but I continued to drink my Tecate and wait for the dinner for four.   Which by the way was a mistake.  You see, Ben H was adamant about going with the platter dinner for three, since there is no way we were going to eat it for four.  So he orders but the waitress had this confused look, and counted four people.  I mean her English wasn't great, but you could definitely understand her.  So Ben H sorta panics and all of sudden we are getting it for four instead of three.  Not a big deal, until the platter came!. . Piles of octopus, peeled shrimp, unpeeled shrimp (with the head/legs), skirt steak, chicken, mussels, crab legs, etc.  A huge pile of a fresh catch of the day.  The octopus was a bit chewy and tough...I mean the whole leg was there...I've never seen this except in Korean cuisine.  The unpeeled shrimp was tough to eat...there's gotta be a trick to eating it other than ripping the head off, picking each leg off, and then scraping off the shell.  Everything else was good, with the steak and mussels being my favorite.  The rice, beans, and tortillas were absolutely perfect.  The crab legs were a bit too soaked...if any of you eat crab legs a lot...I hate it when you try to crack a section and it just bends instead.  Ugh.  . . There was WAY too much food.  We had plenty leftover.  Go with one less when you get this dinner platter.. . So overall I would definitely go back.  I liked the food, but I'm going to try to order from the menu next time.  The big hit looked like the whole snapper and some of the seafood soups.  . . Hey Ben H...I still have cat hair all over my coat...even after two cycles in the dryer...I hate that cat!!!
