ReviewID: YsR34KLY-m7di-yIeEGfBg
ReviewerID: ry0ujNp6_iJEOsL-BmSY4Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Blu Jam Café
Category: American (New)
just got back from having breakfast there and to say i was disappointed is honestly an understatement. i was sooooo looking forward to having the best breakfast in LA after reading all the reviews, sadly that was not our experience. all started out promising, we were seated quickly, immediately handed menu's and asked if wanted coffee, which was an obvious yes. after we were served our coffee we placed our orders. everything that came out of the kitchen looked amazing so we were really looking forward to ours. things came and went, people who placed orders after us somehow seemed to constantly get their meals before us, frustrating yes, but since we were constantly being plied with more coffee this wasn't really an issue - although i was really looking forward to my meal. our waiter seemed to notice that our food wasn't out (but he never came over) and after a few more minutes he came with our breakfasts. the first issue was my blueberry pancakes were not made with blueberries (they obviously realized the mistake so they threw a few on top). i was hungry and going to let this slide, but when i went to put butter on them they were cold. my husbands food looked amazing except for his potatoes, which were basically raw, unlike how he had requested them which was well done. our waiter never came over even though we requested him and instead the gentleman who had been plying me with coffee came over and we mentioned all this to him. he then promptly took our breakfasts off to be fixed. this is really where it all went wrong. first the waiter never during this whole time came over and second rather than make us new meals they just stuck my husbands eggs as well as my whole meal (minus the blueberries) under the warming lights while they crisped up his potatoes then just brought the food out again (this time no blueberries even on top). obviously this did not fix my issues and his main meal was no longer fresh. again we tried to get the waiters attention and could not, he just seemed to know there was still a problem and avoided our table. by the time we finally did get his attention my husband was halfway through his meal. he said he was sorry that he saw that my stuff was made wrong, but at this point i wasn't going to have them try again. my husband ate while i finished my coffee and water. the bill came and they only took off my meal - seeing as i had nothing to eat and my husbands meal had issues as well i feel they should've comped our entire meal. as we were walking out the manager said "sorry about your breakfast", but it was too little too late. bottom line i don't think i'll be headed there any time soon.
