ReviewID: ystYsatJp31cQnU3O--XRg
ReviewerID: tIP5tmJzK2jFKJh6lE-_Ag
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Surin of Thailand
Category: Thai
I don't hate Surin but I don't love it.  It's just sort of there.  It's not bad, but it's not that good, either.  It is definitely Americanized which to me means it is overall sort of bland.  This does not mean it is not nice comfort food; it's just not very exciting or interesting.. . I do think Surin has a lovely ambiance at night.  It is quite pretty with the low lighting and all the candles on the tables, and it does draw a big crowd.  The last time I was there, I noticed beautiful fresh flowers everywhere, which made the restroom in particular smell very pretty.  Having really beautiful fresh flowers around is certainly a nice touch.. . I recently visited Surin after not visiting for a few years.  The service was completely fine - very pleasant, polite and efficient.  My only (minor) complaint is that I had to wait a little while for a water refill.. . The wine list is not great but still offers plenty of different types of wine even if the brands are pretty common.  Like the food at Surin, the wines were not too thrilling, but they certainly were quaffable.. . I have tried several dishes in the past but on my latest visit I tried the Penang chicken curry.  I have been eating a lot of Penang chicken lately (for reasons unbeknownst to even me) so I had a lot of basis for comparison.  There was nothing wrong with the Penang chicken at Surin, but it was boring.  It was mostly curry sauce, and then mostly chicken, and then a few red and green peppers.  There was a lot of sauce in relation to the chicken and vegetables.  I still got filled up because I just used many scoops of rice to soak up the sauce.  The sauce was not bad but was bland - no spice to it at all.  But, I went there on a really cold day and the curry did prove to be a great comfort food.. . I would never refuse to go to Surin but if I had my choice for Thai, I would choose a different option because I just like something a little more exciting.
