ReviewID: YTVIwWvWddgGliIs2TuXsQ
ReviewerID: _Trs7_wLsB5f0_81CaUVXg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: RA Sushi Bar Restaurant
Category: Sushi Bars
My fellow yelper girlfriend B.P. and I decided to try this new sushi place out on a whim the day it opened.  Apparently unknown to us the restaurant was providing its menu complimentary, so the entire dinner cost us a nice tip.  . . Anyway, I walked in after dropping B.P. off and everyone was very friendly - I love customer service places - i.e. restaurants were the service is friendly.  I was taken upstairs to the balcony to meet B.P.  The balcony is very cool - I really like the ambiance of Ra Sushi - very high ceilings and great decor.  The patio looked fantastic, but it had been a long day, so the a/c was a welcomed feature.  The server was very very friendly and recommended a few great dishes.  (personal thing is that I disliked the fact that she was wearing her computer key card on her wrist - reminds me of my days waiting table at Fridays).   Anyway -  the pineapple cream cheese wonton for a starter was awesome.  The spinach appetizer with a mustard sauce was ok.  The edamame was also very nice.  The sushi dishes were all fantastic - the negri and rolls.  We tried the yellow tail negri, the tuna roll with avocado and siracha sauce, and the lobster roll (well, I had that) - all great.  I almost forgot the tuna and avocado appetizer with a dipping sauce - highly recommended - by far one of my favorite dishes.   . . We also tried a few desserts - the creme brule and the cinnamon temporah ice cream.  I really like the ice cream.  As for the creme brule it was great, except that I like my creme brule a bit warmer, but it usually comes the way it was served at Ra Sushi.  Although, it's hard to complain about my own personal preference when the creme brule rich with a very nice consistency and perfectly sweetened with a nicely torched top layer.  It's worth ordering - either one.  . . This place is a welcome addition to Midtown - the ambiance is very nice - with the patio, dining area, balcony, and sushi bar.  My guess is the restaurant will be packed on the weekends and for happy hour.  My only suggestion would be to turn the music down just a touch during dinner and crank it up later.. . I highly recommend Ra Sushi for, well, sushi in Midtown.
