ReviewID: Yu0VDZzH7AuzaxMU_tc0ew
ReviewerID: 6dGhIiebZuHD3L8HjUpPPA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
Having been to Joan's a handful of times now, and just starting to get the hang of things, I have created a cheat sheet for the novice Joanser - it's a scary place to go if you don't know what to expect.. . 1. Parking - If you can find street parking, take it! Otherwise, you might be forced to park in the back. Parking in the rear could mean your car gets blocked by some snotty 20 year old and her daddy's mercedes. If you do block another car, let the folks know inside.. . 2. Case the Joint - Take a good look at all the food in the cases. Think you might like a lemon bar? Make a mental laundry list before you get in line. You don't want to have to wait in the long lines again for the limonata you forgot to buy.. . 3. Order Up - This is a nightmare no matter how you slice the focaccia. The line in the front of the store is for coffee and uh, okay, I don't really know what the front line is for, except to be confusing and take up a lot of space. The line in the back of the store is for lunch orders. This is where you will tell them ALL the things you want.. . 4. Table Hunting: An Acquired Skill - I have learned to be an expert at waiting for a table. You WILL have to hover for awhile, especially for the highly coveted outside tables. Bring a buddy and send them to wait while you order, or vice versa. I have had to settle for the inside tables on occasion. Basically, these tables suck; wait the extra 5 minutes for an outside seat (I mean, if you didn't come to people watch, you came to the wrong place anyway).. . 5. Oh Yeah, What To Eat - The Trio of Salads for $10.50 is always a huge hit. People go nuts for the lentil salad. Me, I'm a tuna melt girl. Delicious tuna salad with tomatoes and carrots with aged cheddar cheese on an airy baguette with sweet pickles on the side. Mmmm. Soups are good, the macaroni and cheese squares are also a favorite, and the desserts are awesome. Hard to go wrong, really.. . 6. Don't go too hungry; it takes a while to process the orders.. . 7. Go hungry enough; the portions are pretty big.. . 8. Don't go if you can't stand supermodels, ladies who lunch, or rich teenagers. That's kind of the It Crowd at Joan's.. . 9. If you can deal with the high maintenance factor here, then bon apetite!
