ReviewID: yUuvU6E5q2QBIHCqjIo5Cw
ReviewerID: 5cVgAicAhCTSrKzsKDuTdw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Ciudad
Category: Latin American
4 stars - Happy Hour. 3 stars - Lunch/Dinner. . Nice place for happy hour, a change of pace from the usual bar/grill. The house mojito and house red sangria summed up to a really nice buzz. Had the rajas tacos followed by the carnitas tacos. The both had outstanding flavor. The rajas was peppers and potatoes with roasted corn, so it was a guilt-free indulgence. Now, a glutton at heart, I could not resist chasing that down with a pair of succulent carnitas tacos. Sit at the bar and watch people, have a drink, and a bite. Pretty good way to unwind. As customary, happy hour only applies in the bar area, there are some tables along the bar that can be used, but I wish they would extend happy hour to the outdoor patio, especially these during these wonderful L.A. summers. Value? Not bad. Two drinks and four tacos will run you about just north of $20 with a tip. House drinks (standard mojito, sangria, some beers) are $4 a pop, so are the two-taco dishes. The drinks were fine, plenty of ice, and the mojito had a dry mint instead of fresh leaves. The red sangria was delicious, also with plenty of ice. There is also a white sangria that I will try the next time. The value of the food comes from the gourmet taste, rather than quantity (each taco will entertain about two bites, depending on your jawbone and state of hunger). These are served without silverware, maybe meant as finger foods, but I asked for a fork anyway. Happy hour runs 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. and there's also a late-nite happy hour (9 p.m. - 11 p.m. on weekdays/midnite on weekends).. . Lunch and dinner earns only 3 stars mainly because of the decrease in perceived (or real) value. Prices are quite high and while the taste factor stands out in some details (some of the sauces are superb), I walked away less-than-satisfied considering bang-for-buck. There is Tuesday Paella night for about $30 a person, sans drink.. . Decor is modern Latin and service is OK both at the bar and in the dining room. My impression is that the dinner crowd is a bit dressier and tends to seem more pretentious.. . Verdict: fine if the corporate account can write-off the check. Otherwise, stick to happy hour and appetizers. Another contemporary setting in downtown L.A. for people-watching.
