ReviewID: YVIo0KgjY1uOxWP3_dDJVQ
ReviewerID: OaQA6cyD7S-DdKqT7N14rw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Savoy Kitchen
Category: Chinese
I came here with my friend after reading some reviews on yelp!. . I was so excited to come here and I didn't leave disappointed!  The place isn't hard to find at all, it's on Valley and you can't miss it!  As you drive by or walk by, there is a crowd and from reading all the reviews, there is always a crowd.. . My friend and I came here around 1:30 on a Thursday and it was quite crowded but as soon as we put our name down, the lady called us and seated us inside.  The place is definitely small and the decor isn't fancy at all.  But it feels home-y and you just got a good feel from the people there.. . My friend and I proceeded to order the hainan chicken which they are known for and some shrimp rolls since we took a glance over and they looked so good!!. . After ordering, we realized they don't take credit cards!! Who doesn't take credit cards!? Especially in a place like this that is kind of popular?!?!  It baffled us!  We were about to stand up and cancel our order but we were looking forward to this meal we decided to stay!  We quickly got onto our blackberries and searched for a wells fargo near by!  Right when one of us was about to stand up, our meals came!  So we ate and at the end of the meal, I got up to rush over to a wells fargo while my friend sat there kind of being like "insurance" for them and I got the money in less then 10mins!!! So remember!! CASH ONLY!. . The hainan chicken came out really quick and the quality and the taste was excellent!  I love their sauce and never had anything like it!  It was so delicious!  Their chicken was so tender and moist, it literally fell off the bone!  The shrimp rolls came out fresh and perfectly cooked! It was hot and tasty and the sauce that came with it was delicious too!!! It's not your typical sauce when you eat egg rolls! Its creamy and just there are no words to describe it... just go there and eat it!!! . . The parking does suck so that's why I did knock a star down!
