ReviewID: yvvuKGmhc8Pmu_xAeXJBrw
ReviewerID: 9A-SnaS1TrN6KGKq6IIcig
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Café Santorini
Category: Greek
My brother and I took our cousin from NY to Huntington Gardens and then afterwards to Old Town Pasadena. Cafe Santorini is situated in Old town pasadena in the corner of Union/Delacey Ave. across from Forever 21 (park in the structure nearby Forever 21 for cheap parking. We ended up parking across the street in the business complex and paying a flat $7) nearby Tutti Gelati and the courtyard next to the movie theater.. . From first glance, I thought Cafe Santorini was Italian but it's actually a mediterranean restaurant that also serves pasta dishes. The ambience is classy and nice. It's a large two story restaurant but the most popular place to eat is outside on the patio overlooking the alley way. This place seems to get crowded even in the late afternoon and the crowd is diverse- mixture of both young and old.. . However, I was a bit disappointed primarily in the food. For the price, I expect it to exceed food typical of Daphne's or at least be equivalent to that of Caspian (in Irvine). My brother ordered the salmon dish which was small and best described as "alright." My cousin ordered the chicken kebab with roasted veggies which was tasty (the veggies were more impressive than the chicken kebab) but nothing extraordinary. I ordered the brick oven pizza with lamb, goat cheese, sundried tomatoes and basil and this was good but nothing that CPK couldn't beat quality wise. The service was okay. Only one waiter was manning the entire patio area and it took a while to place orders and retrieve the check. And we had asked to turn on the heat lamps as it got chillier into dinner time but never got turned on.. . The 3 stars for Cafe Santorini goes to the: (1) ambience (2) the complimentary bread that is served at the table and (3)  the poached pear dessert with mascarpone cheese. I would come back only to eat this yummy dessert. It's $7.50 for literally one pear poached with the cheese but it just melts in your mouth.
