ReviewID: YWb7RdxRd6d--YD1cywcjA
ReviewerID: n5y-I6GoaaZvpzd6BJD94g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
Food: 2.5 stars . Service: 2 stars . Ambiance: 3 stars . Noise: 5 stars . Price: 4 Stars (our total $26 before tip) . . With over 700 reviews I can hardly contribute anything novel at this point so instead I will hope that reiteration will translate into listened warnings for my disappointed sentiments are laced throughout the plethora of quality yelp reviewers. . . Slightly tough pancakes + sub par omelets + impolite and forgetful staff + notoriously gigantic portions + tasty french press coffee + real maple syrup just does not equal an 1 hour wait where you're herded like cattle against a cement wall. So no matter how you divide, multiple, add, or subtract, it's just not worth the wait. Even higher math theory can't save you here. . . Even if you wanted to wait inside to catch the football game...NOPE says midget host man...cause if you miss your names that's too bad for you! . So there you are, left with the decision to eat outside surrounded by disheartened famished patrons waiting in anticipation for their name to be called like it's the first round draft pick or to be packed inside in a cloak of chaos trapped by brick wall. . . The highlight is the french press coffee-richly roasted and full bodied. TIP: Let the it steep 3-4 minutes before applying steady pressure and pressing down the plunger. Hold the lid when pouring to avoid a mess (Saw a not so lucky patron, no it wasn't me). . . Banana Nana Pancakes: Notable selection and variety and worthy of the prefix PAN, but the truth is that what you're really getting are slightly tough and tasteless pancakes that are dull to the taste buds that you'll have to endure forever because they're huge. I guess I can't blame them, it's hard to not accidentally overwork the batter when you're making them by the industrial bucket. . . Omlette "My Soul" (with egg whites): With poorly distributed chunks of chicken and random pockets of jack cheese folded into fluffy bland egg whites and then topped with a skimpy dusting of salsa...I know my soul was not anywhere close to heaven after trying to eat this. Please don't order this, go for the scramble next time, it looks much more promising. . . Fruit: Not fresh at all and probably not a good idea to eat it. . . Service: HA HA HA So I completely understand they're stressed, overwhelmed and peeved by the constant, "When are you gonna call us?" inquiries, but I think they're just so obnoxious here and there's no excuse. The hosts are abrasive and sarcastic, while the servers are just too overworked to be attentive. She never even asked how our food was or if we needed anything. All morning I was conflicted by who or when a good time to ask for a little more salsa, but I never did because I was too scared... . . If you want a a lot of average food for about 30 bucks and like crowded spaces and waits, then Griddle Cafe is for you. There are so many other places in LA that have french press coffee and real maple syrup, that I'm just going to have to move on.
