ReviewID: Ywp7DOAElUWSUCt9NEvd0A
ReviewerID: mACnYp9_diutiCpbEGdB5g
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Sotto Sotto Restaurant
Category: Italian
Dined here for first time on Friday at 5:40pm. My table had a total of four people. This review will be divided into three parts: food, service, and conclusion.. . Part I: Food. - Bread was okay, as okay as bread can be.. - Ordered two types of spaghetti with seafood, naked ravioli, and seafood risotto.. - Food was served at room temperature right before it gets cold. . - Spaghetti noodles came out a little hard, not fully cooked.. - Flavoring of spaghetti dishes was... there was no flavoring.. - Naked ravioli is just that- a cheese ball and little else, and not even delicious cheese at that.. - Risotto was bland.. . The reason I was at Sotto Sotto was because my friend who had dined there a couple times before and was absolutely obsessed with the risotto. "The best risotto ever!" she had exclaimed. I don't think so.. . For the price, I was not impressed.. . Part II: Service. - When we declined to order wine or other alcoholic beverages, the waiter was... a combination of rude, impatient, bored, and angry - I seriously saw his facial expression change from "whatever" to "sullen".. - We were not offered black cloth napkins when everyone in the party was wearing dark colors- I mention this because I heard a server ask the table if anyone would like a black napkin.. - Food got there REALLY fast. There were people seated around the same time as us and ordered around the same time as us who got their food MUCH later. The speed with which the food came out was an issue because I felt like They were trying to get us out of there as fast as possible. . - Friend gently inquired if there was a new chef in the kitchen and waiter answered with major attitude, "Why." She explained she had just been there the last week and the food was so delicious and this time the food was... not delicious. Waiter saunters away. Later he comes back and says he looked around the kitchen (yeah right) and everyone was in their place, so, no, the cooks were all the same. . - We had a complaint but no manager came by our table. I SAW the manager walking around to other tables asking how everything was and he conveniently misses our table. Sotto Sotto is not this big huge space where things like that could happen. . . I'm not a demanding diner. I order my food politely. I don't make a big fuss. I appreciate the hierarchy of the restaurant and the whole dining out experience.  Sotto Sotto... . . *sigh. I don't know. Every other server I observed was doing an awesome job. Our person did no "serving" at all and I realized later that every time he came by I gave him a glare and grimace; couldn't hide how I felt.. . Part III: Conclusion. Will I ever dine at Sotto Sotto again? My friend BEGGED me to give it a second chance. I probably will, but if we get the same guy, uh uh, no go. . . For the price the service was terrible. I wish I had balls to complain while I'm in-house and demand better :(
