ReviewID: YWS0sar0N3TS3D1sPPF_Kg
ReviewerID: op8FmScVlXFkVcqmyAlD3w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Newport Tan Cang Seafood Restaurant
Category: Chinese
One of the nicest restaurants Chinese restaurants I've been to in a while.  By nicest I am only referring to the decor and cleanliness.  It's the 3rd Chinese meal I've eaten in 18 hours.  Also the 2nd meal at Newport Tan Cang in 18 hours, started off at the Colima branch 6pm last night.  Started off this morning with some nice appeitzers at Mandarin Noodle Deli (read my review for more details).  This place is clearly not Chinese either - the writing is in Vietnamese.  They ran out of Diet Coke by noon.  The parking lot is insanely crowded even though its huge.  There are some really cool individual rooms to the right near the bathrooms.  We're thinking of creating a reality food series called 3.5 Jews, a baby and dumplings.  I don't know why I am writing stream of consciousness pseudo Chinese Vietnamese food reviews. . . Get these items and you will not be disappointed. 1. Green onion and ginger lobster.  Fantastic sauce.  You need to mix the roe and green onion sauce into rice.  If you're a real pro you dump the entire thing of rice into the lobster dish and mix it up for proper distribution.  People have described at ad naseum that the lobster is expensive.  blah blah blah if you know it's expensive and don't want to spend the money don't complain.  I want 5 cashmere sweaters for the winter but I can't afford them so I don't own them. . 2. French style beef luc lac.  It's a very special order of beef.  Hard to tell what type of cut but it was very tender and flavorful.  My gringo friends said it was some of the best beef they've ever had. . 3. Salt n pepper crispy calamari.  As advertised crispy, well deep fried and balanced nicely with lime, salt n pepper. . 4. Kong pao chicken.  I was hesitant to order but so many people raved about it.  Get this.  Not greasy, not too many green onions and just a nice hint of spice.  Jamie and I had some serious negotiations about who got these leftovers.. 5. Pea shoots sauteed with garlic.  Nice, simple and if you're going to get greens this is a nice dish. . 6. House special whole fish.  They have a few options.  Ask them what they have and how much per pound.  The snapper and rock cod with the oil soy green onion sauce.  Yum. . . Optional and not in the same class as aforementioned dishes. 7. Clams in black bean sauce.  Ok nothing to lose sleep over.  The sauce is certainly elegant and fragrant.  The clams were eh.  Can do without them. . 8. Deep fried tofu.  The tofu was crisp on the outside and creamy on the inside.  It's a nice dish but kinda like being a reality show girl wannabe actress at the Victoria's Secret after party.  Afterthought.. . The food here is legit.  It is also better when it's not your 2nd meal in an hour.
