ReviewID: YwxXCOYSZ_1Wx4hr7A9EGw
ReviewerID: 8T9_QN3z4uXa6B9vTvwxwA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Alinea
Category: American (New)
Alinea is deservedly highly-praised.  They do shorter (around 12 - 14 courses / 2 - 3 hours) and longer (around 22 - 28 courses / 4 - 6 hours) tasting menus.  For me, it was more about the experience than the food and Alinea definitely lived up to the expectations set by its 5-star Yelp rating.  . . Food:. I had the 26-course tour with wine pairings and while it was tasty and artistic, I was in a food coma for a day or two after!  I probably should have gone with a shorter tour.  As some other reviewers have noted, the focus at Alinea is on the experience first and the taste second, which isn't to say the food is less than great but, with 26 dishes, some are much better than others.  Chef Grant Achatz and his excellent kitchen staff play with texture, color, scent, and taste and deconstruct and reinterpret more common dishes.  The menu, which changes regularly, often features interesting and surprising combinations (lamb and chocolate, or bacon and candy).  They take full advantage of the large number of dishes to make the eater interact with the food in different ways (eat meat off a wire; suck mousse from a tube or liquid from a sphere).  The result is a fun culinary voyage.  Side note on the wine pairings: wow!  Dinner for two, with wine, was around $900.  4 stars.  . . Service:. The wait staff is extremely attentive and when engaged became quite friendly, which made for a better experience.  I left after 1 AM, after a five hour meal, and think there were two or three waiters devoted to my table for the last few hours.   Also, they give you a copy of the menu to help you remember it all!  5 stars.. . Decor:. Relatively open and airy and spread out over two stories.  For some reason Alinea reminded me of a nice but cold home.  I sat upstairs in a room a bit too quiet and private for my taste.  Definitely spend a few minutes in the kitchen, watching masters at work.  4 stars.. . Summary:. Food (60% weight for Overall): 4 stars.. Service (20% weight for Overall): 5 stars.. Decor (20% weight for Overall): 4 stars..      . Overall: 4.2 (rounded up to 5 because of the overall Alinea experience) stars.  . . Very good, interesting, and innovative food and an amazing overall experience.
