ReviewID: yXdmorVclZiEnsIrLBzbMA
ReviewerID: 23_DfS0ojdNS-MFGF_SjsQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Father&#39;s Office
Category: American (New)
father's office probably has the most hip and trendy bathroom in l.a. i know i shouldn't judge an eatery by it's bathroom, but my rear end deserves happiness just as much as my mouth. . . what i liked about this place was the vibe. located in downtown culver city which has gone through a major face-lift over the years, the place is just so west coast chill with east coast setting. if you don't mind someone eavesdropping and giving you a piece of advice here and there, you'll enjoy this communal seating. . . i had to try their sweet potato frites (this word is popping up everywhere now), and they did not disappoint. these deep fried creatures melted in my mouth when hot and the sweet and garlicky aroma instantly pleased me. unfortunately, we didn't go with their famous burger, but opted for steak which came with skinny fries (you see what i mean by neighbors influencing you...). this just totally offset the balance of sweetness not in a good way. the quality of meat itself was not bad, but everything on the plate was too salty to truly enjoy the flavor of beef. . . besides their burger and fries, father's office is also known for their selection of beers, and i somewhat agree to that. they carried my favorite belgium beers, but not so much of german and czech beers. against my recommendation, the bf settled for some american beer (alaskan one), but wasn't completely happy with his choice. hopefully this taught him a lesson...that lena is ALWAYS right :) . . i didn't get a chance to deal with the bartenders and wait staff here, but the gate keeper/bouncer/security guy we interacted with was very pleasant and went out of his way to help us when we had an issue with our bill. everything here is self serve (even water), so don't plant your butt so tightly to your chairs. . . major kudos for having convenient parking, being dog friendly and serving bottled cokes!!!
