ReviewID: YXvYd7zKJd-QbnYGzzFXYg
ReviewerID: 4D2Zw1AfbBh-VHwV0yiZww
Rating: 2
Restaurant: El Tesoro
Category: Mexican
I've come to develop a bit of a taco obsession as of late. Everywhere I go that has a taco on the menu, I've got to try it for comparison. I've been grilling up fish tacos at home. I can't be stopped! I can, however, be stopped from visiting El Tesoro again.. . Dining in Decatur can be a bit hit-or-miss these days. I'm all for "family-friendliness" and all that whatnot, but some places in Decatur are turning into day care facilities, even ones that you wouldn't expect (I'm looking at YOU, Taco Mac). There were an ample number of kids scurrying about outside El Tesoro the night we visited, but it ended up not being too bad inside.. . I'll start with the good:. . - their chips, salsa, queso, and guacamole were pretty tasty.. . Aaaand onto the things I didn't care for so much:. . - this is more of a pet peeve than anything, but I feel a bit 'cheated' when visiting a full-service, sit-down Mexican restaurant, and they expect me to pay for chips and salsa. I think there's an unwritten social contract that it's just "part of the deal.". - let's talk about tacos. I am crazy about fish tacos. I was not crazy about these fish tacos. The fish was cubed before being breaded and fried. cubed?! It was just.... odd. The flavor was just ok, if not a little boring.. - I also tried one of their tofu tacos just to see what that was all about, and I'm not sure what in the hell is going on there, but it wasn't something I would want to eat again.. - they bring out a little "taco bar" of fixins and whatnot to make up your tacos, we had a large table, and they brought one person their own individual cups of stuff, and then on the other side of the table, brought large portions to be shared. it was a pain trying to pass the stuff around. not well executed.. - luckily, someone that arrived before I did tried their house margarita and warned the rest of us. I went with the Texas instead, which was decent.. - we did have a large party (12), but when you tell us it's a 30 minute wait, please try and come closer to 30 minutes than 60, or at least come tell us it's going to be a bit longer.. - finally, the menu is pretty unfriendly with its design. the sections are a bit odd. they're kind enough to use icons to show vegan, vegetarian, and pescatarian items, but they don't put those icons next to dishes where you can select veggie, shrimp or meat, which makes it pretty unclear.. . On the bright side, it's better than other Mexican I've visited recently in that area, but for my taco cravings, I'm going to stick to making them at home, TDS, or No Mas Cantina.
