ReviewID: yYvugHrGE-Cqi6bjNdlnRg
ReviewerID: _xFrjg55612CA61OQ4PrdQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
3.6. . Buzzkill warning. This is the hardest review I've had to write. Here goes.... . The background is that I am an uber Italian food snob. I was born in Rome and ate chunks of parmeggiano reggiano in my stroller. Some of my first spoken phrases were "green pasta" (pesto) and  Carciofi (artichokes). I am not a trust fund baby or even close but have been forturnate enough to spend a lot of time in italy including a college semester in rome. I don't usually like eating in Italian restaraunts in the U.S. because, in my not-so-humble opinion, their stuff is overcooked, overpriced, oversauced, made with poor-quality ingredients, etc, etc.... . Mario Batali was a god to me because he was about authentic Italian cooking. I'm a loyal fan of his shows. He knows his shit, fluent Italian, studies the masters, etc. At his NYC Lupa, I had bucatini amatriaciana that was right out of Rome.. . A margherita pizza in Italy is, usually, a gastronomic pleasure ride. I love the thin crust with the soupy center, the tangy, milky mozzerella, the playful dance of the basil's flavor....uh oh, here comes the snob. . . The second I read about Mozza, I began stalking it. To me it was more than a meal, more than a pizza, but a homecoming to my stomach's soul, without the $800 plane fare. I was equally excited about the appetizers and desserts, the casual Italian meal which is cheaply and easily found there but impossible here.. . I had reservations for a month a half. I read every yelp review three times, gleaning details to inform my upcoming ordering dilemma.. . My boyfriend uttered the words "Enough. About. Mozza." on more than one occasion. . . We were suprised by how loud and cramped it was. But happily, we were seated within a few minutes. I had long prepared my appetizer order: fried squash blossoms and arancini (fried rice balls in a tomato sauce with a melted cheese center, and in this case peas and ground meat). . . I wanted the margherita (my standard in italia) and the burrata squash blossom pizza, but my bf didn't think the latter sounded good and held firm against it. We comprimised on the Buffalo Mozz, speck (proscuitto), olive tapenade. I go b-a-n-a-n-a-s for mozzerella di buffala. . . First came my wine- an $8 glass of Montepulciano. It came with a little side pour, nice touch. For this caliber of restaurant, it was a great price for this delicious wine. Highly recommended. . . Then came the antipasti. The squash blossoms were hot and oozing with ricotta and oil. Very tasty, especially the creamy ricotta, though the batter and oil are a little too prevelant. But similar to what you get in Italy. . . The arancini had a multitude of flavors, all marvelous, but the ratio of ingredients was off-- the balls were considerably smaller than I'm used to, so the rice got somewhat lost in the shuffle. If Mozza's balls had been bigger, there'd be less bready crust, which would've made these tasty arancini superb. . . The major issue with the pizza was expectation. I was expecting to be fooled into thinking I was in Italy. The pizza was good, but it didn't taste authenticly italian. The crust was too puffy, oily, crunchy...bulky, to be frank. . . The margherita had excellent flavors. The basil danced appropriately, the sauce was zippy and complicated in just the right way. The cheese was a downer, though. It wasn't the super-quality mozzerella that I was expecting from a Batali-owned establishment. And there wasn't enough of it. I know the difference between glutunous American portions of cheese and how much you'd get on your pie in Naples. Naples gives you more formaggio.. . Also, the margherita was luke warm. Maybe I shouldn't have spent five minutes trying to snap a gorgeous photo of it for this review, still.. . The buffalo mozz pizza was the biggest dissapointment. It was 85% crust, even puffier and crunchier than the margherita. The buff mozz cheese were just one small ball per slice that couldn't possibly be incorporated to each bite of this pizza. The olive tapenade didn't even add up to a dollop. And with no sauce, it was mostly like eating bread. This was the most expensive pizza on the menu. . . My bf conceded we should have gotten the squash blossom/burrata pizza. I still wonder what that is one tastes like. If I go back.... . For dessert, my date got the butterscotch budino. A pudding like consistency with intense butterscotch flavor. Good but not my thing, I like to chew!. . I got the profiteroles ("soffiata" on menu) with honey and pistacchio gelato. It was okay but not flavorful or sweet enough to bowl me over. . . The bill was $88 before tip. My bf's domestic bottled beer was $16...wtf? Shoulda put the money in a trip-to-Italy piggy bank.. . Again, the harshness of this review must be appreciated within the context of my enormously high expectations. I learned a lesson about chef worship and buying into hype. . . And maybe I shouldn't be such a Grandisso Snobbo di Cibo Italiano. Eh, can't help that.
