ReviewID: YZKjt3AVx5piG8ksIw6kdA
ReviewerID: fP5-u5yZ683B0Mdd7Zjb6A
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Cobras &amp; Matadors
Category: Tapas Bars
A classy tapas restaurant, Cobras &amp; Matadors has an awesome name what with the viperness and tamings of the bulls. Unfortunately the food is hardly worth your hard earned cash. I don't know if I'll be coming back here. . . Food: I came here with Vivian L. and Tina B. for dineLa week so we were able to try everything on the C&amp;M prix fixe menu. I think everyone agreed that most of the dishes were too sweet or poorly cooked. Even the paella, one of the better done items, was overcooked and barely contained any vegetables (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). Most of the meats were prepared poorly; the chewiness of the skirt steak made its consumption a chore rather than a delight (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). Also, the game hen was unbearably sweet (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ). Believe me. If I (someone who probably consumes her own mass in chocolate repeated in a single year) have said something is too sweet, that is NOT a good sign. The churros were also kind of burnt and the chocolate sauce was thin (. http://www.yelp.com/bi.... ).. . Service: Even though we ordered from the prix fixe menu, several items were unavailable. Still, we were not told this until each missing dish was about to be brought out. We got three plates of churros for dessert, some of which ended up just being carted away and trashed. You will need to set up a reservation to eat here in advance. Service is generally very slow. . . Atmosphere: Dark and very cold if you are unlucky enough to sit by the door in winter. The interior is cramped and dimly lit with strings of lightbulbs containing huge squiggly filaments. The walls are decorated with stacks of wine corks. I wonder if they add to the wall whenever someone buys a bottle of wine... One annoying thing is they seem to pick a cd out and play the entire thing during dinner. Our selection for the night was Radiohead's In Rainbows. A good album, but I shudder to think of what my night would've been like had they picked something I can't stand. . . Synopsis: It's expensive, the food isn't anything to rave about, and the service is slow. Not impressed. Not impressed at all.
