ReviewID: yzrUsMpHOaDdmHTaNZE2Gg
ReviewerID: NBJVYt7sO-2WDg3bPwBT0Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
I've been to the Glendale location once, but I've had Porto's LOTS of times and have never been to this location.. . We were on our way back from Lancaster and decided to come here for "lunch".  That's in quotations because well.... it was 3:30.. . We were pulling up and my friend and I dropped our jaws when we saw the line about 25 deep out the door.  I dropped my friend off across the street because the most of the rest of our group was already inside and he wanted to check it out whether or not we'd stay while I circled around/looked for parking.  He called me a couple minutes later and said we were gonna stay, so I manuveured (sp?) my car into one of their tiny parking lot spots and went inside.. . Holy mother of God it was a mad house inside!  They had 2 lines snaking throughout the place so there had to of been hundreds of people inside, and the line outside was only getting slightly longer.  BUT.... part of these 5 stars I'm giving goes out to the 20-30 people behind the counter that kept the line moving at a really good pace.  So basically, you better know what you want when they call out "next in line please" otherwise you're gonna hold up the line for impatient Angelinos.. . I got 3 potato balls, 3 meat pies, 2 cheese rolls and a mango empanada.  Came to a whopping $8 and some change.  We managed to get a few tables in the dining area pretty easily.  We sat down and we all dug into our treats.. . I only had the meat pie once before and forgotten how good it really was.... made me want to get more but I didn't want to get back in line.  The potato balls were awesome as always, as were the cheese rolls.  The mango empanada was my "dessert" and the filling was not too sweet as I was imagining mango jelly or something, but it was diced mango with a little bit of gelatinous sauce.. . Definitely would like to come back (or the Glendale location) for the sandwiches.  I've only had their pastries. . This gets "The Chef's" 2 thumbs up!
