ReviewID: Z-DzIB2J1KbznZkHebTpcQ
ReviewerID: b9Azt2DNyTP9QJZdRFs8jw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Colonnade Restaurant
Category: Southern
When 5 fellow yelpers get together for dinner at Colonnade, anything can happen! After reading about the many reviews, we were off to meet up at 6pm. . . 6pm you ask? Why yes, this place is packed at 6? Why would you ask, the older crowd that goes, is eating before bed at 7pm. The comment on the gays and grays, dead on, but the great thing, they intermingle well, and are randomly scattered throughout the place. Even some places, had a gray gay! . . Ensure your party is there, they don't seat you unless everyone is present, and accounted for. We were sat in what we thought, and felt was, the kids section. I was anxiously awaiting to be presented my beverage (water, rebel I am) in sipper cup, but real glass. . . Our waitress Christine was very friendly, and my glass was never once empty. She knew the menu like the back of her hand, including the Marion Salad, and the alleged story behind it. She allowed Tuiie to order the Mac n' Cheese, only to tell Victor S, they were all out, Tuile asked "wait, isn't that what I ordered?". . . The rolls and bread were fresh, soft, and ready to be devoured. We had none left in just a few minutes. Not a fan of the liver and chicken, I passed, but judging by the fried chicken, it did not seem to be anything extraordinary. I would imagine the bread has to be served soft, for the older crowd. . . My entree was the Pot Roast, which was a fairly small service (okay with me) for $14. It consisted of 3 pieces of meat, about 2 inches long, with potatoes. I almost asked "where's the beef", but I did not think anyone would find that humorous. Tried Tulie's sweet tea, it left plenty to be desired. I felt my main course was more the size of a nice appetizer, luckily we went out for dessert after. . . We gathered up our stuff, were let out of our play pen in the kids area, and off to pay. The line was about 6 people deep to pay, and the crowd behind us, not the most friendly. I can say that I most likely would not be back. . . And yes, you may wonder why they don't take credit, but when you see how busy they are, it doesn't seem to be hurting their business by any means. . . If you want a night out on the town, full of some chicken and liver, gays and grays, corn muffin and bread, then head on over to Colonnade!
