ReviewID: z114trKQo-vfyIVy7cm3-g
ReviewerID: qbtznqJqPl4-7hXkJBE8jQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
Ok. The first time I went, I sat at the bar and just had steak.  But it was good steak.. . Second time, it was a feast of $300+ between two people (incl sides, appetizers, wine, Scotch, the whole-nine-yards), and what's more, the service was excellent.  I've been trying to track her down (Nick the maitre'd has been tremendous help) - Melanie, I think.  Really nice and knowledgeable about wines/Scotches.  This is where I first had their seafood gnocchi.  . . Third time, three girls, $100/person incl wine -waitress Molly only so-so, not so attentive, the server lost my leftovers, and the manager (one of a few they have.. named Andy? something that starts with an A, I think?) that came to talk about the issue was a complete... rude person (I'll call him that for the sake of keeping my review G-rateD). So snafu there, but hey, it happens.  And the gnocchi continued to be good.  Excellent.  . . Fourth time, absolute failure.  Took my mom there saying it's the best steak, and the meat itself had that strong, not-so-good meat smell.  And the waiter - G-Rod (yes, he called himself that) was almost patronizing, messed up my order and didn't realize it (I didn't remind him), and didn't check on us once until we were almost done with our meal.  Is everything okay, he asked - what, so that I'd say everything was good and leave you a nice tip?  I told him I didn't like the recommendation he had and that the meat was off today and he didn't do anything about it or at least send a manager to discuss.  So I left a flat 15%.  . . A cynic in you might say that the attitude of the waiting staff is in direct relationship with the size of the bill - but I'd like to believe that Melanie would have been attentive regardless.  . . In summary: .  3.5 stars for food at that price level. - 0.5 star for terrible manager and some of the waiting staff.  . +0.5 stars for good service that you can request ahead of time (that, and Nick the maitre'd is GREAT!). + 0.5 stars for the crab meat truffle gnocchi alone.. and the bread. . So overall - 4 stars. The last two experiences were really at 3 and 2 level... . But I'll go one more time.  If not for anything else, for gnocchi.
