ReviewID: Z1ZG3ydcuPT-JhSmH2wAgw
ReviewerID: -QstHPoUb1n3sFuDOV5Esg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Cemitas Puebla
Category: Mexican
So after hearing all the reviews on this and seeing Guy Fieri's episode on this place in  his "Diners, Drive-Ins, and Dives" show, I finally gave in and drove a fairly a ton of miles from the northwest burbs to check it out last week. And all I can say is... WOW!. . I came here on an empty stomach so that I could order and eat a couple different items off the menu. First, I ordered the famous Cemitas sandwich with Carne Asada. I don't how else to tell you this, but the sandwich freakin rocks! The steak was extremely tender, juicy, and flavorful, and the cheese was rich and creamy. The chipotle sauce was an absolute explosion of flavor that had a great but not overwhelming kick along with a fantastic smoky aftertaste. I'm a huge fan of chipotles, but this sauce was out of this world! The bread in the sandwich had amazing texture and flavor as well. Overall, I was extremely impressed.. . Next, I tried one of the Tacos Arabes with the Orientales. The pork was so rich and juicy with an amazing balance of seasoning yet very tender at the same time. Combined with the sauteed onions and the warm tortillas, the tacos arabes was very appetizing.. . The last item that I tried on the menu was the Chalupa with Carne Asada. Yum! The tortilla was fantastic, and the carne asada was once again consistent in being flavorful and tender. I added some of the sauce that was on the tables, and it delievered a wonderful punch of smoky flavor to the chalupa. Extremely GOOD!. . Overall, the food was great and is well deserving of all the rave reviews. My only surprise was that the restaurant was very small... for some reason I expected it to be bigger especially after seeing it on tv with Guy Fieri. Anyways, my experience with the food was outstanding, and this place has officially captured my vote as serving the best Mexican food in Chicago. I totally recommend giving this restaurant a shot! And make sure you eat the food there because it tastes best when it's eaten warm and fresh.. . FYI... I know it's been mentioned several times but seriously try the Coke Mex. It's Coca-cola from Mexico and is made with real natural sugar (no high-fructose corn syrup as used here in the States). It's a bit pricy, but the taste and the fact that's it made with real sugar was rewarding!
