ReviewID: Z2C_J0CjoFVfLDgQuPWj1g
ReviewerID: CNfVYpMRpeEgPBEXXOKYVg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Hub 51
Category: American (New)
Met my sister for an early dinner on a Thursday night.  The restaurant was empty at the beginning, with only a few stragglers inhabiting the bar.. . We were seated immediately inside the large, warehouse-like room.  Our waitress came over within seconds and made us feel at home right away by explaining the entire menu.  . . Hub 51 has all types of cuisines so we wanted to make sure we made the most of the experience right off the bat.  We began with an appetizer of the guacamole and their signature sushi roll.  The guacamole was awesome and came with roasted corn on the bottom.  The corn added a smoky flavor the the guacamole, which was also served with roasted tomato salsa and very thin tortilla chips.  The sushi roll we chose was called Miso Salmon, and came eight to an order.  Each piece of sushi came topped with a cooked piece of salmon, marinated in miso, and wrapped around a huge chunk of avocado.  Very unique and very good.  This was the first piece of sushi I have ever had that was actually cooked and not raw.. . For entrees, my sister had the Sake Salmon and I decided on the Grilled Amish Chicken.  The salmon was super moist and cooked to perfection.  It came with melted fennel and was presented very nicely.  The chicken was average, but I didn't expect that much in the first place.  The chicken came with a huge side of roasted corn and tomato succotash.. . Desserts are simple, and unlike everyone else who has reviewed Hub 51, we didn't order the carrot cake.  We figured the Warm Brownie Skillet with a side of ice cream would be a good ending.  The brownie was OK at best and resembled something a beginning baker would be able to make.  Should've listened to everyone else's advice.. . Overall, Hub 51 is a great new place to try and is definitely a place to see and be seen.  The bar was packed when we left and I think there was even a small wait.. . The service was fantastic and we were treated like royalty.  I will be returning soon, with the goal of trying their famous tacos and finishing with the massive carrot cake.
