ReviewID: z63zQONlxUogni-U-KzITw
ReviewerID: 4SJS_m-JXc0oASx6x5Mjkw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gloria&#39;s Cafe
Category: Mexican
I've been dreaming about the glorious explosion of flavors that happened last Wednesday night.  . . How could I describe the complexity of the broth of the Sopa de Siete Mares?  How do I do justice to the extreme freshness of the various delectable sea creatures I consumed?. . Or the enjoyable companionship of yelp friends?. . Well, I'll try my best.. . After battling to get out of Downtown in the pouring rain to get over to Gloria's Cafe, I found parking in the strip mall in front of the futon shop.  There was a dire warning posted in front of the space suggesting it might not be a great idea to park there as they tow.  I called Derek Z to discuss.  In the end, I decided to risk it.  I didn't hydroplane over here to try to find parking in the very packed neighborhood.  . . There were 16 of us this evening to celebrate the ROTD of a certain Nada P.  :)  How come I didn't think of such a brilliant scheme?  Note to self, must do this for my next ROTD (if that happens, of course).  I cannot remember what everyone had but our genial host Chico F most certainly could.  . . I tried the pupusas which were not greasy, very lovingly stuffed with cheese and pork.  This was my favorite.  The loroco one was good but oooh whee, that pork captured my interest. Plus, they were awesome with what quite possibly was the best curtido (cabbage slaw) I ever had!  I could just eat five bowls of the curtido alone.  . . Then my bowl of delight came.  Anyone who knows me, knows I enjoy a big bowl of seafood and this one surely did not disappoint.  While Derek Z's crab legs were sticking out of his soup bowl, my crab legs were demurely tucked in.  I thought that was cute.  I set to work and ate everything!  Starting with the mountain of shrimp, delicious fish, nicely chewy (but not rubbery) calamari and tender octopus legs.  Then I cracked into the crab legs to be wowed by how fresh it was.  That tender sweet white flesh which was even better dunked in that luscious broth.. . I also got to try Erica F's pork which was absolutely wonderful and something I would enjoy but I actually prefered the tartness of Yuko Y's beef.  Then I got to taste Christopher S's garlic shrimp.  OMG.  This would be something I would also get.  I wonder how many times would I have to come to this restaurant just to systematically order everything on the menu?. . Replete and happy with the sangria, I was so very glad I ventured west to this very wonderful celebration of food, friends and yelp. I can't wait to bring friends back.  . . Thank you!
