ReviewID: z6lGMOKgcENy_jqgUSm-Pw
ReviewerID: NyltIuiXtKMuqtVH85uyxQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Feast
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
I went to Feast last night to "mellow out" after a rough week (well I guess it was only half a week since it was only Wednesday - oops!).  My girlfriend and I went pretty early - right after work.   The decor is cute - we sat outside in the garden area.. . The service was pretty average, nothing bad nothing great.  I did dig the bread basket with that buttery-cheese stuff - tasty indeed.  I did NOT like my martini because it was really small and  not strong enough.  I asked for a "splash" not a "glass" of cranberry.  I switched to wine and had a pretty decent Cabernet.. . The menu there is all over the place - there is a definite Mexican theme in there but also a lot of pasta dishes.  It was almost overwhelming.  For an appetizer we had guacamole.  The guac was fabulous - VERY fresh. The chips were OK but so thick I had to break each one in half.  I had the pork chop which was really great - thick and in some maple glazed sauce.  There were some sweet potato "tacos" under it.  Now that I write this I remember thinking the whole time that there were carrot strips in those tacos but they were sweet potato strips I guess - oops.  My friend got the goat cheese stuffed chicken over Gnocchi.  She liked it but I thought it was really bland.. . For dessert (yeah it was a really LONG and bad 1/2 a week) we split the special - strawberry rhubarb pie.  Very tasty.. . I think I will come back here again but there are other places in the area I will try or re-visit first.  I don't think the toddler next to us playing with some toy helped the overall experience.  This toy was mad annoying - it sang a little song over and over again.  By dessert I was ready to smash it into tiny pieces.. . *UPDATE 6/28/07*. . So I finally went back to Feast for brunch and boy was it hoppin'.  Although they do have a ton of tasty brunch beverages (GREAT mimosas and spicy bloodies) the food still falls a little flat.  Nothing really jumped out at me.  I had the turkey burger because all the brunch items were either too fishy or too Mexican-themed for me (wasn't in the mood for pico de gallo at all).  The turkey burger was OK but nothing great.  It had too much going on (like tons of cheese and onions).  I may come back for a liquidy lazy meal someday but I sure won't be running. . .
