ReviewID: z9xTgqLlvlooONi7cOXOlw
ReviewerID: HKnZArO9uMJBiLvrggfKkQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Soowon Galbi Korean BBQ
Category: Korean
I didn't eat red meat......until I came here.. . Environment:. The area can be scary/ghetto because it is off the main drag (like Wilshire Blvd, for instance) and the parking lot is small. However, they offer valet (when I went, they forgot to charge me so the parking was free but I hear this was a mistake). The restaurant is tucked away in a strip mall so it is easy to miss, but the bright yellow sign helps you out dearly. The inside is an amazing change of scenery compared to the surrounding neighborhood. I walk in and am greeted by a beautiful, smiling woman named Alyssa Min L. (hi Min!). Wow, what a hottie! Mama L. is a looker too, and she is usually at the register as well. The interior is very contemporary with marble tabletops and dark wood among the black leather bench seats. It's amazing how nice this restaurant is. Also, this is the CLEANEST kbbq restaurant I've ever been to. It cannot get any better than this!. . Food:. - The side dishes are so good! Bean sprouts, broccoli, mini pancakes, kim chi, pickled radishes, egg salad, that fluffy egg thing, and seasoned salad (I may be forgetting a dish). Usually all side dishes taste about the same, but the egg salad was amazingly fresh and tasty. The bean sprouts were crisp and not oily or wilted. The salad was made with fresh green leaf lettuce, not cheapo iceberg, and had a wonderfully flavorful dressing that was light and refreshing. . - They use REAL charcoal! This is the REAL DEAL! As the saying goes, IF YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE HEAT, THEN GET OUT OF THE KITCHEN!. - Great selection of meat. My favorite is the chadolbaegi, thinly sliced beef. The meat is very fresh, tender, and not too fatty. Also, the sauce they give you to dip it in is perfectly salted with a garlic kick! Yum, I wanted to drink it (the bf frowned upon the idea). The chicken is awesome. They offer dark meat chicken (probably thigh meat) that is marinated in sweet soy sauce like marinade that is to die for. I wanted to drink the marinade (again, the bf stopped me). The marinated beef is killer. The sauce is similar to the chicken marinade (I don't know if it's the same because it looks darker?) and the flavor is sweet and savory at the same time. Plus, the quality of the meat is very good: fresh, not too fatty, and tender. My mouth is watering as I type.. . Why five stars?. The quality of the meat is great, the side dishes are excellent, and the service and cleanliness is outstanding. I feel like their outstanding meat quality is a result of not being an AYCE place: quality over quantity is their objective. That said, the portions are NOT small and the prices are similar to what you'd pay at an AYCE anyway. They even flip your meat for you (unless you don't want them to, just ask). I wish I didn't drink beer so I could have more room for the meat! I only wished they offered ice cream or had a fro yo machine like some kbbq places do. Oh well! Either way, I can't wait to go back for more! And I guess I'm a carnivore now.
