ReviewID: Z9y2pTA5CzuZaTJ6PfjTeQ
ReviewerID: MOZNSqLAo8TfhCi5x8iLzg
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Versailles Restaurant
Category: Cuban
There is just absolutely no way in hell my 1-star vote  can bring down the average 4 stars. . . Fact is I started dining here since 5 years ago. I was a poor grad student 2 blocks away and the food served here was like heaven. Back then the garlic chicken was $8.95. Tons of rice, beans and plantains. My other 2 favorites include fried breaded pork chops and red whole red snapper. . . Since moving away from this hood, we never had time to revisit. Yesterday we did. . . First off, yes, you can still feel the presence of grad students hanging there. . . Second, Versaille remodeled the interior! Gone are the fugly curtains! Hooray! . . Third, prices went up by $2. Garlic chicken now $10.95, pork chop $12.95 etc. And of course smaller portion of rice + beans etc. . . The 1-star isn't so much because of the last bullet point. Ok, so rising operational costs means we have to fork out a little more. That's fine. But that doesn't mean the quality of the food has to go down. That's my problem with restaurants these days. They take the opportunity to increase the profit margin in both directions.. . The chicken tasted blend and the garlic sauce ain't that garlicky anymore. I recalled that the fried chicken skin literally melted in my mouth. They don't anymore. And how difficult is it to fry breaded pork chops? I have done it at home and the texture always come out just right. Apparently very challenging for Versaille. The chops were tough (overcooked) and the breaded skins fell off even before entering my mouth. I was eating chops and breaded flakes separately. Perhaps Versaille should take a lesson from the Japanese how they did their Katsu Chops.. . Just one more point if any one don't know this yet. Yes the chicken are pre-fried and placed under a heat lamp. So there you are eating KFC-operational style food. Plus when Versaille does it, it's somehow still approved as an  "A" restaurant. Now, when SamWoo does that for roast duck, they get a "B". . . Restaurant rating ethnically biased? Perhaps. But something to ponder.
