ReviewID: z_tXkkBxkZamJNX7rBr-Lw
ReviewerID: 3gE3_MDUsCg-Tay4t1R5nA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Friendship Chinese Restaurant
Category: Chinese
*drumroll please*. .                                     ddrdrdrdrdrdrdrrddrdddddddd *chshhh!*. .               Review number 200, ladies and gentleman! *confetti cannons* Woooo!. .                       ..... silence..... I don't even want to think about how much money I've spent getting to this point..,,,,,,. *crickets, silent head nods*. . But hey! Review 200 was sponsored by our very own bitter bunny, David R. *confetti cannons* Woooo! Thanks, buddy!. . Tuesday night in Logan Square. The usual hubbub of activity and decent parking. Enter: Friendship Chinese. They're on a 30 minute wait, so once we realized it was BYO we took a stroll down to my old corner store and picked up a sixer of Anchor Steam. A few minutes after returning to FC, we were seated along with two glasses and a bottle opener for our beer. Major points scored.. . The insides are lovely. Nicely spaced tables and very comfortable seating. Our server arrived with menus and gave us ample time to make some decisions. First, the delicious calamari. I don't know how they make it so that it doesn't curl up when fried, but either way, keep on doing what you do, Friendship. Some of the best calamari I've ever had. Top three, easily. . . As we were about halfway through, she brought a noodle/cucumber appetizer and then asked if we'd like our mains which I thought was very considerate. We requested she hang onto them a little longer to give us a bit more time, which she did. . . I ordered the garlic peanut chicken, which after a brief discussion about level of heat I opted for medium and after about five minutes of eating realized I should have just kept my gringo mouth shut as I could have handled more. It did creep up after some time though and I was ultimately satisfied after a questionable start. . . No chance to talk dessert as the bill was set down without asking. Ahh well. I was nonetheless quite impressed with Friendship. The pace of the meal, the quality of service, the decor... just about everything. As I mentioned to David I need to return before doling out that fifth star since there are several things on the menu I want to try first, but I absolutely will return for them!. . PS: They included a whole thingy of rice with my leftovers without asking them to. Much love.
