ReviewID: ZadO2V6bTzQ0A31UpJFF-g
ReviewerID: PZlToKr0F8phjppcoDuDkA
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Hamburger Mary&#39;s
Category: American (Traditional)
It's really only getting three stars because I had eaten here once before a couple years ago and had a good experience - but then, an old friend worked here at the time, so perhaps that is why.. . I came here Tuesday night with a friend to grab a bite to eat after having drinks at a nearby bar.  We walked in and it was fairly packed, so we got the table directly in front of the door.  I'm not one to complain about seating arrangements, but it was cold out so every time the door opened we were hit with a blast of cold air.  But since it was busy and there was no where else to go, we sucked it up.. . Our server came over and took our drink orders.  My friend had a Diet Coke, I ordered a Stoli and Sprite.  When she brought my drink over it tasted... off.  I couldn't put my finger on what it was.  When she stopped by to check in, I apologized and asked her if they could remake it.  She said no problem, and a few minutes later brought me a new one.  She stuck around for me to sample it, and while it tasted better it was still off...  but since I couldn't figure out what I was I just accepted it.. . Our food came out fairly quickly.  My friend had a chicken cesar wrap (I think), and he seemed to enjoy it.  I had ordered a burger, and when I placed my order I made it clear I wanted it plain.  But when I got it, it had lettuce (which was fine), pickles (no), and some white sauce (definitely not okay).  I scraped off the sauce as best I could.  I would have sent it back, but since I had already sent my drink back I didn't want our server to think I was being high maintenance.  So I ate it.  It was fine - nothing spectacular.  The fries were good - they had some seasoning on them that was tasty.  But we both had the alcohol munchies, so really, anything tasted good at that point.. . I still love the shoe check presenters.  And the hand dryers in the bathroom?  Totally awesome.  They blow so hard it morphs the skin on your hands.  Now THAT'S getting your hands dry.. . So, Hamburger Mary's gets 3 stars, which is A-OK.  Seems appropriate.
