ReviewID: ZaQC97iURPSkrp9L7O3mJQ
ReviewerID: OBeon38Z0GnwmYKs4AgTYw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
All I have to say is, do I have to go naked to avoid smelling like Korean BBQ?? Because I will. Oh, I will. And the world may be a better place for it...or actually maybe a worse place. Maybe a better place after I start working out again, but for now, a worse place. Let's leave it at that. This place is open air so I figured the smoke actually has somewhere to go that doesn't involve me, my hair, my clothes, or my internal organs. But alas, the smell still attaches to me like a freakin' remora to a shark. It's only second worst to that gas that turns you inside out.. . I would say the place is decent. It's not amazing, but it's not horrible. It's definitely one of those quantity-over-quality type places where you can stuff yourself to near vomitation state, but you're not gonna get the best meat products. However, if you take it for what it is--an "all-you-can-eat" restaurant--you pretty much know what to expect. I have to say that when a restaurant offers all-you-can-eat, I take full advantage of it to get my money's worth, and I add an "as fast you can" element to my dining experience. The slower you eat, the more time your stomach has to realize what you're trying to do to it, so just keep eating!!  It seems to work out well for my stomach until it punishes me later. And if you just stick to the meat, a little rice and lettuce for wrapping, and occasional miscellaneous Korean appetizer items, you can definitely get your money's worth.. . As to be expected from an all-you-can-eat establishment, the place is also pretty chaotic, even for how big it is. It's always crowded and the waiters are always running around. If you know how to bark what you want at the waiters, you should be able to get everything you need. It's definitely an experience. And really great for big group dinners.. . Considering I live in Koreatown near a ton of great restaurants, including Tahoe Galbi down the street, I wouldn't go out of my way to come here for all-you-can-eat, but if someone really wanted to go, I wouldn't object to it, even though I do hate the parking situation.
