ReviewID: zbRrLfwt4S7FAkewWInp8w
ReviewerID: co9UsE7LXw9VqeaZPEzHMg
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Spago
Category: American (New)
No complaints on the food, but no real compliments either. . I had very high expectations with the good reviews, Michelin stars, and the high prices... but was not "wowed" at all, and came home very disappointed. . . Food: 2-3 stars . The food seems to be an Asian-influenced Californian cuisine. The menu is not that extensive, and includes Asian items such as sashimi with yuzu-soy sauce, Hong-Kong style fish, Cantonese duck, as well as crab cakes, grilled steaks, and roasted chicken. . . I ordered tuna cone appetizer (part of the tasting menu), and the duck with mushrooms and figs. . My wife ordered the mushroom ravioli and cod (part of the Dine LA menu). . The tuna cones were ok - the tuna was finely chopped with spicy mayonnaise, with a cone of sesame-soy. The kind of thing you get at a fusion Asian place - you can't really taste the tuna, because the sauce is a bit too strong. But I wanted seafood for an appetizer, and this was the recommendation. . My duck was a bit over-cooked, and the mushroom sauce was nothing to rave about. It was ok, but for $40, I was expecting an innovative and spectacular duck dish, which I didn't get. . My wife's mushroom ravioli was very oily and heavy - a bit much for an appetizer. The grilled mushrooms that accompanied the dish were very good. . The cod was ok - it was grilled with a frenchy-foam sauce. The taste and presentation was of a typical "fine-dining", something we have seen and eaten before, and no "wow" factor. . The wine selection is VERY extensive (and expensive). They have really good wines by the glass as well. . So over all the food was disappointing, and did not meet my very high expectations. . . Service: 4-5 stars . Very smart and attentive service. . They have so many people working the tables and in the kitchen! . . Decor: 3-4 stars . We sat inside the outdoor courtyard, and it was very cozy. The garden and trees are very nice. Makes you forget you are in the middle of a city. . Don't really understand the BGM, tough. It was 80s-90s rock music, so we had Tom Petty, Nirvana, Red Hot Chili Peppers etc - This is supposed to be a sophisticated, and even romantic restaurant, no? Maybe some jazz?? . . So overall, was disappointed. For $100 a person, I expect a very memorable dining experience, and what I got was very average. . Not worth the money...
