ReviewID: zbyTgm5weEXQKanWBeZ1Jw
ReviewerID: scu1qTGz6xsVKgW_-0Gmjw
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Wurstküche
Category: Hot Dogs
3 solid stars. . Ok so we'd heard about this place, and we live pretty close by so Wurstkuche for lunch it is!. . The exterior looks like a warehouse, so it's very easy to miss. Black Russia (I named the voice of my cars' navigation system), was confused poor thing. "RIGHT HERE, LEFT....RIGHT HERE, LEFT HERE....DESTINATION". . . So we park and walk up to the joint, and there's a line outside. It took us about 10 minutes to get up to the order counter, not bad, not bad. Although, it wasn't even lunch hour, so I can imagine how packed this spot would get during rush hour.. . There were three of us so we ordered;. . Bratwurst (with no toppings), Louisiana Hot Link &amp; Filipino Marharlika, both topped with caramelized onions and hot peppers. Two orders of the large (groot) Belgian fries with Chipotle Ketchup, Chipotle Aioli, Pesto Mayo, &amp; Blue Cheese Walnut - Bacon dipping sauces. We also ordered two Pabst Beer's and a strawberry soda, total; $45. So, definitely not cheap. . . I recently had a conversation with other Yelp members about whether or not pricing should be considered when reviewing a business. I'm a strong believer that it should be. That being said, this place is overpriced. True we ordered two beers, but at $2.50 a beer, it's only about a dollar more than most places would charge for a soda anyways. So yes, it's definitely overpriced.. . On to the food. There were taste differences between the three sausages, although not by much. Between the Louisiana hot link and Filipino Marharlika, you'd think (one is sweet, one is hot) there would be a huge taste difference, nope. Even the "average" bratwurst tasted similar to the other two. Not to mention, when topped with your two choices of toppings, the flavors become even more obscure. The fries were tasty, we all agreed. The fries and the dipping sauces were fun. Our favorite sauces hands down were the Chipotle Ketchup and Chipotle Aioli, and believe me, it's not because we're huge chipotle fans. The other two sauces, Pesto Mayo and Blue Cheese Walnut - Bacon, seemed like they were lacking the rest of their ingredients and were basically colored mayo. The Blue Cheese Walnut - Bacon for example, was mayo based, and nowhere in the name did "mayo" exist. One more thing about the food, the "caramelized onions" are grilled onions NOT caramelized onions, big difference. The hot peppers are not hot either, don't expect anything close to spicy. They're just being what I call "Culinary Corporate Correctness", it's basically what happens when companies go all corporate on you. Where hot means "barely mild", sweet means "no spices", caramelized onions mean "grilled onions", it's a true phenomenon. I can write a book on that subject, so I'll stop there. . . The food overall is tasty, overrated? Absolutely, but then most places are these days. The atmosphere here helps the food, big time! Meaning, I could buy these same sausages at a nice european deli and save more than half the amount spent here, however, I wouldn't have a cool downtown loft-like space to savior it in. . . We'd definitely go back, thanks again Yelp!
