ReviewID: zEJicMvkA4Mz9T2Vm907EA
ReviewerID: QgOc3ZpEXfC-SdPyzOfhCA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Gingergrass
Category: Vietnamese
i think Gingergrass is fantastic.  . . sure, its generally very busy, the tables are close together, and there is most always a wait...but if all of you wait-haters would just take a deep breath and relax, i bet you'd really enjoy your experience much more.  in fact, one of the reasons i love going to Gingie is because Silverlake Wine is right across the street!  put your name down for a table and include your cell number, pop into the wine shop and have a glass while you wait!  the helpful employees at Silverlake Wine definitely make up for some of the sourpusses at Gingergrass (more about that later).  you'll get a phone call when you're table is ready, which to me is a great little service...not many restaurants do that as far as I'm aware.. . the food has always been amazing.  i constantly crave the shrimp chips with the dipping sauce, i always order the fresh tofu rolls, and the entrees and salads are great.  the Mako salad is a favorite and the lemongrass steak on top is sooo delicious.  the Shaking Beef with the yams is so good, but very rich.  last night a friend tried a new addition to the specials board: the Walnut Shrimp.  big, golden fried shrimp bathed in a cream sauce and flavored with candied walnuts...sinfully good and very decadent.  in fact, all of their salads are very large and their entrees are usually rich, which makes it a great place for sharing meals.  . . bonus points!  Gingergrass is one of the few restaurants who actually listen to me when i ask them to pleeeeease make sure there is no cilantro in the food or even on the plate as a garnish.  and i love them for that.. . there aren't many places where i save room for desert, but their fried banana spring rolls with the chocolate and creme sauces are TO DIE FOR.  . . now, I'll agree that the service isn't always stellar, but all of the guys that have been my waiter have all been great.  the ladies on the other hand all seem annoyed that I'm actually asking for food.  I'm sure some of them are nice, but there's one in particular that i swear hates me.  and everyone she waits on.  and her job.  sucks for her, Gingergrass is great!
