ReviewID: Zf2Ca0pA7kyFiTLEfi80Gg
ReviewerID: kLPUD4xZuiNJEIPVqsF3rw
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Zenkichi
Category: Japanese
We had a reservation for 7:00 PM for our party of five.  . . After reading the reviews on Yelp, we knew all about the:.  - lack of a sign.  - funhouse style mirrors.  - mysterious setting.  - private rooms. . You'll find the place if you have the address.  Just use the door under the orange light.  One patron almost went into the service entrance, and she said she had eaten at Zenkichi before.  It is easy to trip on steps, and walk into glass doors, especially if you've had some sake.. . Our room unfortunately was not so private.  There was a rowdy group of six in the next room, with no wall separating us, merely wooden bars.. . We started with a $60 bottle of sake (720 ml), which by the end of the meal wasn't enough for the five of us (we like to drink), so we ordered beer to finish the dinner.  The sake was good, light tasting, not like hot sake that comes in the ceramic pourers, and not like the cold sake that comes in the 10-16 ounce bottles.  It was served at room temperature, and to me, it tasted better like that, but the bottle said to serve ICE COLD.. . We ordered the Omasake for four and one person decided to order a la carte.  The a la carte meals were small, so he had to order three meals.  The Omasake menu is fifteen courses, but you will only get a half a mouthful from most of the courses. . . Highlights from the meal:.  - Maguro Carpaccio Medium tuna sashimi: sesame oil, white soy sauce - the tuna melted in your mouth.  - Grilled Saikyo Black Cod - unanimously the best tasting item on the Omasake menu.  - Salad with beef - very flavorful, but not enough beef.  - Dessert - Banana cake, frozen black sesame mousse (chocolate based). . The service was very very good.  The wait staff was very attentive and check in on us very often.. . We paid $80 per person, which is a little more than what we usually spend for dinner, but the experience was good.  If we substituted beer for the sake, the bill would have been $60 a person, so I'll probably go that route next time.. . I went in with very high expectations due to the rave reviews I read, and I have to say I was slightly disappointed.  The portions were too small in my opinion, and the bill was a little high.  I'll probably go back, but not regularly.
