ReviewID: zGIFW_-njiML589PvsBwpA
ReviewerID: klAFypj77lN_dS8H8lyrlA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: El Tepeyac Cafe - Manuel&#39;s Original
Category: Mexican
I am so glad that El Tepeyac (or Manuel's, for those on the "inside") is on Yelp. I've been going there with my family my entire life...literally, my parents started going there since college &amp; it became a family staple ever since. My parents will drive 2 hours round trip on a weekend just to stock up on burritos that will feed them for a week.. . Top Choices: . . Hollenbech Burrito - can definitely feed two, so decide beforehand if you want enough leftovers for a meal and a half or if you want to share  &amp; just take one (or two...) home with you. No point in splitting it to save money, however...the entire menu is extremely low priced. (burritos average $6-$8). . Machaca Burrito - what can I say, it's like a bit of burrito heaven(there's also an equally delish Machaca tostada). Densely packed with meat and flavor, it's even more amazing with extra extra sauce upon request, and that goes for the Hollenbech burrito too. . Taquitos - Not only are the taquitos themselves uber fresh and delicious, it's enough to order them just to get the absolutely delish guacamole that comes with the plate. OHGOODNESS, so good!. . Enchiladas - my fave growing up until my stomach grew enough to accomodate even half of one of the burritos. The cheese stays melty and Ranchero sauce is perfection. Cheese, beef or chicken, never dissapointing.. . Things to know: . *It gets super crazy and super busy, especially on Sundays, since it's across from a church, so be prepared to wait outside in line, first come first serve(service is super fast though). . *They don't take reservations, but they do take to-go orders. *Not in the best or most well-lit area, so be aware and mindful when going, especially later at night.. *Wheelchair accessible outside (inside is densely packed but sometimes has room to accomodate &amp; they are definitely willing)
