ReviewID: zGmyO0mmNb37MzOj7PHKAw
ReviewerID: d3pDDfxuWF7Zz7rEttzkmQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Shopsin&#39;s
Category: Diners
Let me preface this by saying I did not get kicked out or bitched at, I did not witness anyone else being cursed out, the service I received was basically indifferent [not rude at all, not overly friendly], I arrived early and had no wait, and I followed every last rule I read about on Yelp and mentally prepared myself two weeks before going.  So because I didn't have any unpleasant experiences in regards to service, and because I already knew what I was getting myself into had that even been an issue, the ONLY thing I'm basing my review on is the food itself.  Also note that I love diners and eccentric menus so I 'get' what this place is about and is exactly why I came, meaning I'm not someone who came expecting fancy high class 5 star restaurant perfection.. . I'm sorry but I just don't get the hype.  Shopsin himself was not cooking so perhaps that made a difference.  Between myself and my dining companion we ordered 1/2 slutty cakes, 1/2 coconut sweet rice pancakes, and a krakatoa.  I was expecting the slutty cakes to have the peanut butter mixed throughout the pancakes, not a glob right in the center which made it very rich and slightly unpleasant to eat.  My friend chose the coconut rice because she's Asian and will fill her belly with rice whenever the possibility presents itself but was not impressed with them and also thought the fact it wasn't short grain detracted from it.  I'm not big on rice in anything so I won't even bother giving my opinion on them since it's already biased.  The miniature bottles of real maple syrup, however, were right up our alley and a nice touch.  For 6 medium sized pancakes to be worth $19 they better be mind blowingly good and these didn't even come close.. . As for the krakatoa, this is the only place I can give them points for presentation - even the people next to us audibly gasped when this small edible monument was placed in front of me.  But what the description of 'egg sausage stuffing potato volcano' boils down to is a couple of french fries, scrambled eggs, sausage, and toast.  I didn't realize I was getting the exact same typical diner staple I've gotten countless times in the past, except not as good, with less fries, and for more than double the price.  There was also a very light smattering of some kind of sauce I couldn't place [my friend thought it was steak sauce] that didn't add anything flavor-wise and a couple of random carrot peels for garnish that felt incredibly out of place and tasted awful when I accidentally ate one because they just didn't mesh with the rest of the dish.. . Don't worry Shopsin devotees, you don't have to worry about me taking up precious space in the limited dining area because I'll be sticking to my regular local diners and continue making my own pancake concoctions at home.  I'm glad I came here and tried it for myself but I just have no desire to come again and feel like this place is a tad overhyped and in some ways gimmicky.  I just can't help but think that if any other diner was charging $17 for the same food that's normally in the $7 price range elsewhere [fries, eggs, toast and sausage], and there's less of it to boot, and they think artfully arranging it will make you think it's worth the extra money, everyone would be up in arms at the injustice and deception but because it's at Shopsin's somehow it's not just accepted but automatically loved because there's a chance someone will curse you out while you're eating it.
