ReviewID: zi7tIZSmbCetY_ulpVSvJQ
ReviewerID: tvn8fCy1FdEOztS-MjCbCQ
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Over Easy Café
Category: American (Traditional)
I decided to try this place out after seeing it reviewed on Check, Please! and noticing how there tends to be a line out of the door to get in. Luckily, either it was a really cold day and people were too lazy to attempt brunch, or the hype died down, because I didn't have to wait for too long to get in.. . So why is it usually so difficult to get in? Because the food is great and the place is SMALL. My friends and I had to wait for 15 minutes in the back, by the kitchen and bathrooms, before they could seat us.. . But it was well worth the wait. We each tried different dishes and sampled each others. The dishes were, to the best of my recollection, as follows:. . - Smoked Salmon Scramble (ordered with an extra short stack of pancakes); . - Ham and eggs basted with a special mustard sauce; . - Damen omelet (with spinach, mushroom and goat cheese); and . - Blueberry granola pancakes with candied pecans.. . I also ordered the freckled OJ (strawberry orange juice). . . The freckled OJ was good, but I don't think I would order it again because the glass was pretty small and it cost $4. But you should order it for the experience.. . Each of us really liked our food and I would say that my favorite was the Smoked Salmon Scramble, which I had ordered for myself, although I'm partial to smoked salmon. I also liked the mustard, egg and ham combination my friend ordered, with the mustard being a nice compliment to the protein. The granola blueberry pancakes had a nice texture that made you think you were eating healthy (despite all the butter and syrup we drizzled over them). The Damen omelet is a safe choice for anyone not willing to try out the risky, TexMex influenced menu that involves ingredients such as red pepper sauce and jalapenos.. . Overall, I plan to go back again, especially because I want to try their hoisin turkey burger. Mmm, turkey burgers! Or get a plate of my own blueberry granola pancakes.
