ReviewID: zimwMAocK3RN5NE1OLpb3w
ReviewerID: aRJH2Klt-Y4DVjVMLsbcOA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Palm&#39;s Thai Restaurant
Category: Thai
During what seems like my annual after X-mas trip to LA, me and some of my closest needed to meet up for a mini-reunion. . . After a whole day of text tag, my best finally called me around 8p, slurring that he had just woken up from a champagne coma (we've all been there, and it was a Sunday--God's champagne brunch day) and was STARVING. His belly had spoken and it wanted Thai!. . From the outside, Palms looks just like any other trendy Hollywood spot--a place to be seen, not to get down and grub (because who cares about food in LA when you've got the famous cigarettes and caffeine diet, right?). Being a fattie--a fattie from a city that is home to a tons of nitty gritty hole-in-the wall restaurants, I was skeptical (SF elitism for ya). But there was no need for me to break out in a panic-stricken-fat-kid-sweat (is there going to be enough food for me?!?!) because I was already prego with a delicious Papa Cristos baby. . . The surprises:. 1. Found parking. On the street. Para gratis! *happy dance*. 2. No wait. Don't you just love when you're running late and the rest of the party does all the waiting for you?. 3. Reasonably- priced menu (like most Thai places). . 4. No full bar BUT had some of the sweetest and smoothest sake EVER. . 5. Asian Elvis impersonator singing on stage. . 6. Asian Elvis impersonator singing Eagles songs.. 7. Asian Elvis impersonator singing Happy Birthday to ME! (I totally forgot it was my bday the week before--damn, I must be getting old). . The un-surprises:. 1. Said bestie never got around to eating any food--just drank sake and beer. Classic.. 2. Thai food always tastes like Thai food to me. It's always good, not great. . . This place was a perfect place to meet up friends and introduce new ones. Loud enough to curb any awkwardness that the alcohol didn't take care of (not that we needed it). My throat was definitely scratchy the next day. . . Sorry, Palms, I'll try and lay off the LA bashing. Kristine = foot in mouth. Yes, I'm bendie. Mmm...is that peanut sauce I taste???
