ReviewID: ZItThkhPTWKld3dBbAzaAg
ReviewerID: -uLtfRYb2o8hQtjOrKNNhQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Milk
Category: Ice Cream & Frozen Yogurt
One night I was trolling around with friends after an exhibit of Patty Boyd's photos at Henry Diltz' Morrison Hotel Gallery and we just wanted to stop by somewhere, anywhere, for a snack before bed.  As soon as we remembered that Milk was in the area, we drove up and down the streets trying to find it, not remembering its exact location, but knowing we were close.  . . When we finally got there, we tried a handful of desserts. I had the little mint ice cream nuggets which are priced fairly if you consider the work that goes into making them, not so fairly if you think about how the ice cream dipped in chocolate that is a smidge bigger than a marble.  I also had a strawberries and cream ice cream bar that was covered in graham bits.  That made me happy.  My friend tried the blueberry version and she didn't complain.  . . I went back another time and had the butterscotch ice cream bar (butterscotch chocolate was clearly made of Nestle Butterscotch chips, which are yummy!) with slivers of almonds (which is nice for texture, but I would have preferred something like slivers of toasted coconut) and banana ice cream (which is not as creamy as ice cream, but still nice).  I liked it, but when my mouth started getting cold, I tasted less of the buterscotch and too much of the almonds.. . The restaurant isn't cozy or comfortable, the furniture is basically lawn furniture on a concrete floor.  This is appropriate though, considering the business this place does and their need to turnover tables often.  At Milk you don't want to hang out so much and that's okay- all you really want is to try the snacks and get out.  There ain't nothin' wrong with that.. . There were a lot of little other things I wanted to try, but the money was running out on the meter and the meter maid is pretty diligent about doing his/her job. (BTW, the parking is horrendous at night).  Maybe next time I'll come in again late night and try their food.  Nothing really knocked my socks off, but I am intrigued and I'm considering another sampling trip soon.
