ReviewID: ZIZW6IZTlsqD6zx5kt1E3g
ReviewerID: fHP3A1CABebnQ4cV00vXSQ
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Front Page News
Category: American (New)
I have been trying to like Front Page News for years.  Both locations have great patio areas which are wonderful for balmy Atlanta evenings.  Both locations also have the same mostly mediocre food selections.  I have finally found a couple of dishes I would honestly go back for:. . Seafood Gumbo:  It has a slight kick and large chunks of seafood.  Very good as a starter.. . Red Beans &amp; Rice: I have only tasted this as a side but would for sure get it as my main.  Lots of great flavor!. . Boneless Wings with HOTlanta sauce:  love love love the flavor!  Sometimes it is spicier than others and I can't eat it, but I always share with friends.  . . Jambalaya:  Okay, this is a review by proxy, but I am super excited to try it out and report back my actual opinion.  I hear that it is very good, slightly spicy and very flavorful.. . My main issue with this location is the service.  It s....u....c....k....e....d!  Completely.  We went here after a make up kickball game.  There was a table of 8 (ish) in a mostly empty patio.  The night was cool and the fans were going full blast.  We asked the waiter about turning them off and he said he would have to check...he wasn't sure if it was possible.  Wasn't sure if it was possible?  Really?  How does a person who works there not know if they can turn off the fan.  The fan was literally blowing in my face and my hair kept sticking to my gloss.  I knew that any food I ordered would be freezing after the first bite.  Our waiter was fine when bringing out our first round of drinks, and even placing and receiving our order was fine.  Then it was check time...it took forever to get it.  This turned a mostly pleasant time into a crappy one.  Who wants to wait when we are ready to leave?  At first we couldn't even find him.  I don't know if he was on a smoke break or what, but he wasn't around for a while.  Than, he probably passed our table a good three times with us waiving at him (and one time even asking him to come by when he has time) before he came over.  We were one of three tables in that area, he seriously didn't see us?  Finally he brought our checks, which were not correct.  Someone brought them up to him to have them fixed (we really didn't feel like waiting again).  . . I am happy that I have found some good things to eat but will probably stick with the Midtown location.
