ReviewID: ZkPUKq3kuFxiO0QyDsVRfA
ReviewerID: Qh69e1_tF1fpgHh9v6Q9ww
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Veerasway
Category: Indian
Wow!! I was totally impressed by this place, and already have plans to return again next week.  Everything from the service, ambience, the drinks, and of course the food, was amazing!. . We started with the Shankur sangria, coupled with the tasty chutneys/dipping sauces served with little crisps.  The drink was a perfect start---a little sweet but with enough tartness to cut the sweet, and a great use of cilantro (one of my favorite herbs) in a cocktail!  We ordered a shrimp appetizer and two samosas.  The shrimps were a little small, but I kind of enjoyed that since I wanted to try virtually everything on the menu.  The samosa was super spicy, which made me smile.   I am so sick of places warning about the spiciness of their food, and then when you taste it, you are like whaaaa? This isn't spicy!!  This was the exact opposite, and I even had to stop for a minute between bites to let my mouth cool down.  I love it!!  . . For entrees, we ordered the tandoor roasted chicken and the saag aloo.  I recommend both, but get the chicken with dark meat only.  Our server warned us that it was better with dark meat, but we decided we'd try it with both white and dark....we should have listened.  But in any event, the chicken was ... and I hate this word, but sometimes you have no choice ... moist.  And it was perfectly seasoned.  The saag aloo was a nice contrast...a little spicy, and excellent paired with the olive oil and sea salt naan.  BTW, I can't wait to go back and try the other "flavors" of naan---I'm hoping some of them will rival Avec's deluxe focaccia...a girl can dream, right?  I also had a glass of Malbec from Argentina, which paired nicely with the meal and was reasonably priced.. . The service struck that nice balance of attentive while not being pushy or over the top.  The decor is fun, clean, and lively.  I will definitely be back, and am anxious to try the delivery option as well.
