ReviewID: zkxCCbscYyI9qZE87mrK7Q
ReviewerID: yZzPb5BzSIsSKFF8Ici1eg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Pizzeria Mozza
Category: Pizza
Just heard of Mozza a few days ago and had to try it, especially knowing who is behind the concept: Nancy Silverton and Mario Batali.  An insider told me to try the restaurant around 4pm, as it is between lunch/dinner services and shouldn't be as busy.  That is a relative term.  We got there a bit late, at 4:30pm, and my sister said "don't worry, this is L.A., nobody eats this early."  Needless to say, it was packed, on a Sunday afternoon.  . . The wait was well worth it - we got the best seats in the house, front and center at the pizza bar, so we got to watch the pizzaiolos do their thing, and the food and wine were great.   I don't know much about Italian wines, but the selection was pretty extensive and prices reasonable - most wines were in the $35-45 range.  . . The food menu excited us and we wanted to try just about everything.  Alas, we showed some constraint and ordered the chicken liver bruschette.  I don't even like liver, but enjoyed this dish.  The liver was subdued and paired nicely with the Nerello wine.  We also ordered Nancy's chopped salad; Arancine alla Bolognese (deep fried rice balls filled with cheese); and Squash blossoms stuffed with cheese.  All were delicious.. . Finally, the pizza, and the reason why I came.  I love pizza.  And I think Nancy achieved her vision in the pizzas - thin crust with an almost bread-like edge.  Visually, these pizzas are bold and beautiful, especially the squash blossom pizza.  On initial presentation, one notices the huge blisters on the crust's edges.  Further inspection reveals a crisp, center crust; edges that vary from the wide open, blistered crumb, to the more compact.  The paper thin blisters add a nice crunch, while the denser portions provide a chewy contrast.  The crust is not as delicate as Chez Panisse's, but that is not an insult.  Nancy's vision of a bread-like crust is achieved - it is reminiscent of a chewy, artisanal baguette, complete with the micro-blisters associated with an overnight retardation of the dough prior to baking.. . The fennel sausage, panna &amp; red onion pizza was excellent.  A friend suggested we break up the sausage with a fork before eating, and it did the trick and may be the antidote to Nancy L.'s (. http://www.yelp.com/us.... ) complaint.  If the sausage is spread around evenly, the center crust was able to hold its own.  We also ordered the egg, guanciale, radicchio &amp; bagna cauda pizza.  This was also nice - perhaps a little heavy on the toppings, but you can't really complain about that unless you are a crust purist.  I'm not a huge egg yolk guy either, but it worked well with all of the other ingredients.. . This meal was for three people, and I was stuffed (and I can eat a lot).  We ended up with enough leftovers for a light lunch for one.. . Oh, and I don't know if it is possible to reserve, but there is an awesome private dining room in the wine cellar, off to the right (Melrose Avenue) side of the main dining room.  We got a peak of it while waiting for our seats.
