ReviewID: ZL-OX2n6MBJaqLQWyE_QPw
ReviewerID: GtYYEjM_10ImiBBWuUuALA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Perennial
Category: American (New)
Perennial is the type of restaurant that makes me want to be a better diner. . . After gazing longingly at this place for quite some time, it's inclusion in the Restaurant Week fleet sealed the deal for me. Upon walking through the revolving door, I was greeted by a perky hostess and a manager (?) who sat us at our table right away. I was dining with a friend, but as soon as I sat down, I was already plotting to get my boyfriend to take me back. I fell in love with the decor. It was such a trendy looking place, but not at all pretentious. There's no reason to be pretentious, even if you're just doing it for pretentiousness sake. . . I was already giddy about the famous black truffle gnocchi, however, I gasped out-loud when the smell of delicious pretzel bread wafted into my nostrils. After stumbling upon this amazing discovery, I ordered as quickly as possibly just to expedite the arrival of the bread!!. . Bread was yummy. The gnocchi was even yummier! So glad that it delivered as I have a tendency to hype things up and be disappointed when it can't live up to my lofty expectations. My friend went with the shrimp/toasted pumpkin seed risotto, which had a phenomenal flavor. The toasted pumpkin seeds was an interesting twist and was the perfect touch for a cold winter dish.  . . And even though we went with the restaurant week menu, we apparently felt like we were being underfed and ordered the bacon mac 'n cheese and polenta as sides. The entrees were good - I was pleasantly surprised by the butternut squash puree that came with my salmon, but the salmon itself wasn't blowing my mind. It was good - don't get me wrong, but I think that the veggies really stole the show. Mac n' cheese was soooo good...awesome cheesy goodness paired with salty, smoky bacon. Please sir, can I have some more? . . Unfortunately, I gave up dessert for Lent (stupid, stupid, stupid!) and didn't get to partake. My friend opted for the hazelnut bar, and while she did her best to pretend it tasted horrible, her hurried bites and eyes-closed savoring really gave it away. . . Besides the awesome food - the service was top notch. I think we had three separate people come by our table and ask us how things were. Including the assistant manager, Ben. He was super personable and friendly. He asked us what other restaurants we had been to for restaurant week and then told us how the Boka Restaurant group is doing a "Chicago Chef Week" March 22nd through the 29th. He even gave us a list of all the restaurants along with his card in case we "ever needed anything". I tucked that bad boy in my wallet...not sure what I would ever need, but it can't hurt to hold onto it!. . So mark your calendars Yelpers! $30 three-course dinners and $20 three-course lunches. Restaurant week cometh again for the Boka restaurant group! With all this eating, I'm seriously considering purchasing a pair of maternity jeans for the elastic waistband.
