ReviewID: zL5xO3tqNnWFPzPK_EaFQg
ReviewerID: 1q4sB7WNmtQcFVigJppg5Q
Rating: 2
Restaurant: Devon Seafood Grill
Category: Seafood
We had dinner reservations here for my first time in Chicago... and it definitely ranks among the worst dinner experiences I've had. Due to the service, wait, and overall poor restaurant management... not necessarily the food (which wasn't spectacular either). I had just flown 4 hours across the country to visit a friend in Chicago, so I was hungry/irritable/exhausted. Not a great mix for what was soon to be the longest dinner of my life.. . We came in precisely at 8 pm when our reservations were, and were told that they were just cleaning some tables off and we'd be seated in no longer than 20 minutes. Fine, I was hungry but not to the point where I was ready to tear off a limb and start chewing on it.... yet. We waited and waited, and then noticed some older people who had arrived later getting seated downstairs before us... so naturally we were like wtf. So I confronted the dude who apologized and gave me the same line again, "Oh people are just taking some time to finish clearing up the tables, we're waiting on others to finish paying, this restaurant sucks balls and I'm a dumbass, etc." At this point we were noticeably more annoyed, so he offered us complimentary drinks while we were waiting. Although I was aggravated, I took them to spite the restaurant for making me wait on my first night in town on an empty stomach (okay, and I wanted to drink). I semi-forgave them just for a second, until I realized that an hour had already passed and their snail-like disorganized service applied to delivering our drinks too. We were pretty pissed by now and were about to leave until they realized that they were about to lose a lot of business (we weren't the only party who was angry and ready to leave). . . Finally we get downstairs, which I must admit has a pretty nice ambiance with circled booths and dim lighting. The waiter was very aware and understanding of our long wait and had the drinks sent over quickly, which we guzzled down in about 5 minutes. I had a mango martini (good) and champagne (very good). This quelled me for a while until we ordered and got our food. The lobster bisque would have been better if I wasn't informed that it's nothing but heavy cream and lobster bits. But our waiter (whom I actually liked) quickly replaced my order with another appetizer without question. Our main dishes came out after another wait, but at this point I wasn't even hungry anymore. During the 2-3 hours that had passed since we had first stepped foot in the restaurant, my stomach had shrunk to the size of a tennis ball. I ordered the seared George Bank scallops with asparagus and risotto, which was pretty good but again, nothing special. My friend's filet was overcooked and a bit dry. At this point we just wanted to go home and sleep, but the manager came and asked how everything was. I of course told him what happened, and although he kindly suggested that he would be happy to make it up to us, his efforts were in vain. Granted, he did give us free drinks, dessert, and took 30% off our meal (which was greatly appreciated). But at this point we were pretty fed up with the overall poor quality of our dining experience. If Devon Seafood Grille just managed its guests a little better and communicated more clearly (instead of lying to us about our wait times), it would have been a much better experience. . . We ended up boxing up our desserts to go, and leaving a tip only because the waiter seemed very apologetic about how disorganized the restaurant ran things. So although we got compensated generously for our crappy dining experience, it didn't compensate for the time we wasted. I only give it 2 stars b/c I left with a warm buzz to combat the otherwise freezing weather that night. . . Don't ever plan on coming here again, unless I happen to be the only customer in the place and/or there is a huge grizzly bear outside and there's nowhere else to hide.
