ReviewID: zl926FwiFPf8YRajSZ_4JA
ReviewerID: 9k17b6_Ooj8GfVoTcquNNQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: CUT
Category: Steakhouses
Warning: There will be a lot of comparisons to Mastros up in this review, since it is the only other steakhouse of this caliber that I have been to (I don't count Ruth's Chris.  I spit on Ruth's Chris!  PTOOH!).. . I have known about and lusted after Cut for some time, but had very little expectation of ever actually going here in the near future, as my hole-y pockets hold nary a single coin to spare for a 4 dollar sign steakhouse, nor did I expect my dear boyfriend to just say, "Hey, I want to take you out for an extremely nice, expensive dinner for no real reason at all - let's go to CUT!"  But, friends, that is exactly what happened. I try not to think about how this uncustomary and seemingly random act of benevolence coincided with the conclusion of what was no doubt a debauched March Madness weekend in Vegas with his fraternity brothers, the details of which he has been suspiciously recalcitrant to offer.... . (long, suspicious pause). . Anyway. We managed to convince two friends to join us for what would doubtlessly be an evening of meaty joy.  Needless to say, we were all in a quiver of anticipation about our meal and our party arrived at the Beverly Wilshire in high spirits and skipped merrily into Cut, holding hands and singing songs and generally just very full of joie de vivre. On the way in, we bumped into none other but Wolfgang himself as he was walking out!  Actually, I am ashamed to say that three of the people in our group (including me) didn't even notice him as he walked past and we only knew we had passed him because my friend who DID see him started smacking us all the second he passed, hissing at us that we had just ignored the Great Wolfgang in his own home.  Although disappointed that I didn't get a glimpse, I felt that this almost-meeting could only be a good sign. . . Unfortunately, this premature euphoria was not to last. . . The first disappointment of the night came when the waitress came to take our appetizer order and upon requesting the bone marrow flan we were told that THEY HAD RUN OUT!!!!  I'm pretty sure that anyone looking at my face at that moment must have thought that I had just received some terrible news.  They would be right, because IT WAS TERRIBLE NEWS.  I had been looking forward to it ever since I knew Cut existed and more than once I've had to wipe the drool off my keyboard at the descriptions of it on the yelp reviews.  This is a tragedy that I have yet to get over.  Who knows the next time my boyfriend will do something terrible and secret in Vegas and make up for it with an expensive dinner??  ugh. Anyway, the waitress suggested the pork belly as a substitute which we had been planning on ordering as well anyway.  It was quite delicious and I would recommend it, although I calculated that my single piece of tiny pork belly to be over $4, which is not that cool, but whatever. . . On to the main course...the beef!  It was... (FANFARE!!!!!) ...underwhelming.  I know that the reason people come here is for the Waygu, but I didn't order that, and I don't know if I would have particularly cared for it, anyway.  From all the reviews that said you could cut it with a fork, I didn't think I'd appreciate it fully because I like my steaks to be somewhat chewy.  I got the 35 day dry aged Nebraska 16 oz rib eye, and the rest of my table got the 21 day aged (not dry aged) Illinois 20 oz bone in rib eye.  Mine definitely had far more flavor than everyone elses' and it was a perfect medium rare with a nice, delicious char on the outside (I'm a supporter of a nice outside char) but I definitely prefer Mastros over Cut. When I put the first bite of my Mastros steak into my mouth, my eyes rolled back in my head and I clutched at the table and nearly wept with delight and gratitude.  No such reaction here, not even close.  It was a great steak, but couldn't hold up to my Mastros experience.  The sides were also an overall disappointment.  The potato puree was EXTREMELY average and the size of it was appallingly small, especially after seeing the gargantuan sizes of the sides at Mastros. Crappy mashed potatoes anger me, because it is not at all hard to make good mashed potatoes. It had very little flavor and my friend commented that it tasted no different from mashed-potatoes-in-a-box (not something very lightly said, especially after having been starstruck by Wolfgang himself). . . We ended the meal with the banana cream creme brulee which WAS RIDONK.  After a meal that we all agreed to be just average, SOME OF US *eyes boyfriend* tried get away without ordering dessert, but luckily I am nothing if not vigilant about such matters, and in this instance my vigilance paid off.  IT WAS AMAZING.  . . All in all, CUT did not live up to my expectations.  Normally right now I would be feeling like someone just told me there is no Santa Claus, but luckily, I know that Mastros is waiting for me.  Also, I'm Asian. We don't have Santa Claus.
