ReviewID: zNfTlha_sbnShiUlhO7kXA
ReviewerID: kOC19QQ8GQLhxnPiWHWHrQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Ping Pong
Category: Chinese
Like many before me, Ping Pong is a local place for me. After 2+ years in the neighborhood I finally popped my Ping Pong cherry tonight. Flying solo because my boyfriend was out for the night I picked things based on their yelp mentions, ordered enough for me to eat now, and him to have leftovers later. . . Placed the order and decided to walk down to pick it up. I was told 15 minutes, I showed up in 20 and asked the host if it was ready. He said no, I paid and started my wait. 10 minutes later a bag was brought out and left behind the bar. 10 minutes after that I finally got the host to check on my food and he picked that bag up and handed it to me. All told I got my food 25 minutes late. It was beautifully packaged, and I'm sure would have been hot if I wasn't waiting on it for a while. But it was busy, and the host was swamped, so I guess it's to be expected. Then again, they always look swamped, so I'd expect them to handle it better.. . The hot &amp; sour soup was terrible. 3 bites in and I was done for good.  Since the boyfriend doesn't like it, into the trash it went. Luckily things got better. The crab rangoon were fried well, but not the stuffed, crab filled things I envisioned after reading these reviews. Skimpy on the cream cheese and crab almost non-existant, I'll take the free ones from Yen's every time over these. Sadly they were better than many others I've had in the city though.. . I got the Sesame Tofu which was also very good. The sauce wasn't thick or syrupy, but it had a very subtle and distinct flavor. The ginger was a great accent to tofu &amp; broccoli that was cooked well. Too bad there wasn't a lot of broccoli though. But light and totally refreshing. A wonderful change to the normal Chinese restaurant version that is usually very syrupy and sweet. I really enjoyed it. The "sashimi tuna dip" however, is incredible. Raw tuna, a thin and light spicy mayo, fresh cucumber, black sesame seeds, and cilantro along with lightly fried chips to dip... if this was the only good thing I had I'd go back for it again and again. If you order anything from Ping Pong, get this tar tar dish. . . All in all, between the super loud music, the overabundance of trendy wanna-be-seen people, and the amount of times I got elbowed; the wait seemed about 3 times longer than it was. For that reason alone I'll never eat there. But I'll sure as hell be ordering from them again, even if it's just for the tuna tar tar. . . PS - the boyfriend enjoyed all 3 things, so he'll be up for ordering in the future! yay!
