ReviewID: ZngyGi9l0MI0OfqwfLIwtw
ReviewerID: Qht8dEGcI95jVnPErdjz8g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Pink&#39;s Hot Dogs
Category: Hot Dogs
So here's the thing.  Chocolate or vanilla?  I pick chocolate.  Pepsi or Coke?  I pick Pepsi.  Michael or Prince?  I pick Michael.  Back in the day Michael.  Michael when he was only half white.  Burger or Hot dog?  I pick the dog every time!  So when my son moved to that city down south, I knew I had to visit Pinks.. Now, like Randy, I love LA.  I love all the things that people hate about LA.  The fake manufactured people.  The residents that feel, if you don't live in LA why live.  The fact that everyone in LA has a PDA.  I love all that stuff.  So I was feeling kinda fly as I drove my rental car down to get my Pink's hot dog.. As I got a couple of blocks away I could see in the distance a huge line.  This is hard to believe but it was a line almost a block long, 100 people strong, just to get a damn hot dog!  Oh I've got to have one of these.  The hell with an iPhone.  Get me some Pink.  Parking was a bitch, but I found one a quarter of a mile away.  I get in line.  I see people walk by me with their Pink's hot dogs looking so content.  20 minutes later people are still walking by with their hot dogs looking so satisfied.  45 minutes later I am still in line and people are still walking by while tearing into their hot dogs.  I realize these people were almost starving to death waiting in line.  Hell, I've lost a good 2 pounds while waiting.. I finally get to the front of the line.  I order a chili dog.  You'd think after waiting over and hour in line I could do better than that, but that's what I ordered.  I'm hella hungry at this point.  As I'm walking by all these fools in line I start tearing into my chili dog.  Damn.  That's a tasty dog!  It's the best chili dog I have ever had, and that is a bold statement.  I've been around.  It was great.  But after I finished it, I started to think.  Was it a great chili dog or was I so hungry after the long assed wait that anything would taste great.  Not sure, but next time I have half a day to kill and I'm in LA, you can find me with all the other fools, in line, waiting to get a hot dog.
