ReviewID: zO6-de9If1wLrJPfo9dWkg
ReviewerID: 6YEnpx-qloIfFX-L9uyfbQ
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto's Party Store &amp; Cake Gallery
Category: Bakeries
I initially found out about Portos from my super foodie friend Mark Y., who promised me more than once that he'd make a Yelp account back over the summer... + never did. Booo! BUT he did introduce me to Portos for a lunch break, + I've been hooked ever since! . . Little did I know then that Portos is so crazy popular all over Yelp! I've been about 3 times now to either the Glendale or Burbank location, + everything I have tried has been *insert sing-song voice* Amaaaaaaaazing!. . * MY FAVORITES: * (in order of level of awesome-ness). -- Cheese Rolls -- Um so no, they don't literally taste like cheese, but more like sugary sweet cream cheese goodness all wrapped up in a flaky outer layer sprinkled with sugar crystals! So unsuspectingly plain in appearance which makes them even more sinfully delicious! If you're taking some to-go, try heating one up slightly before eating + it becomes MELT IN YOUR MOUTH quality.. . -- Hot Pastrami -- I'm a big pastrami fan, + this sandwich most definitely meets my standards! Way better than anything you'd find at Subway / Togos / Quiznos + not greasy overkill like The Hat, this baby was perfect. It's a good amount of tasty meat in proportion to the bread + without too much fatty parts as pastrami can be known for. One sandwich for $5 is 2 meals for me especially since it comes with plantain chips when ordering dine-in. Cheap is good.. . -- Potato Balls -- Imagine creamy mashed potato stuffed with seasoned, juicy ground beef + then fried. That's the Portos potato ball for ya! It's big enough to be a be substantial snack (esp considering it's under $1 each), but small enough that it's a must-have add on to whatever else you're ordering. . . Other mentions:. The Pan con Lechon + the Cubano sandwiches are others that I tried + know I enjoyed... but somehow my memory of them being spectacular does not stick. It's not that they were unremarkable or anything, I'm sure... but rather I was probably too busy salivating over my cheese rolls +/or potato balls to remember what they tasted like, haha. Mental note to self to remember to focus when trying new delicious items! . . Be ready for looooong lines when coming here during peak hours (aka lunch times, weekend afternoons), but don't let that intimidate you since they've got plenty of help behind the counter. And for sure, the yummy-ness you are about to enjoy is worth it! If you're coming to Portos with at least 1 friend, have someone scout out tables while in line. While the location is quite big so there are plenty, it's always nice to have to opportunity to dive in the second the server lowers the heavenly plates to your table. . . Gah, I want a cheese roll now.  *pouts*
