ReviewID: zOLbX7hp3Koto3GKollNyA
ReviewerID: XsUHLtb7z8cLA3XnN3V34Q
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Porto&#39;s Bakery
Category: Latin American
I'm pretty sure Porto is some person's family name or something, but apparently the verb "portar" means "to carry," and means "I carry" when converted to "porto," which I find strangely indicative of how I feel when I leave here carrying 8,000 extra pounds of delicious in my stomach.. . Porto's is probably one of the most affordable bakeries in all of LA.  Less than ten dollars will go a long way towards filling you up.  Yes, there are long lines, but the commensurate lines behind the counter do a great job of making sure that the line moves quickly and efficiently.. . Every time I go here, I get the same things, sometimes in varying degrees: a Media Noche Preparada, a Meat Pie, a Chicken Empanada, a Refugiado (guava and cheese pastry), and a Cheese Roll, all accompanied by a refreshing Horchata Smoothie.. . The Media Noche Preparada appears thin, but is jam packed with flavor.  With croquettes, ham, roasted pork, swiss cheese, pickles, mayo, and mustard on a toasted sweet roll, it's hard not to inhale the whole thing at once.  It also comes with a side of these great banana chips they have.  I just wish that they had some tomato or some more veggies thrown in there, but that's really just my idea of compensating for the way I feel after I do inhale this sandwich.  The Meat Pie is a great side that also helps to fill you up.  And finally, the best thing they've got: Chicken Empanadas.  These empanadas won't be like the ones you're used to.  These are the bakery version, meaning the meat comes baked inside an amazing, flaky, buttery casing that just melts on contact with saliva.  I bet I could eat a thousand of these a day, but my distended stomach says otherwise.  And for some reason, I always think the Horchata Smoothie will help me wash things down, but it just fills me up even more, in a good.  It's a great smoothie.. . I've also tried the Media Noche and Cubano, but they just don't do it for me like the Media Noche Preparada does.. . There's no better way to finish off a meal at Porto's than with a Cheese Roll and Refugiado.  I always like to eat them in pairs because I think they play well of of each other.  The flaky crust plays off of the soft strudel.  The creamy cheese plays off of the sweet guava.  The bigger Refugiado plays off of the smaller Cheese Roll.  A match made in heaven.. . I always try to convince myself to try something else when I go here, but shamefully I never pull through.  Then again, that's just another testament to Porto's great food.. . One thing you do have to think about before coming here is what you have to do for the rest of the day.  Porto's food is all really filling and satisfying, and if you get what I get when you go, then you will undoubtedly be down for the count for the rest of day.. . GET: Chicken Empanada, Refugiado, Cheese Roll
