ReviewID: ZoqqHuJ6RlxvEVOmO-JnQw
ReviewerID: R3ZgNDlEAm8d6K_WPYIRgg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Hakata Ramen Shin-Sen-Gumi
Category: Japanese
If I were commandeering a Death Star-like planet-destroying space station with a food court that could only hold 3 restaurants, this would be one of them (the others being In N Out and a toss-up between Sushi-Ya and Afloat Sushi in Pasadena).. . I LOVE SHIN SEN GUMI!  Holy crap!  I really can't say enough good things about this place.. . The servers are consistently awesome, fun and friendly.  Yes, there is a lot of yelling in Japanese and no, I don't know what it means, but if a team of servers and ramen chefs saying "hello," "goodbye," and "thank you" in Japanese bothers you, then this place is not for you.  It's definitely not the place to enjoy a quiet romantic dinner, but I've taken six friends to Shin Sen Gumi on separate occasions and all of them liked it.  I'm pretty sure none of them had ever eaten at a ramen house before either.. . Also, everyone that works there is super friendly and genuinely nice and it seems as though they take their jobs very seriously.  It seems as though cooking and serving ramen is their passion.  I can really appreciate that because I think it's a definite contrast to the attitude that most American wait staffs have.  I would put them on the level of In N Out's employees, if not higher because it's clear that what they do is important to them and it shows.  I definitely appreciate their efforts and energy!. . The place has a really great vibe when you sit about halfway down the restaurant facing the ramen-making area.  The walls have ramen-related photos and you can really feel the passion for ramen emanating from the place.  I guess if you've never been there, that might sound silly, but you can definitely feel a lot of love.  . . As for the ramen itself, it's awesome!  I'm by no means a ramen expert, I've only eaten at Orochan in J-Town and Kyushu in Van Nuys, but I prefer Shin Sen Gumi to both of those places.  They ask you how firm you want the noodles (get firm), how strong you want the soup base (get strong), and how heavy the oil base should be (I get light).  I get the full hakata ramen with extra chashu, spicy miso, flavored egg and green onions and ginger.  They also offer an extra serving of noodles for $0.95.  What a deal!  . . With a drink and tip, it's $16 well spent.
