ReviewID: ZQ7f5-GegbJtdx6PvukIew
ReviewerID: bEf3xvHgeEmRFr6celPgjg
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Big Star
Category: Mexican
Oh my god were the tacos good. Oh my god did the wait suck. Actually, it was alright. There were about 8 people ahead of us, and instead of just waiting around, they let us stand around a barrel table and start ordering. Although it was a bit inconvenient, we were starving and impatient. So, I guess it was nice of them to let us do that. They were pretty busy, and their walk thru was closed. Womp womp. . . The guacamole and chips were great and decently priced. It was enough for 5 of us to be content with. Their salsa was ..alright. Yeah. Dots....and alright. That's how I felt about the salsas. My friends ordered the pork belly and lamb tacos. It was a consensus that the pork belly was much better. They said the lamb tasted "too lamby". I guess that means too meaty? Not sure, but they loved the pork belly. I got the fish tostadas. So GOOD! The fish was great and the toppings went along so great with it. I would have ate more had I not felt like my stomach was going to burst. The portion sizes are smaller than I would like, but they were surprisingly still filling. But then again, I did want to save room to have some dessert elsewhere. . . The service was alright. They took our order, delivered it, gave us our check. Not a lot of checking in. Some water refilling. It was enough. I don't like to be suffocated. And for the price of the food, I wouldn't expect more. . . The outdoor seating was great, seeing as it was a great Chicago summer night. The restaurant itself is very hipster and belongs in Wicker Park. I think they converted a garage into a restaurant/bar? At least that's what it seemed like. It was cool. . . Parking is semi-inconvenient. It's near Milwaukee so parking is sparse, but if you look a little harder, you'll find some spots open a couple blocks away. You just have to walk. No big deal in the Chicago summer night. I would definitely go again, but I don't know if I would wait about an hour to get seated. So let me rephrase that. I'd go again if the wait was short. . . OH YES! JUST CASH!
