ReviewID: ZQf0sLbJdAsOi3tQ_1bdNw
ReviewerID: -XtWgNfuKeUDetM67dqd2w
Rating: 5
Restaurant: The Stinking Rose
Category: Italian
My guy took me here for my birthday, and I've been a fan every since.  It's a very unique place, owned by a very unique Itallian chef.  The theme of the restuarant old Hollywood, and features borderline gaudy furniture and decor.  You almost feel like you've walked into some old Hollywood backlot set complete with rich scarlet painted walls featuring frescas of faces and scenery.  There's even a Dracula room with huge gothic chandelier and (very fake) cobwebs.  We sat in a booth comprised of rows of little gypsy tents.  Very fun.  The visit on its own is an experience without the food.  . . The food:  Amazing.  Right from the second you walk in, you're assaulted with the scent of savory garlic.  It's not overpowering as one would expect, rather it is inviting and mouth-watring.   Please don't leave without trying:  . . *The Bagna Calda*  A bowl of roasted garlic in olive oil and butter.  They give you scrumptious rolls to spread it on.  The cloves are whole, but roasted to the point of disintigration.  The clove litterally turns into garlic spread as you smoosh it all over the warm rolls.  It's not overpowering at all.  Very delicious.  If you're on a date, its very sexy.  Don't worry about the garlic breath.  He / She will smell like garlic too.  No worries.  . . *The Garlic Steamed Clams Tureen*  Boiled clams steeping in a garlic broth.  Not too filling, but every bite is heaven.. . *Any Fish*  You have a choice of: Sea Bass, Haddock, Salmon or Halibut.  Then you get to pick how they cook it:  Some spicy tomato concoction, a lemon butter caper dealy-bob, a rosemary asparagus job or (the one I picked) Roasted garlic with cherry tomatos and kalamata olives.  OMG the flavor of the fish was clear and fresh and the sourness of the olives with the zest of the garlic was foodgasmic.  It was complimented with a gnocchi-pastatastic side that was to die for.  . . My guy got the *Silence of the Lamb Shank*  LOLOL made with Chianti glaze and fava beans.  He said it was amazing.  He ate it so fast, I actually didn't get a chance to steal any.  O_o. . *Garlic Ice Cream*  Its complicated to explain.  Just try it.  Its good.  Trust me.  . . On my next visit, I can't wait to try the 40-clove chicken and the Dungeness Crab.  I've heard they're phenominal.  If it wasn't such a far drive, I'd go so much more often!  . . The prices are range in the $20-$30 dollar range, around $40 if you want a slab of prime rib or doulbe helping of crab / mussles / shrimp / seafood etc.  . . Totally worth it.
