ReviewID: zTjN1mvGjOfo5alCZEWM2g
ReviewerID: WWnhqRnWWjutMqh-2SzEuQ
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
We arrived with confidence, Mike and I, confidence in the thick heatproof tongues and cast-iron gastric lining we inherited from our kimchi-scarfing ancestors, confidence in our personal fortitude and hatred of surrender, confidence that we would stare down the Beast dubbed the Special 2 and retire in victory and fame, our Polaroids adorning the Orochon Wall of Bravery.. . We arrived shortly after 1 PM on January 19, 2009, a party of three, the third of which declined to take on the Special 2.  The waiter, a serious Japanese man with a dirty tan and floppy hair, led us to our table after a few minutes' wait.  We were seated at an outdoor table in the warm January sunlight and given menus, which we examined with the utmost aplomb.  The menu listed spiciness levels ranging from 7 (non-spicy) to the feared Special 2.  The Beast came with a warning label - "Eat at Your Own Risk!!!" printed in red samurai sword-slash strokes.  David, our unadventurous third, settled on the shoyu "Impact Orochon," with a spice level of 3, with added chashu and scallions and a half order of fried rice.. . Mike and I looked quickly through our options.  Our eyes met and each of us recognized the trepidation in the other.  We steeled ourselves and nodded.  When the waiter came, we ordered.  Two shoyu Special Twos with bamboo on top and a half order of fried rice to absorb some of the heat.  The waiter betrayed no sign of awe at our ineffable courage.. . We waited.  We waited for close to fifteen minutes, eyeing the stocky waiter and his handkerchiefed head each time he passed us by.  David's order came first, leaving us to wonder what potions and poisons were taking their time leaking their demon essences into our soup.. . We found out soon enough.  Our waiter returned with two bowls of steaming ramen floating in a broth the exact red-black color of pure evil.  Slices of jalapeno bubbled from its depths like victims claimed by cursed waters.  Bamboo shoots, mushroom, and a few stray pieces of shriveled pork finished out the unholy fen.. . We were so young, so naive.  The ramen was chewy and well-kinked.  The bamboo a smidgeon softer than ideal, but enjoyable yet.  The mushrooms were rubbery.  The pork was overcooked and unmemorable.    The fried rice was heavy on the soy sauce but well-flavored.  The broth - the broth was a lake of fire.. . Mike and I took our first spoonfuls and looked at each other with horror.  We had underestimated our adversary - a warrior's worst mistake.  The broth scorched our lips.  It made our noses drip.  We coughed.  We trembled.. . Five minutes into the challenge, I turned to Mike and said, "I don't think I can do this."  He took my hand and said with gleaming eyes, "Steph, don't you say that right now."  We persevered.. . Minutes later, our stomachs rebelled.  I could feel my insides thinning like the walls of a sand castle brushed over and over by the slow lapping of tired waves.  A glance at Mike told me that he too felt the corrosion of his insides, and we agreed.  "Dude, it just isn't worth it.". . We admitted defeat.  We lacked training.  We lacked strength.  We lacked the masochistic strain it takes to be a true Orochon warrior.. . We relaxed.  Once I gave up my aspirations of Ramen Heroism, I was able to enjoy my lunch, finishing the noodles with rice, bamboo, and just a touch of that most pagan of broths to moisten and spice up each bite.  Mike and I sampled David's Impact Ramen, a shoyu broth that we initially called "water."  When my tastebuds had recovered their function, I was able to determine that Orochon's shoyu broth was nothing special, and that its flavor was overly distorted by the taste of the Chinese mushrooms.. . The waiter came to clear our bowls, and asked without a hint of sympathy or disappointment whether we were finished.  We allowed him to take them away.  We were humbled.. . We waited for the bill.  We waited for change.  We tried the call button at the table and determined that it was broken.  We waited, and finally, we were free to leave the scene of our shaming.  On our way out, we gazed, hearts brimming with respect, at the faces beaming out at us from the Orochon Wall.. . Will we be back?  Not for the ho-hum broth on offer to the unadventurous.  But perhaps one day, when we have forgotten the sting of our failure and the hellish fury of the Beast, we will gather up our courage and challenge the Special 2 once more.
