ReviewID: ZVabf2FefjiyUKMr11Pspw
ReviewerID: 84Ee_5DeoubAMxpAcAmD7Q
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Manna Korean BBQ
Category: Barbeque
The best way to describe the atmosphere at Manna is "Korean Oktoberfest". If you want a nice, quiet evening, it's better to go elsewhere.  The wait to get in can be long-ish, and once you're seated  at one of the long tables in their huge outdoor patio- more airplane hangar than a place for AYCE Korean BBQ- you'll see what I mean.. . Thankfully, the patio has a high ceiling. I don't know if that helps to dissipate the "Korean BBQ Afterglow", but after several bottles of Hite or pitchers of flavored soju (somewhat pricey), you probably won't even care, not that you should be smelled in public anyway.. . I'm not an expert on Korean BBQ. I DO have my standards. But... once AYCE is factored into the equation, then... well... if you're of the carnivorous persuasion, then decently-marinated cow cooked on hot metal IS manna from heaven.. . So the drill is basically the same: you sit down with your party pals, a server brings out the "panchan" along with small saucers of dipping sauce and salted sesame oil, you order your protein, and you start grillin'. . . There's a bowl of lightly dressed lettuce, and if you wish, they'll bring out a platter of whole lettuce leaves and pretend you're on the Atkins diet. And if this is your last stop for the night, sliced garlic cloves. Why not? . . I forget if they have the julienned green onions here. I don't remember if there's soup. There may have been white rice; maybe not... They DO have those rice wrappers, mochi-like sheets with which to eat your meat and, at the same time, test your dexterity with chopsticks.. . There's also a spicy miso paste- okay, not "miso". DON'T ask for "miso"; ask for "soybean paste".. . On our first visit, someone asked the mexican boyfriend of one girl to ask the server for "miso". He flagged down our server and got an earful. I didn't transcribe their exchange- it was more of a lecture- but it went something like this:. . -"Can we have some miso?". -"NO! NO MISO! THIS IS KOREAN RESTAURANT, NOT JAPANESE RESTAURANT! NOT JAPANESE! NO MISO! NO MISO SOUP! YOU WANT MISO YOU GO JAPANESE PLACE, THIS KOREAN!. . And our friend, completely taken aback, had this look, like, what's going on? why is this man screaming at me? what did I say?? I thought it was hilarious.. . -SOYBEAN PASTE!! YOU WANT SOYBEAN PASTE, NOT MISO!. . Our deeply offended server finally brought out some soybean paste for our meat. Five minutes later he wore a huge, crazy grin (the kind where you bare your teeth) as he sprayed a bottle of champagne into the back of an unsuspecting someone who was celebrating their birthday (but YOU supply the cake). That was the funniest thing I've seen in a long time.. . Manna is definitely an experience. It may not be the best Korean BBQ, but if you have a large, boisterous group, this is the place to bring them. I think they have indoor seating, but what's the point? All the real action's out under the BBQ hangar.. . And remember: "soybean paste", NOT "miso"...
