ReviewID: ZvE9QUEaweZChRSsEPX9zQ
ReviewerID: 1IqicHIwRvjl83yGVhIooA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Yeah! Burger
Category: Burgers
YEAH BABY! THIS IS OFF THE HOOK!!!. . Well, not completely. But it is a big improvement from the last couple of fancy burger joints I tried.. . (And what the heck is off the hook? Ah well, another guy Frieri-ism that I don't quite understand. . .). . It is quite noteworthy that this opened just down the road from Flip Burger Boutique, a place which I don't have much positive feelings. I came inside with mostly lowered expectations. As it so happens, they were exceed - and a bit more. . . The one main issue that I had with Flip was quickly addressed - the burger is actually decently sized. In face, its a double-patty burger, which makes me very happy. It looks horrible (its like somebody try to deconstruct it and forgot to finish it), but its a good size - and the tasty is not too shabby. . . The other issue I had was the crowds. It was busy, but not so Tokyo-train car packed (although I think they are inviting trouble by stating "Don't worry, your order will arrive in the few minutes?" Hidden slam? Hmmm. . . . ). I got my order in quickly, found myself a seat and a few minutes later, it arrived. Yay for speed (I wonder if that is why my burger looks broken, though).. . (FWIW, there were children as well in the place, but not as many. I guess people don't breed as much in this part of town).. . A couple of more points:. .  - The fries, they were so-so. However, the ability to have an order with half fries and half onion (the Fifty-Fifty) was very much appreciated. Next time, I may just stick with the onion rings.. .  - the concrete, which I thought it would be some special ice cream. As it turns out, it was just a frickin' shake. It was good (vanilla with hot fudge), but nothing particular special. Boo.. .  - the look is a bit kitschy - and not in the good way kitschy. Maybe it is too clean or something. Needs more dust.. . Negative points aside, I was quite satisfied with the food as well the service. In the Great Atlanta Burger War of 2010, as far as I am concerned, Yeah! wins this round.
