ReviewID: zVibC0M0s20C_7CfrVZ0sA
ReviewerID: NXsadicF_ynvfJeKsAFL7g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Barney&#39;s Beanery
Category: Sports Bars
It's hard to do an unbiased review, because I'm a regular. I love Barney's. I love the vibe, the history, the location, the food, the beer, the staff... I love it all. This is a really down-to-Earth, casual place. There's no scene, no velvet rope. Wear what you want - nobody gives a damn. We're there to eat and drink, not to be impressed by the typical LA bigshot-wannabes. Barney's transcends all that. I have only two criticisms, and they are both minor enough not to take any stars off my rating. . . The first is that the service is sloooow. On a busy night, it would not be out of the question for it to take 45 minutes to get a hamburger. But there's plenty to look at and talk about in the meantime, and the beers arrive within a minute or two of ordering. So you're not feeling ignored or forgotten, you're not bored, and you're not thirsty. And the food is worth it. My usual order is a chili burger with fries and a draught Fat Tire, but I've had lots of other things and I've very rarely been disappointed. . . Second criticism is the strict "no minors" policy.  I don't know if it was always a bar first and a restaurant second, but it is now. There is pretty much no way in hell a 20-year-old is getting in after 7pm on any night of the week, even if all they want is a Coke and an order of chili fries. (Oddly enough, though, little kids can go in with their parents anytime. I've seen 8-year-olds shooting pool in there at 9pm on a Saturday.) But, again, no stars off because I'm nowhere near a minor so it's not really my problem. The only time it's a bummer is when I'm hosting couchsurfers from out of town and we can't go to Barney's for dinner. If the trade-off is that I don't have to put up with annoying high school kids while I enjoy my Fuller's London Pride, I guess I'm okay with it. . . Those two things notwithstanding, Barney's is the best! I should note, however, that all of this applies only to the West Hollywood Barney's - the real one.  I've seen the phony ones in Pasadena and Santa Monica, and they have about as much to do with Barney's as TGI Friday's does. They tried to replicate the feel, but there's no soul, no history, so they end up like glorified Hard Rock Cafes. Wouldn't be caught dead in those places. But the original Barney's, the WeHo Barney's, is a great time for all.
