ReviewID: zweyRDxrQ2hsgxYL5TYm6A
ReviewerID: DLDTqteedxLAwPlEhpti5Q
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Alcove Café &amp; Bakery
Category: Bakeries
HUEMANLIFE.COM: Restaurant Review: This place runs the wide spectrum from good tasting healthy food and good tasting fattening food.  It takes a special foodie to know and be able to distinguish the difference though. For me its a place to treat myself when I've done good with my workouts and/or nutrition regimen.  Today I had red velvet cake - yum! . . When I first discovered Alcove it was suggested by a friend during my first month living in LA.  I had friends visiting and we wanted a good breakfast place to eat.  I loved the place on first sight!  the food was amazing and it catered to the health conscience. The concept was also great whereby you place your order then take a number and go find a seat (outside seating mostly). The food came out in record speed (almost). But I noticed that time I was with one of my European friends and his black non-threatening girlfriend (my friend too). The reception was amazing.  . . However I go again with a black male  friend and we were treated totally different.  The food came out extra slow. They even lost the ticket!!!  OMG! We saw several  people come and go. When spoken to about it on several occasions, the hosting staff was very inconsiderate and non-accommodating. Furthermore the young (host) lady kept arguing back and forth with my friend about the missing order. "Big NO-NO!" The customer is ALWAYS right.  Even if they aren't you handle it with professionalism. Alcove lost MANY points for this.  They tried to patch it by later offering desert. My friend was so very frustrated that he declined (and he works in the service industry so he usually tips extra well - he did that day too since you tip as you pay - go figure).  I however took the red velvet cake.  Why not. its FREE, right? . . No - Even that was drama! Getting the FREE slice of cake was like pulling teeth. When going to get the cake from the counter there was shadiness thrown to me by the cashier (who was later brought in the loop about the incident from the host and about how irate my friend was about the situation). . . Wow they showed their a&amp;@ that day. It almost made me not want to go back. But until I find a place that sells great red velvet cake  - since I'm from NYC (and its not like their's is the best), I'll be going there, but probably won't me dining in again unless there's absolutely no where else to go - I will NEVER leave another tip EVER (even if I go get takeout).  I would give this place 5 stars but "perceived" racism is something I won't tolerate! They're lucky I don't give 1 or 2 stars. I loathe anything that smells like racism (I "perceived" this and perception is my reality).
