ReviewID: zwhvDU120ozgSo04UjaQNw
ReviewerID: u-iM3e0YE_mgRU6dBJBv_g
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Bossa Nova Brazilian Cuisine
Category: Brazilian
Not sure if I loved the food or if it was the company I was with, which brought me to give Bossa Nova a 5 star rating!  I loved this place. Went here with a few of my favorite people in the world so this review may be a little bias but feel free to continue reading :P We went on a Tues. night, thankfully...we only had to wait ~10 minutes for a table.. . Our waiter was the bomb. He was very courteous. He had the best manners. Must be because he's from Brazil? Not sure..but he was great. Being the curious eaters we are, we asked him a bazillion questions &amp; he was more then happy to answer each and every question with a smile. I wish I caught his name, but whatever your name is...thank you!! He helped us finally make our decision(s) after about 25 min. of browsing our menus. . . We started off with a pitcher of Sangria - I loved it. Very sweet &amp; tasty - just how I like it. Not bitter or tart at all. Followed by Yucca appetizers. I've never had Yucca before so you can imagine how surprised I was with just one bite. Not too greasy &amp; very filling with just one or two pieces. . . We ordered family style because we are family after all :). We started with the Fresh Seabass fillet Bossa salad: fresh romaine lettuce, chopped fresh tomatoes, roasted almonds, gorgonzola, homemade croutons and chopped red onions, tossed in balsamic vinaigrette dressing. This salad is by far the best salad I've ever had. The vinaigrette dressing was really what made the salad. It's hard to explain but it was dam good! And really, how does one make a perfectly cooked seabass fillet? A-mazing! It was perfect. That salad was perfect. . . Next, we ordered the Skit Steak pizza. My favorite dish of the night and I'm not even a pizza lover.  The steak was SO tender and flavorful...you can just taste it in each and every bite. And mind you, these are pretty slim pieces of steak. SO unbelievably good.  Definitely a must try! The cheese on the pizza wasn't too greasy either&amp; a slightly slim crust is always good. . . We also tried the Lombinho com Abacaxi (Pulled Pork) Sandwich. I am not a fan.Pork is always dry and sorry to say, but so was our sandwich. Oh, it's Fancy smancy with a pineapple in the middle but no...it just didn't cut it for me. I'd hold off on this if I were you. . . Our last entree of the night was The traditional fresh boneless Chicken Breast. Very soft, juicy, tender chicken breast - YUMMY! I enjoyed it very much. It also came with salsa, beans, white rice, &amp; some floury stuff (don't know what that was), but when you mixed with everything on the plate, it was pretty good. Gave the entree a little bit of texture I'd say. . . Overall, I give this place a 5 star rating. Everyone was very nice &amp; kind. We also came with my friend's daughter &amp; they were very hospitable towards us. This place is awesome in my books. Nice waiters, nice staff, nice, simple decor, wonderful lighting, &amp; of course the food is amazing. No wonder it's one of the highest rated restaurants in Hollywood. Thank you, Bossa Nova for making our last night in  SoCal memorable. . . Here are the prices of our meal:. . Pitcher of Sangria - ?. Fried Yucca - $6.99. Bossa's Salad (Fresh Seabass fillet ) - $13.49. Skirt Steak Pizza - ?. Lombinho com Abacaxi  (Pulled Pork) Sandwhich - $10.49. The traditional fresh boneless Chicken Breast - $11.99
