ReviewID: ZWoWSobwfa99w0KjBzoLyA
ReviewerID: YJ9oyi2BwqXwxl3DKoKHdw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Orochon Ramen
Category: Japanese
Ok so today it was raining, and the ultimate rainy day meal is soup. We attempted to eat at Mitsuwa Market side Ramen Joint but the restaurant was closed, and i wasnt about to go into the market, gather ingredients and cook it myself (i mean damn, how am i supposed to Yelp about that...? hahahaha). . . So Cj, Bobin, and i drive by Koraku..... too full. Then Mr. Ramen..... naaaaawwwww.....! then i remember there was this Ramen spot on the third level of the Japanese snack market that was pretty poppin' during the cherry blossom festival... and the thought hits me... "mmmm a new place to Yelp about...! hehehe". . So we get there, and wait a few mins for a table to clear up. This is enough time to stand in the drizzle, smoke a few cigs, and appreciate the lovely decor of this place. It was small, medium-lit, crowded in tight spaces, with alot of dark browns, black, and especially red accents. Noooooooiiicccce....!!!!!! I loved it, but then it was sit time.. . So we get to the table, i hear the sound of Japanese behind me, english to my right, my friend Bobin talkin in Tagalog on the Phone in front of me, and CJ speakin in Cantonese to my left. I think to myself..... "This setting could not get any better......." So we get the menu's and see the variety of Ramen isnt much, and there isnt translations. . Youre given the options, Miso, Soy Sauce or Salt. Then 7-8 names for Ramen where the top 2 were spicy, which i translated on my own. # 1 was ok spicy, and # 2 mustve been a nose and ear steamer. Reason i say this is because there is a bulletin board full of polaroid pictures that have faces of the people that have eaten the # 2 in under 30 minutes and survived.  at the bottom of the menu there are add-ons. for ex: Cha su pork, egg, garlic, butter, extra noodles.... which surprised the hell out of me. the only time ive seen an option for extra noodles was in Tokyo.......impressive.. . On the second page there was all the appetizers and extra side goodies.. . Over lookin the menu, and with the waitress at my side, i knew what i wanted and made up my mind. With a determined face i told the waitress, "i want a number 5 with cha su pork and egg as usual". Bobin ordered the same, and CJ had the # 4 all with soy sauce. . . Bobin then asks me, since that's your usual, what 's in it....! I looked at him and said in a quiet voice, "I dont know man, you know that tehre isnt english translations on the menu for the ramen, and i didnt want to look like a chump ordering... hahahahahahahaha...". . The bowls came, they were big, and so was the peice of cha-su pork. I was amazed on how great this Ramen tasted. This with a coke, and we were set.. . ooooh weeee.....!!!!
