ReviewID: ZxEf8OJjEVgHW9JV505KBQ
ReviewerID: tRn7n1ri-fVYt0YMrdmSNQ
Rating: 1
Restaurant: Crustacean
Category: Vietnamese
If you like $39.50 + entrees; keep on looking - this is not the place to leave your $$. (that would be $$$$).  Went there Saturday night - with no reservation and was able to get a table in the front - they gave the 2 of us a table for 6; so lets not consider this prime real estate!  Noise level of music pretty loud - but, music was pretty good. All downhill from there - . The waitress poured the wine into a glass for tasting... the wine was OK if you like the smell &amp; flavor of soap - she returned w/ 2 new glasses &amp; told me that she had asked them to 'turn down the detergent level in the washer';  rather than choosing an entree (nothing knocked my socks off from the menu- not interested in Snapper or Salmon) I specifically asked the waitress if the Crab Cake appetizer ($18.50) was a large enough portion for an entree; she said - you should have the noodles along them &amp; it would be plenty .... we also ordered a soup, and crispy rice roll as appetizer. and my dining partner ordered the Ho Fun Ravioli. (ravioli w/ shrimp) - the food; while good; is not spectacular - and is served in a rather expected, uninteresting fashion.  Oh, and we had to send the ravioli back - it was lukewarm.   The crab cakes were very good. . When the bill came - SURPRISE!  the  'crab cake appetizer' that I had as an entree was not $18.50 - as indicated on the menu - but $39.50!. I mentioned the mistake to the server - who proceeded to tell me that I received a full portion &amp; that's what I ordered (wrong!)- but, if I didn't want pay that much - she would talk to the manager. She returned shortly to tell me that 'we have taken the crispy rice roll ($9.00) off you're  bill - "is that a good deal?" she asked. ... Not the kind of service you expect from an "A" place... get better service from Cheesecake Factory.. they would have at least comped the entree!. By the way.. if you still decide to visit this restaurant.. leave plenty of time to use the facilities.. they have 1 stall each for each sex.. its like stand in line waiting @ Dodger Stadium @the 7th inning stretch....at least the women here carry better looking handbags!
