ReviewID: zxhQK3dfNvpxmUJbjQte6w
ReviewerID: DrCbKOnnm1-sHQNfHqiVnA
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Café Circa
Category: Restaurants
It's a Tuesday night, spending time with a friend,  I'm gonna name drop momentarily but I'll get back to my review,  we previously spent the evening with Will Downing he was in town for a meet and greet /cd listening party at the W hotel in Dunwoody, so my friend says..."What's Next?" "Let grab a drink somewhere", so I put on my suggestion thinking cap and begin to narrow down our options, he finally decided on Caf Circa.  Caf Circa is a new hot spot, housed in the King District on Edgewood Avenue(next door to Caf 458) and a few blocks from one of my other favorite cool spots to lounge and unwind, the Harlem Bar.  As we entered the caf, we were met by a friendly host, we decided to sit at the bar. Now let me tell you about the bar, it's so long, how long is it? it practically covers the entire caf, of course I'm exaggerating but it huge(go see for yourself).  As I gazed around the room,  I spotted Anthony David(yes, Anthony David) spinning old school, R &amp; B, Hip Hop ....of course, I commented to him about being multi-talented ( a songwriter, singer and DJ)..the brotha got it goin' on! The bartender is an associate of mine from the National Black Arts Festival, so I felt right at home. We weren't that hungry, after all, we just had appetizers at our previous event, so I ordered the Sweet Potatoes Fries(light, crispy, sweet) and for dessert, apple crumble pie which came with whipped cream(delicious), my friend ordered, shrimp tacos which came with bean &amp; rice, and for dessert, peach cobbler with a scoop of ice cream.(Yes, I tried it, it's delicious, not heavy, not too sweet, flavorful).   On certain days of the week, there's Dinner &amp; Jazz, and a variety of musical performances.  So if you're looking for a venue serving the professional, urbane community.... for your next book club meeting, art preview, dinner date, business meeting, lounge and unwind, head on over to Caf Circa...I think you'll enjoy your culinary and social experience!  I'll be back soon, maybe this weekend!(smile)
