ReviewID: zxnKKKIf_kjn6NIgB8Cg1Q
ReviewerID: xIQweSU-iDYcKtEDwvLP_g
Rating: 4
Restaurant: Chateau de Saigon
Category: Vietnamese
1. Green Papaya Salad with Pork and Shrimp. I love the contrasts in this dish: warm and cold, crunchy and chewy, sweet and fresh with fish sauce. It's a good dish and has the potential to be fantastic. That being said, they could have done more with the pork and shrimp placed on top of the salad. The pork was reasonably flavorful, but dry and lifeless in appearance. The shrimp were ok too, but only poached and halved lengthwise. If the same preparation was used here as for the shrimp in the vermicelli dish, I wouldn't have one negative thing to say.. 2. Rice Paper Wraps with Roast Pork. All the vegetables were very fresh and the pork was delicious. A good go-to dish. Ahh and the sauce: my roommate guessed that it was fish sauce, sugar, and rice vinegar.. 3. Vermicelli Sampler (with pork, shrimp and shrimp cake). Everything in this dish was good. The shrimp were whole, marinated, grilled and basted with a slightly sweet sauce. The pork was marinated, grilled and sliced thinly on top. The shrimp cake has been coated in rice flour(?) and lightly fried, for a familiar flavor with a different texture. The idea in this dish is to stir everything up, just like tossing a salad. So you have your noodles, bean sprouts, peanuts, lettuce, shrimp, pork, etc, on top of which you pour the fish sauce/rice vinegar/sugar mixture. . 4. Stir-fried Lemongrass Tofu. I have really gained a new appreciation for tofu. This preparation was very tasty. The tofu was breaded in rice flour and lightly fried with lemongrass, ginger, garlic and shallots. Crispy on the outside, creamy on the inside.. . I also tried a Vietnamese beer, "33", that had just arrived that day. To me it tasted like 1/2 Old English, 1/2 Budweiser. But I digress, the focus is on the food. The service is very attentive. During the course of our dinner we had several visits from different staff members, and a few from the manager. Being completely honest, I was a bit surprised when first entered the restaurant by the number of Americans in the dining room. This is vastly different from all of my previous experiences on Buford Hwy, so initially it made me wonder about the authenticity of the food. That being said, all of my worries were washed away when the food hit the table. It was a very enjoyable experience. Also, I am now 100% convinced that the Vietnamese are far ahead of us in the way that they eat: small portions of protein balanced by large quantities of fresh vegetables, wonderful textural contrasts and bright flavors. We might want to think about that.
