ReviewID: zXOKrWf-awtwrXxRgO_BHQ
ReviewerID: dJ35LF9oqIDaQIEHHpX5Pw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Langer&#39;s Delicatessen-Restaurant
Category: Delis
Since my original "review" appears in the netherworld bowels of page five, I thought I'd write a new one, since I have been on a Langer's kick the last few weeks.  First of all, let's get some of the "reviewer" stupidity out of the way:  To J.B. - I don't know what universe you live in but your rather silly and totally incorrect statement about Langer's parking lot is probably keeping people from going down there.  Parking is, of course, free for the first hour.. . As to the "size" of the sandwiches - to the person who says these pastrami sandwiches are so big you should share one - first of all, real Jews don't share a pastrami sandwich.  I realize you're probably very young, but these sandwiches, unlike Art's or Jerry's, are not of the humungous variety - that's why I love them.  At Art's or Jerry's you can't even get your mouth around the sandwich, AND the meat is terrible.  Here, the sandwiches are just the right size with just the right amount of meat and let me tell you, youngsters, I have never EVER gained even a half-pound eating at Langer's, but then I know what to eat and how to eat it.  The pastrami (order extra lean, it's worth it), is, as everyone says, the best anywhere.  It's hard to take a comment like that seriously when, in the same review, the reviewer admits they've never eaten pastrami before.  There is no fat on this pastrami.  The rye is fresh and soft (and not toasted as another reviewer avers) - I eat the pastrami, Russian dressing, and cole slaw - it's never been anything other than superb.  I usually eat with two of the biggest eaters known to man, so besides their sandwiches they also order potato pancakes, kishka, and chopped liver, so I've sampled a bite of each and can say without fear of contradiction that the chopped liver at Langer's is the closest to home-made I've ever tasted.  The glop at Art's and Jerry's is disgusting - this is heaven on a plate.  . . The last time I was there we did sit next to a guy and his girlfriend.  He was very gregarious and wanted to know everything about what we were eating.  He ordered everything we had.  He was really funny and we all had a great time.  He asked us what we did and we told him.  We asked him what he did, and he said "I'm a crook."  That was funny.  At the end of the meal we said goodbye and shook hands with him and found out his name - while I won't repeat the name here, I can only tell you he's the son of a used to be head of one of the most famous Mafia families ever.  I wish I'd stayed and talked to him, because there's just a few people I wouldn't mind sending him to, to pay a little visit, if you get my drift.
