ReviewID: ZXwTh85EZuKlskOQs4Mdew
ReviewerID: wHip-tIYauP94YcJOfSiwA
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Griddle Café
Category: Breakfast & Brunch
As breakfasty places go in LA.. I was a bit skeptical since its seems that for such a sleepy city (in that no one gets up before 10am in LA.).Plus,  I've had some very lackluster experiences at some of the so-called "great breakfast places" in Los Feliz and Silverlake and Sunset Junction. which basically consisted of me standing in a line for the privilege of getting my order taken- like I'm at McDonalds..and then having to self serve for condiments and to PAY the same price for mediocre food without service...just what I want on the weekend.)  completely over rated..I just wanted to find a place (other than the Pantry) to have a good, cheap, breakfast as I am not one of those people who think Dennys or I Hop fit that bill... Well, we knew to get there early and in early I mean..before 10am..:) we arrived at 915 on a Sunday morning and were seated promptly..they also had a couple tables left outside.. but we opted for inside since I wanted to have that experience..oh, they also have parking available behind the restaurant. A PLUS.... The restaurant was about 3/4 full at this time. The have a cool diner type bar  area as well.. Although,no booths were available when we got there..which was fine,  since there was just 2 of us. It was a bit noisy, but we could still converse fine.. Our server  swung by upon our seating and even though she was clearly on her way to another table, she ACKNOWLEDGED us. As a former F &amp; B person... even if you can not get to my table.. just say hello..this is the signature of  CUSTOMER SERVICE 101!!!! NO matter what business... She came back got our beverage order .. and when we were not quite ready..was not annoyed with us (like so many others are) but POLITELY said she'd come back..she did, we ordered... Eggs Benedict and Whole Wheat Pancakes... I got my nice french pressed coffee within minutes.. and we waited about 10-15 minutes top for our food....Yes, the portions were ample!! But more importantly..tasty!!  spot on!  Our server continued to come by check on us give us water re fills without asking. We could not ask for more. She anticipated my needing help with the Go box..and offered a tip in re heating..promptly brought our check..We will go back!!  Next time, we said we would sit outside.  I didn't ' get to try their signature potatoes that I saw on others' plates.. that looked YUMMMY!!!  But the thick cut ham on the Eggs Benedict was quality and GOOD!!! I  looked around and saw nice thick quality bacon slices and beautiful FRESH fruit  meaning RIPE (  not under ripe) on other diners' plates...My coffee was smooth and rich. again Quality all around... I love it when restaurants get it right on all levels..because SO few do in Los Angeles especially... The menu items were not pricey for the food quality or the portions here. They are spot on.  We essentially got 4 meals with an easy re heat for 15 min. in the oven..and tasted pretty good as well.  . If you get there after 10am on the weekends.. expect a bit of a wait..but totally Worth it!!! Share, Share, Share order different items as all of the portions are perfect for that!
