ReviewID: ZYef8fGfy_f_xlanRi_xLQ
ReviewerID: A82n-ShwB314ITuCtGT5cg
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Mastro&#39;s Steakhouse
Category: Steakhouses
I treated my sister to Mastro's for her birthday and overall it was an amazing meal. My sister ordered the 33 oz chef's cut rib-eye (approx $50), which was simply huge! She barely put a dent in it. I had the 22 oz bone-in rib-eye (approx $45) and my girlfriend had their famous bone-in 12 oz filet (approx $45). Based on the reviews I read on Yelp, I ordered the lobster mashed potatoes (approx $35), truffle gnocchi (approx $25), gorgonzola macaroni and cheese (approx $10), and warm butter cake a al mode (approx $10) for dessert. My sister also was given a free slice of three layer chocolate cake for her birthday. . . The bill came out to be just over $250 with two glasses of moderately priced wine. The total came to $300 with tip. Not too bad for the exceptional quality and the sheer quantity of food we ordered. The sides were generous portions. All three of us had to-go bags. The basic side dishes cost around $10. The special sides were a bit pricier. We had so much food it looked like we raided a buffet. . . First of all, I do not like filet mignon and I never order it. I always order rib-eye, prime rib or new york strip. The reviews here raved about how decadent the filet is, so I urged my girlfriend to give it a try. It was by far the best steak I've ever had. It was buttery-tender melt-in-your-mouth goodness everyone had described. It's definitely worth going back for. Next time I go to Mastro's I'm getting the 18 oz bone-in filet. . . As for my rib-eye, I was not all that blown away with it. It was definitely a excellent steak, but it was not as tender as I was anticipating. It was a bit chewy but the flavor was good. However, overall the rib-eye does not hold water compared to the bone-in filet. . . My girlfriend and I ordered our rib-eye and filet medium rare and it was cooked spot on. The steaks were pink throughout and had the slightest translucent center. My sister ordered her rib-eye medium and it had a nice pink hue throughout. . . As for the sides, the lobster mashed potatoes were the best mashers I've ever put in my mouth. There were generous chunks of lobster and the potatoes were creamy and buttery. The mac and cheese was very rich, and had a thick layer of melted cheese on top. Overall, it was a good side dish but did not give me sweet nasty dreams like the mashed potatoes did. I thought the gnocchi was bland and I did not like it. I'm not sure if it was due to the fact that the mashed potatoes, mac and cheese and steak were just so rich and flavorful in comparison.. . The warm butter cake comes with fresh homemade whip cream and is garnished with fresh fruit. The top of the cake is sprinkled with sugar and melted in a similar fashion as creme brulee. I love whip cream so much I ate the entire plate of cream that came with the cake. The butter cake was definitely worth getting. It's big enough to share between 3 to 4 people.. . The service was good. The waitress and manager came by and asked how everything was and they weren't too pushy or pretentious. I felt that the food and drinks did take a bit of time to arrive, but it was busy and I was probably just eager from seeing and smelling everyone else around us eating their food.. . The atmosphere was very dark and romantic. I didn't really notice the noise. Many people were wearing jeans and sneakers. I feel formal attire is unnecessary.
