ReviewID: ZysxvZDctv3CpQGaBvYUaw
ReviewerID: 0nOIH8qIMnmZdLCTemnRsw
Rating: 5
Restaurant: Strip House Steak House
Category: Steakhouses
BEST STEAKHOUSE IN NYC!. . Well this is the only steakhouse I've been to in NYC, but I did my research and picked Strip House as my one and only steak house to visit while in NYC last month. Boy, was it yummy!. . My best friend and I made reservations online I believe... and like the yelper below me said... there is a wait! We waited about 20 to 30 mins. But it was worth it. Bread in the basket was ok. My best friend is a huge steak eater, while me on the other hand... steak is not my thing. We had the shrimp scampi to start... I believe we had 4 huge jumbo shrimps. YUMMY! He ordered the steak and I had the fish. We had mushrooms and mash potatoes on the side. Both dishes were lovely. I tried a peice of his steak and must say it was nice and juicy. . . Love the red/dark lighting. Place was packed... tables/bar full of people. Looked like this was a popular place to come for drinks at the bar. It was an older crowd. Seating is a little tight. We were seated inbetween 2 gay couples that spoke really loud and it was annoying. One of the couple kept on talking about the other gay couple and it was irritating to hear it. People seem to dress up coming here... but I was dressed casual. The chocolate cake dessert looked amazing and it was huge! The people next to us asked us if we wanted a piece because it was to huge for them to finish it all, but I was too full to eat dessert... but it looked delicious. We had the chocolate brownie with ice cream! yummm!. . So if you don't mind waiting with or without reservations... and don't mind hearing your neighbors conversation... then you won't have a problem. . . Got here via subway and had no problems finding the place. Not good for kids or family. Maybe better for small groups or couples. This place is on the expensive side, but the food is excellent and the service was great! Totally worth it!. . I would love to come back here again if I visit NYC. The service was excellent and the food was amazing!. . *check out my photos!. . 5 stars from me!
