ReviewID: Zzko3Yiw9FyQ9AWu5nmRLQ
ReviewerID: MPKLX4qJ8kQVwhz_b1yZ8g
Rating: 3
Restaurant: Joan&#39;s on Third
Category: Specialty Food
Well, almost 4 stars. Joan's is one of those places that is actually cool without getting in your face about it, unlike Toast down the street tries to be. I'm not a big fan of this part of town to begin with (I prefer my gritty, oft-bagged upon Downtown 'hood and my even older 'hood - Boyle Heights), but I drive over here now &amp; then just for Joan's.. . Cheese... the best collection in CA outside San Francisco. Damn good too. French, yeah, that's to be expected. California, cool. Ahhh... but the Spanish cheeses!!!! Who would've thunk it... Spain has some abbalootely AMAZIN' cheeses - and Joan's is Grand Central for them.. . Food... the chicken breast sandwich rocks. The pasta salads are pedestrian. Haven't gone for the meats yet. Selection of green salads is very good - with some interesting, unique stuff like snap pea salad and such. Yummy.. . Dessert... Oh, my. This is where Joan's really shines - I'm not a big dessert guy, but wow - the carrot cake is divine, if a bit too sweet for some; the black &amp; white cake is phenomenal, the Snickers cake is better than most and the cupcakes are awesome.. . Drinks... I had a very good mocha, probably my 3rd or 4th fave in LA. . . OK, so why only 3 stars??? Well, it's a bit of a madhouse inside - if you like a little stress and aggravation with your cheese and dessert, great. I guess one figures it out after a few trips there (I did), but there are several undefined "lines", a rather confusing table service situation, and very helpful but very overworked people behind the counter.. . Then there's the tables... they suck, plain and simple. Oh, yeah, they are right on the sidewalk along busy mid-block 3rd St. and they are way off to the side of the place - but that's not the issue I have with them. I hate those flimsy, wobbly, cheap black metal tables and tiny little slatted chairs... I'm a pretty big dude - I'm in good shape, but my football player's body feels very precarious perched on those tea &amp; finger sandwich style chairs... . . Still, it's the best take-out place in LA, and yeah, the cheeses and desserts are worth driving across town for. Hopefully with their expansion the table situation will improve a lot. Joan's, I see 5 stars in your future....
