Reconstructing Stimulus Velocity from 
Neuronal Responses in Area MT 
Wyeth Bair, James R. Cavanaugh, J. Anthony Movshon 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and 
Center for Neural Science 
New York University 
4 Washington Place, Room 809 
New York, NY 10003 
wyethcns. nyu. edu, jamesc cns. nyu. edu, tonycns. nyu. edu 
Abstract 
We employed a white-noise velocity signal to study the dynamics 
of the response of single neurons in the cortical area MT to visual 
motion. Responses were quantified using reverse correlation, opti- 
mal linear reconstruction filters, and reconstruction signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR). The SNR and lower bound estimates of information 
rate were lower than we expected. Ninety percent of the informa- 
tion was transmitted below 18 Hz, and the highest lower bound on 
bit rate was 12 bits/s. A simulated opponent motion energy sub- 
unit with Poisson spike statistics was able to out-perform the MT 
neurons. The temporal integration window, measured from the re- 
verse correlation half-width, ranged from 30-90 ms. The window 
was narrower when a stimulus moved faster, but did not change 
when temporal frequency was held constant. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Area MT neurons can show precise and rapid modulation in response to dynamic 
noise stimuli (Bait and Koch, 1996); however, computational models of these neu- 
rons and their inputs (Adelson and Bergen, 1985; Heeger, 1987; Grzywacz and 
Yuille, 1990; Emerson et al., 1992; Qian et al., 1994; Nowlan and Sejnowski, 1995) 
have primarily been compared to electrophysiological results based on time and en- 
semble averaged responses to deterministic stimuli, e.g., drifting sinusoidal gratings. 
Reconstructing Stimulus Velocity from Neuronal Responses in Area MT 35 
Using methods introduced by Bialek et al. (1991) and further analyzed by Gabbiani 
and Koch (1996) for the estimation of information transmission by a neuron about 
a white-noise stimulus, we set out to compare the responses of MT neurons for 
white-noise velocity signals to those of a model based on opponent motion energy 
sub-units. 
The results of two analyses are summarized here. In the first, we compute a lower 
bound on information transmission using optimal linear reconstruction filters and 
examine the SNR as a function of temporal frequency. The second analysis examines 
changes in the reverse correlation (the cross-correlation between the stimulus and 
the resulting spike trains) as a function of spatial frequency and temporal frequency 
of the moving stimulus pattern. 
2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
Spike trains were recorded extracellularly from 26 well-isolated single neurons in area 
MT of four anesthetized, paralyzed macaque monkeys using methods described in 
detail elsewhere (Levitt et al., 1994). The size of the receptive fields and the spatial 
and temporal frequency preferences of the neurons were assessed quantitatively 
using drifting sinusoidal gratings, after which a white-noise velocity signal, s(t), 
was used to modulate the position (within a fixed square aperture) of a low-pass 
filtered 1D Gaussian white-noise (GWN) pattern. The frame rate of the display 
was 54 Hz or 81 Hz. The spatial noise pattern consisted of 256 discrete intensity 
values, one per spatial unit. Every 19 ms (or 12 ms at 81 Hz), the pattern shifted, or 
jumped, A spatial units along the axis of the neuron's preferred direction, where A, 
the jump size, was chosen according to a Gaussian, binary, or uniform probability 
distribution. The maximum spatial frequency in the pattern was limited to prevent 
aliasing. 
In the first type of experiment, 10 trials of a 30 s noise sequence, s(t), and 10 trials of 
its reverse, -s(t), were interleaved. A standard GWN spatial pattern and velocity 
modulation pattern were used for all cells, but for each cell, the stimulus was scaled 
for the receptive field size and aligned to the axis of preferred motion. Nine cells 
were tested with Gaussian noise at 81 Hz, 15 cells with binary noise at 81 Hz and 
54 Hz, and 10 cells with uniform noise at 54 Hz. 
In another experiment, a sinusoidal spatial pattern (rather than GWN) moved 
according to a binary white-noise velocity signal. Trials were interleaved with all 
combinations of four spatial frequencies at octave intervals and four relative jump 
sizes: 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, and 1/32 of each spatial period. Typically 10 trials of length 
3 s were run. Four cells were tested at 54 Hz and seven at 81 Hz. 
3 ANALYSIS AND MODELING METHODS 
We used the linear reconstruction methods introduced by Bialek et al. (1991) 
and further analyzed by Gabbiani and Koch (1996) to compute an optimal linear 
estimate of the stimulus, s(t), described above, based on the neuronal response, x(t). 
A single neuronal response was defined as the spike train produced by s(t) minus 
the spike train produced by -s(t). This overcomes the neuron's limited dynamic 
range in response to anti-preferred direction motion (Bialek et al., 1991). 
36 W. Bair, J. R. Cavanaugh and J. A. Movshon 
The linear filter, h(t), which when convolved with the response yields the minimum 
mean square error estimate, sest, of the stimulus can be described in terms of its 
Fourier transform, 
= 
Rx (v) ' (1) 
where R (v) is the Fourier transform of the cross-correlation r (-) of the stimulus 
and the resulting spike train and Rx(w) is the power spectrum, i.e., the Fourier 
transform of the auto-correlation, of the spike train (for details and references, see 
Bialek et al., 1991; Gabbiani and Koch, 1996). The noise, n(t), is defined as the 
difference between the stimulus and the reconstruction, 
n(t) = 8et(t)- 8(t), 
(2) 
and the SNR is defined as 
SNR() = 
..(), (3) 
where R(w) is the Fourier power spectrum of the stimulus and R..(v) is the 
power spectrum of the noise. If the stimulus amplitude distribution is Gaussian, 
then SNR(v) can be integrated to give a lower bound on the rate of information 
transmission in bits/s (Gabbiani and Koch, 1996). 
The motion energy model consisted of opponent energy sub-units (Adelson and 
Bergen, 1985) implemented with Gabor functions (Heeger, 1987; Grzywacz and 
Yuille, 1990) in two spatial dimensions and time. The spatial frequency of the 
Gabor function was set to match the spatial frequency of the stimulus, and the 
temporal frequency was set to match that induced by a sequence of jumps equal to 
the standard deviation (SD) of the amplitude distribution (which is the jump size in 
the case of a binary distribution). We approximated causality by shifting the output 
forward in time before computing the optimal linear filter. The model operated on 
the same stimulus patterns and noise sequences that were used to generate stimuli 
for the neurons. The time-varying response of the model was broken into two half- 
wave rectified signals which were interpreted as the firing probabilities of two units, 
a neuron and an anti-neuron that preferred the opposite direction of motion. From 
each unit, ten 30 s long spike trains were generated with inhomogeneous Poisson 
statistics. These 20 model spike trains were used to reconstruct the velocity signal 
in the same manner as the MT neuron output. 
4 RESULTS 
Stimulus reconstruction. Optimal linear reconstruction filters, h(t), were com- 
puted for 26 MT neurons from responses to 30 s sequences of white-noise motion. A 
typical h(t), shown in Fig. 1A (large dots), was dominated by a single positive lobe, 
often preceded by a smaller negative lobe. It was thinner than the reverse correla- 
tion r (-) (Fig. 1A, small dots) from which it was derived due to the division by 
the low-pass power spectrum of the spikes (see Eqn. 1). Also, r(-) occasionally 
had a slower, trailing negative lobe but did not have the preceding negative lobe 
of h(t). On average, h(t) peaked at -69 ms (SD 17) and was 33 ms (SD 12) wide 
at half-height. The peak for rsx(') occurred at the same time, but the width was 
41 ms (SD 15), ranging from 30-90 ms. The point of half-rise on the right side of 
the peak was -53 ms (SD 9) for h(t) and -51 ms (SD 9) for rs (-). For all plots, 
Reconstructing Stimulus Velocity from Neuronal Responses in Area MT 37 
vertical axes for velocity show normalized stimulus velocity, i.e., stimulus velocity 
was scaled to have unity SD before all computations. 
Fig 1C (dots) shows the SNR for the reconstruction using the h(t) in panel A. For 
8 cells tested with Gaussian velocity noise, the integral of the log of the SNR gives 
a lower bound for information transmission, which was 6.7 bits/s (SD 2.8), with a 
high value of 12.3 bits/s. Most of the information was carried below 10 Hz, and 90% 
of the information was carried below 18.4 Hz (SD 2.1). In Fig. 1D, the failure of the 
reconstruction (dots) to capture higher frequencies in the stimulus (thick line) is 
directly visible. Both h(t) and SNR(w) were similar but on average slightly greater 
in amplitude for tests using binary and uniform distributed noise. Gaussian noise 
has many jumps at or near zero which may induce little or no response. 
., 0.3 , 0.6 
'  /: . I 
O! ..o ß 
 'e e o 
z I 
-160 -80 0-80 
-3 
Time relative to spike (ms) 
D 
lOO 
0 0 20 40 
Frequency (Hz) 
150 200 250 300 
Time (ms) 
Figure 1: (A) Optimal linear filter h(t) (big dots) from Eqn. 1 and cross-correlation 
rsx(-),(small dots) for one MT neuron. (B) h(t) (thick line) and rsx(') (thin line) 
for an opponent motion energy model. (C) SNR(w) for the neuron (dots) and the 
model (line). (D) Reconstruction for the neuron (dots) and model (thin line) of 
the stimulus velocity (thick line). Velocity was normalized to unity SD. Curves for 
rsz (-) were scaled by 0.5..Note the different vertical scale in B. 
38 W. Bair, J. R. Cavanaugh and J. A. Movshon 
An opponent motion energy model using Gabor functions was simulated with spa- 
tial SD 0.5 ø, spatial frequency 0.625 cyc/ø, temporal SD 12.5 ms, and temporal 
frequency 20 Hz. The model was tested with a Gaussian velocity stimulus with SD 
32ø/s. Because an arbitrary scaling of the spatial parameters in the model does not 
affect the temporal properties of the information transmission, this was effectively 
the same stimulus that yielded the neuronal data shown in Fig. 1A. Spike tredns 
were generated from the model at 20 Hz (matched to the neuron) and used to com- 
pute h(t) (Fig. lB, thick line). The model h(t) was narrower than that for the MT 
neuron, but was similar to h(t) for V1 neurons that have been tested (unpublished 
analysis). This simple model of a putative input sub-unit to MT transmitted 29 
bits/s--more than the best MT neurons studied here. The SNR ratio and the re- 
construction for the model are shown in Fig. 1C,D (thin lines). The filter h(t) for 
the model (Fig. lB thick line) was more symmetric than that for the neuron due to 
the symmetry of the Gabor function used in the model. 
1_ Neuron 1 Neuron 2 
0.5 
o 
,. -160 
 1 
0.5 
¸ 
I I I 
-120 -80 -40 0 -160 
-120 
I I 
-120 -80 -40 
1/16 
-0.5 
-160 -80 -40 0 -160 -120 -80 -40 0 
Time relative to spike (ms) 
Figure 2: The width of rsx(r) changes with temporal frequency, but not spatial 
frequency. Data from two neurons are shown, one on the left, one on the right. 
Top: rsx(r) is shown for binary velocity stimuli with jump sizes 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 
and 1/32 (thick to thin lines) of the spatial period (10 trials, 3 s/trial). The left side 
of the peak shifts leftward as jump size decreases. See text for statistics. Bottom: 
The relative jump size, thus temporal frequency, was constant for the four cases in 
each panel (1/32 on the left, 1/16 on the right). The peaks do not shift left or right 
as spatial frequency and jump size change inversely. Thicker lines represent larger 
jumps and lower spatial frequencies. 
Reconstructing Stimulus Velocity from Neuronal Responses in Area MT 39 
Changes in rsx (-). We tested 11 neurons with a set of binary white-noise motion 
stimuli that varied in spatial frequency and jump size. The spatial patterns were 
sinusoidal gratings. The peaks in rsx (-) and h(t) were wider when smaller jumps 
(slower velocities) were used to move the same spatial pattern. Fig. 2 shows data 
for two neurons plotted for constant spatial frequency (top) mud constant effective 
temporal frequency, or contrast frequency (bottom). Jump sizes were 1/4, 1/8, 
1/16, mud 1/32 (thick to thin lines, top panels) of the period of the spatial pattern. 
(Note, a 1/2 period jump would cause an ambiguous motion.) Relative jump size 
was constant in the bottom panels, but both the spatial period and the velocity 
increased in octaves from thin to thick lines. One of the plots in the upper panel 
also appears in the lower panel for each neuron. For 26 conditions in 11 MT neurons 
(up to 4 spatial frequencies per neuron) the left and right half-rise points of the peak 
of rx(-) shifted leftward by 19 ms (SD 12) mud 4.5 ms (SD 4.0), respectively, as 
jump size decreased. The width, therefore, increased by 14 ms (SD 12). These 
changes were statistically significant (p < 0.001, t-test). In fact, the left half-rise 
point moved leftward in all 26 cases, and in no case did the width at half-height 
decrease. On the other hand, there was no significant chage in the peak width 
or half-rise times when temporal frequency was constant, as demonstrated in the 
lower panels of Fig. 2. 
5 DISCUSSION 
From other experiments using frame-based displays to present moving stimuli to 
MT cells, we know that roughly half of the cells can modulate to a 60 Hz signal 
in the preferred direction and that some provide reliable bursts of spikes on each 
frame but do not respond to null direction motion. Therefore, one might expect that 
these cells could easily be made to transmit nearly 60 bits/s by moving the stimulus 
randomly in either the preferred or null direction on each video frame. However, 
the stimuli that we employed here did not result in such high frequency modulation, 
nor did our best lower bound estimate of information transmission for an MT cell, 
12 bits/s, approach the 64 bits/s capacity of the motion sensitive Hi neuron in the 
fly (Bialek et al., 1991). In recordings from seven V1 neurons (not shown here), 
two directional complex cells responded to the velocity noise with high temporal 
precision and fired a burst of spikes on almost every preferred motion frame and no 
spikes on null motion frames. At 53 frames/s, these cells transmitted over 40 bits/s. 
We hope that further investigation will reveal whether the lack of high frequency 
modulation in our MT experiments was due to statistical variation between animals, 
the structure of the stimulus, or possibly to anesthesia. 
In spite of finding less high frequency bandwidth than expected, we were able to 
document consistent changes, namely narrowing, of the temporal integration win- 
dow of MT neurons as temporal frequency increased. Similar changes in the time 
constant of motion processing have been reported in the fly visual system, where 
it appears that neither velocity nor temporal frequency alone can account for all 
changes (de Ruyter et al., 1986; Borst & Egelhaaf, 1987). The narrowing of r (-) 
with higher temporal frequency does not occur in our simple motion energy model, 
which lacks adaptive mechanisms, but it could occur in a model which integrated 
signals from many motion energy units having distributed temporal frequency tun- 
ing, even without other sources of adaptation. 
40 W. Bair, J. R. Cavanaughand J. A. Movshon 
We were not able to assess whether changes in the integration window developed 
quickly at the beginning of individual trials, but an analysis not described here at 
least indicates that there was very little change in the position and width of 
and h(t) after the first few seconds during the 30 s trials. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. We thank Fab- 
rizio Gabbiani and Christof Koch for helpful discussion, Lawrence P. O'Keefe for 
assistance with electrophysiology, and David Tanzer for assistance with software. 
References 
Adelson EH, Bergen JR (1985) Spatiotemporal energy models for the perception of 
motion. J Opt Soc Am A 2:284-299. 
Bair W, Koch C (1996) Temporal precision of spike trains in extrastriate cortex of 
the behaving macaque monkey. Neural Comp 8:1185-1202. 
Bialek W, Rieke F, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Warland D (1991) Reading a 
neural code. Science 252:1854-1857. 
Borst A, Egelhaaf M (1987) Temporal modulation of luminance adapts time con- 
stant of fly movement detectors. Biol Cybern 56:209-215. 
Emerson RC, Bergen JR, Adelson EH (1992) Directionally selective complex cells 
and the computation of motion energy in cat visual cortex. Vision Res 32:203- 
218. 
Gabbiani F, Koch C (1996) Coding of time-varying signals in spike trains of 
integrate-and-fire neurons with random threshold. Neural Comp 8:44-66. 
Grzywacz NM, Yuille AL (1990) A model for the estimate of local image velocity 
by cells in the visual cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B 239:129-161. 
Heeger DJ (1987) Model for the extraction of image flow. J Opt Soc Am A 4:1455- 
1471. 
Levitt JB, Kiper DC, Movshon JA (1994) Receptive fields and functional architec- 
ture of macaque V2. J.Neurophys. 71:2517-2542. 
Nowlan S J, Sejnowski TJ (1994) Filter selection model for motion segmentation 
and velocity integration. J Opt Soc Am A 11:3177-3200. 
Qian N, Andersen RA, Adelson EH (1994) Transparent motion perception as de- 
tection of unbalanced motion signals .3. Modeling. J Neurosc 14:7381-7392. 
de Ruyter van Steveninck R, Zaagman WH, Mastebroek HAK (1986) Adaptation 
of transient responses of a movement-sensitive neuron in the visual-system of 
the blowfly calliphora-erythrocephala. Biol Cybern 54:223-236. 
