Gaussian Processes for Bayesian 
Classification via Hybrid Monte Carlo 
David Barber and Christopher K. I. Williams 
Neural Computing Research Group 
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics 
Aston University, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK 
d. barberast on. ac. uk c.k.i. williamsast on. ac. uk 
Abstract 
The full Bayesian method for applying neural networks to a pre- 
diction problem is to set up the prior/hyperprior structure for the 
net and then perform the necessary integrals. However, these inte- 
grals are not tractable analytically, and Markov Chain Monte Carlo 
(MCMC) methods are slow, especially if the parameter space is 
high-dimensional. Using Gaussian processes we can approximate 
the weight space integral analytically, so that only a small number 
of hyperparameters need be integrated over by MCMC methods. 
We have applied this idea to classification problems, obtaining ex- 
cellent results on the real-world problems investigated so far. 
I INTRODUCTION 
To make predictions based on a set of training data, fundamentally we need to 
combine our prior beliefs about possible predictive functions with the data at hand. 
In the Bayesian approach to neural networks a prior on the weights in the net induces 
a prior distribution over functions. This leads naturally to the idea of specifying our 
beliefs about functions more directly. Gaussian Processes (GPs) achieve just that, 
being examples of stochastic process priors over functions that allow the efficient 
computation of predictions. It is also possible to show that a large class of neural 
network models converge to GPs in the limit of an infinite number of hidden units 
(Neal, 1996). In previous work (Williams and Rasmussen, 1996) we have applied GP 
priors over functions to the problem of predicting a real-valued output, and found 
that the method has comparable performance to other state-of-the-art methods. 
This paper extends the use of GP priors to classification problems. 
The GPs we use have a number of adjustable hyperparameters that specify quan- 
tities like the length scale over which smoothing should take place. Rather than 
Gaussian Processes for Bayesian Classification via Hybrid Monte Carlo 341 
optimizing these parameters (e.g. by maximum likelihood or cross-validation meth- 
ods) we place priors over them and use a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) 
method to obtain a sample from the posterior which is then used for making pre- 
dictions. An important advantage of using GPs rather than neural networks arises 
from the fact that the GPs are characterized by a few (say ten or twenty) hyperpa- 
rameters, while the networks have a similar number of hyperparameters but many 
(e.g. hundreds) of weights as well, so that MCMC integrations for the networks are 
much more difficult. 
We first briefly review the regression framework as our strategy will be to transform 
the classification problem into a corresponding regression problem by dealing with 
the input values to the logistic transfer function. In section 2.1 we show how to 
use Gaussian processes for classification when the hyperparameters are fixed, and 
then describe the integration over hyperparameters in section 2.3. Results of our 
method as applied to some well known classification problems are given in section 
3, followed by a brief discussion and directions for future research. 
1.1 Gaussian Processes for regression 
We outline the GP method as applied to the prediction of a real valued output 
y. = y(zr.) for a new input value ;r., given a set of training data 7) = {(;ri,ti), i = 
1...n} 
Given a set of inputs ,,x,...,, a GP allows us to specify how correlated we 
expect their corresponding outputs y = (V(x), V(2),..., V(,)) to be. We denote 
this prior over functions as P(y), and similarly, P(F,, Y) for the joint distribution 
including F,. If we also specify P(tly), the probability of observing the particular 
values t = (t,...t,) w given actual values y (i.e. a noise model) then 
i 
P(y. lt)= P(Y*'Ylt)dy= Pt) P(Y*'Y)P(tly)dy (1) 
Hence the predictive distribution for y. is found from the marginalization of the 
product of the prior and the noise model. If P(tly) and P(y,, y) are Gaussian then 
P(y. lt) is a Gaussian whose mean and variance can be calculated using matrix 
computations involving matrices of size n x n. Specifying P(y., y) to be a multidi- 
mensional Gaussian (for all values of n and placements of the points ;r., ;r,... 
means that the prior over functions is a GP. More formally, a stochastic process is a 
collection of random variables {Y(a)la e X} indexed by aset X. In our case X will 
be the input space with dimension d, the number of inputs. A GP is a stochastic 
process which can be fully specified by its mean function (;r): E[Y(zr)] and its 
covariance function C(a, a') = E[(Y(;r)- p(a))(Y(a') - p(a'))]; any finite set of 
Y-variables will have a joint multivariate Gaussian distribution. Below we consider 
GPs which have y(a) = O. 
2 GAUSSIAN PROCESSES FOR CLASSIFICATION 
For simplicity of exposition, we will present our method as applied to two class 
problems as the extension to multiple classes is straightforward. 
By using the logistic transfer function a to produce an output which can be in- 
terpreted as (), the probability of the input  belonging to class 1, the job of 
specifying a prior over functions w can be transformed into that of specifying a prior 
over the input to the transfer function. We call the input to the transfer function 
the activation, and denote it by y, with a'(zr) = r(y(zr)). For input ;ri, we will 
denote the corresponding probability and activation by a'i and yi respectively. 
342 D. Barber and C K. L Williams 
To make predictions when using fixed hyperparameters we would like to compute 
k, - f w,P(v, lt ) d,, which requires us to find P(,lt) - P((ze,)lt ) for a new 
input ,. This can be done by finding the distribution P(y, It) (y, is the activation of 
w,) and then using the appropriate Jacobian to transform the distribution. Formally 
the equations for obtaining P(y, lt) are identical to equation 1. However, even if 
we use a GP prior so that P(y,, y) is Gaussian, the usual expression for P(tly ) - 
I-Ii w'(1 - i) 1-t' for classification data (where the t's take on values of 0 or 1), 
means that the marginalization to obtain P(y, It) is no longer analytically tractable. 
We will employ Laplace's approximation, i.e. we shall approximate the integrand 
P(y,, yl t, O) by a Gaussian distribution centred at a maximum of this function with 
respect to y,, y with an inverse covariance matrix given by -7V log P(y,, ylt, ). 
The necessary integrations (marginalization) can then be carried out analytically 
(see, e.g. Green and Silverman (1994) õ5.3) and we provide a derivation in the 
following section. 
2.1 Maximizing P(y,, 
Let y+ denote (y,,y), the complete set of activations. By Bayes' theorem 
log P(y+ It) - log P(tly)+log P(y+)-log P(t), and let + -- log P(tly)+log P(y+). 
As P(t) does not depend on y+ (it is just a normalizing factor), the maximum of 
P(y+lt) is found by maximizing + with respect to y+. We define ß similarly in 
relation to P(ylt). Using log P(tilyi) = tiyi - log(1 + e y'), we obtain 
+ = trY-Zløg( 
i--1 
 = t!rY-Eløg( 
i--1 
1_ ._ i n+l 
yK+xy+ -  log IK+I 2 
 i n 
y:rK-y- log[K I - log2a' 
-- log 2a, (2) 
where K+ is the covariance matrix of the GP evaluated at l,...a, a,. K+ can 
be partitioned in terms of an n x n matrix K, a n x 1 vector k and a scalar k,, viz. 
( 
K+ = kI k, 
(4) 
As y, only enters into equation 2 in the quadratic prior term and has no data point 
associated with it, maximizing q+ with respect to y+ can be achieved by first 
maximizing q with respect to y and then doing the further quadratic optimization 
to determine the posterior mean 9,- To find a maximum of q we use the Newton- 
Raphson (or Fisher scoring) iteration y, = 
equation 3 with respect to y we find 
Differentiating 
w = (t- )- K-y (5) 
vv = -a'--w (6) 
where W = diag('l(1 - w1) , .., r.1 - r.), which gives the iterative equation 1, 
ynw .__ (/.(-1 _.{_ W)-Iw(y _.{_ w-l(t _ 7i')) 
(7) 
a The complexity of calculating each iteration using standard matrix methods is O(n3). 
In our implementation, however, we use conjugate gradient methods to avoid exphcitly 
inverting matrices. In addition, by using the previous iterate y as an initial guess for the 
conjugate gradient solution to equation 7, the iterates are computed an order of magnitude 
faster than using standard Mgorithms. 
Gaussian Processes for Bayesian Classification via Hybrid Monte Carlo 343 
Given a converged solution 0 for y, 9, can easily be found using y, = kTK-iO = 
W -1 
leT(t -- it). vat(y,) is given by (K x + +)(+x)(+), where W+ is the W matrix 
with a zero appended in the (n + 1)th diagonal position. 
Given the (Gaussian) distribution of y, we then wish to find the mean of the dis- 
tribution of P(r, lt) which is found from it, = f a(y,)P(y, It). We calculate this by 
approximating the sigmoid by a set of five cumulative normal densities (erf) that 
interpolate the sigmoid at chosen points. This leads to a very fast and accurate 
analytic approximation for the mean class prediction. 
The justification of Laplace's approximation in our case is somewhat different from 
the argument usually put forward, e.g. for asymptotic normality of the maximum 
likelihood estimator for a model with a finite number of parameters. This is because 
the dimension of the problem grows with the number of data points. However, if 
we consider the "infill asymptotics", where the number of data points in a bounded 
region increases, then a local average of the training data at any point z will pro- 
vide a tightly localized estimate for r(a) and hence y(a), so we would expect the 
distribution P(y) to become more Gaussian with increasing data. 
2.2 Parameterizing the covariance function 
There are many reasonable choices for the covariance function. Formally, we are 
required to specify functions which will generate a non-negative definite covariance 
matrix for any set of points (z,..., z). From a modelling point of view we wish 
to specify covariances so that points with nearby inputs will give rise to similar 
predictions. We find that the following covariance function works well: 
C(a,a') = v0exp - t= 
(8) 
where zt is the /th component of  and 0 = log(v0, wx,..., wa) plays the role of 
hyperparameters 2. 
We define the hyperparameters to be the log of the variables in equation 8 since 
these are positive scale-parameters. This covariance function has been studied by 
Sacks et al (1989) and can be obtained from a network of Gaussian radial basis 
functions in the limit of an infinite number of hidden units (Williams, 1996). 
The wt parameters in equation 8 allow a different length scale on each input di- 
mension. For irrelevant inputs, the corresponding w will become small, and the 
model will ignore that input. This is closely related to the Automatic Relevance 
Determination (ARD) idea of MacKay and Neal (Neal, 1996). The v0 variable gives 
the overall scale of the prior; in the classification case, this specifies if the r values 
will typically be pushed to 0 or 1, or will hover around 0.5. 
2.3 Integration over the hyperparameters 
Given that the GP contains adjustable hyperparameters, how should they be 
adapted given the data? Maximum likelihood or (generalized) cross-validation 
methods are often used, but we will prefer a Bayesian solution. A prior distri- 
bution over the hyperparameters P(0) is modified using the training data to obtain 
'the posterior distribution P(OIt ) x P(tlO)P(O ). To make predictions we integrate 
We call 0 the hyperparameters rather than parameters as they correspond closely to 
hyperparameters in neural networks. 
344 D. Barber and C. K. I. Williams 
the predicted probabilities over the posterior; for example, the mean value (a,) 
for test input a, is given by 
(9) 
where /r(a, ]0) is the mean prediction for a fixed value of the hyperparameters, as 
given in section 2. 
For the regression problem P(t119 ) can be calculated exactly using P(t119 ) = 
f P(tly)P(yl19)dy , but this integral is not analytically tractable for the classifi- 
cation problem. Again we use Laplace's approximation and obtain a 
logP(tlO)_ (t)+ I1¾ -1 +Wl+-log2r 
(10) 
where t is the converged iterate of equation 7. We denote the right-hand side of 
equation 10 by logPa(t119 ) (where a stands for approximate). 
The integration over 19-space also cannot be done analytically, and we employ a 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo method. We have used the Hybrid Monte Carlo (HMC) 
method of Duane el al (1987), with broad Gaussian hyperpriors on the parameters. 
HMC works by creating a fictitious dynamical system in which the hyperparameters 
are regarded as position variables, and augmenting these with momentum variables 
p. The purpose of the dynamical system is to give the hyperparameters "inertia" 
so that random-walk behaviour in 19-space can be avoided. The total energy, 7/, of 
the system is the sum of the kinetic energy,/C = pTp/2 and the potential energy, œ. 
The potential energy is defined such that p(191D) cr exp(-œ), i.e. œ = - log P(tl19 )- 
log P(19). In practice log Pa(tl19 ) is used instead of log P(tl19 ). We sample from the 
joint distribution for 19 and p given by P(19, p) cr exp(-œ-/C); the marginal of this 
distribution for 19 is the required posterior. A sample of hyperparameters from the 
posterior can therefore be obtained by simply ignoring the momenta. 
Sampling from the joint distribution is achieved by two steps: (i) finding new points 
in phase space with near-identical energies 7/by simulating the dynamical system 
using a discretised approximation to HamiltonJan dynamics, and (ii) changing the 
energy 7/by Gibbs sampling the momentum variables. 
Hamilton's first order differential equations for 7/ are approximated using the 
leapfrog method which requires the derivatives of œ with respect to 19. Given a 
Gaussian prior on 19, log P(19) is straightforward to differentiate. The derivative of 
log Pa(19) is also straightforward, although implicit dependencies of  (and hence 
') on 19 must be taken into account by using equation 5 at the maximum point to 
obtain 0.0/00 = (I + KW) -x (OK/OO)(t - a'). The computation of the energy can 
be quite expensive as for each new 0, we need to perform the maximization required 
for Laplace's approximation, equation 10. The Newton-Raphson iteration was ini- 
tialized each time with r = 0.5, and continued until the mean relative difference of 
the elements of W between consecutive iterations was less than 10 -4. 
The same step size  is used for all hyperparameters, and should be as large as 
possible while keeping the rejection rate low. We have used a trajectory made up of 
L = 20 leapfrog steps, which gave a low correlation between successive states 4. This 
proposed state is then accepted or rejected using the Metropolis rule depending on 
3This requires O(n 3) computation. 
4In our experiments, where 9 is only 7 or 8 dimensional, we found the trajectory length 
needed is much shorter than that for neural network HMC implementations. 
Gaussian Processes for Bayesian Classification via Hybrid Monte Carlo 345 
the final energy 7-/* (which is not necessarily equal to the initial energy 7/because 
of the discretization of Hamilton's equations). 
The priors over hyperparameters were set to be Gaussian with a mean of -3 and a 
standard deviation of 3. In all our simulations a step size  = 0.1 produced a very 
low rejection rate (< 5%). The hyperparameters corresponding to the wt's were 
initialized to -2 and that for v0 to 0. The sampling procedure was run for 200 
iterations, and the first third of the run was discarded; this "burn-in" is intended 
to give the hyperparameters time to come close to their equilibrium distribution. 
3 RESULTS 
We have tested our method on two well known two-class classification problems, the 
Leptograpsus crabs and Pima Indian diabetes datasets and the multiclass Forensic 
Glass dataset 5. We first rescale the inputs so that they have mean zero and unit vari- 
ance on the training set. Our Matlab implementations for the HMC simulations for 
both tasks each take several hours on a SGI Challenge machine (R10000), although 
good results can be obtained in less time. We also tried a standard Metropolis 
MCMC algorithm for the Crabs problem, and found similar results, although the 
sampling by this method is slower than that for HMC. Comparisons with other 
methods are taken from Ripley (1994) and Ripley (1996). 
Our results for the two-class problems are presented in Table 1: In the Leptograpsus 
crabs problem we attempt to classify the sex of crabs on the basis of five anatomical 
attributes. There are 100 examples available for crabs of each sex, making a total 
of 200 labelled examples. These are split into a training set of 40 crabs of each 
sex, making 80 training examples, with the other 120 examples used as the test set. 
The performance of the GP is equal to the best of the other methods reported in 
Ripley (1994), namely a 2 hidden unit neural network with direct input to output 
connections and a logistic output unit which was trained with maximum likelihood 
(Network(i) in Table 1). 
For the Pima Indians diabetes problem we have used the data as made available 
by Prof. Ripley, with his training/test split of 200 and 332 examples respectively 
(Ripley, 1996). The baseline error obtained by simply classifying each record as 
coming from a diabetic gives rise to an error of 33%. Again, the GP method is 
comparable with the best alternative performance, with an error of around 20%. 
Table 1 Pima Crabs 
Neural Network(l? 3 
Neural Network(2) 3 
Neural Network(3) 75+ 
Linear Discriminant 67 8 
Logistic regression 66 4 
MARS (degree = 1) 75 4 
PP (4 ridge functions} 75 6 
2 Gaussian Mixture 64 
Gaussian Process (HMC) 68 3 
Gaussian Process (MAP) 69 3 
Table 2 Forensic Glass 
Neural Network (4HU) 23.8% 
Linear Discriminant 36% 
MARS (degree = 1) 32.2% 
PP (5 ridge functions) 35% 
Gaussian Mixture 30.8% 
Decision Tree 32.2% 
Gaussian Process (MAP} 23.3% 
Table 1: Number of test errors for the Pima Indian diabetes and Leptograpsus crabs tasks. 
Network(2) used two hidden units and the predictive approach (Ripley, 1994), which uses 
Laplace's approximation to weight each network local minimum. Network(3) had one 
hidden unit and was trained with maximum likehhood; the results were worse for nets 
with two or more hidden units (Ripley, 1996). Table 2: Percentage classification error on 
the Forensic Glass task. 
5All available from http://markov. stats. ox. ac. uk/pub/PRNN. 
346 D. Barber and C. K. L Williams 
Our method is readily extendable to multiple class problems by using the softmax 
function. The details of this work which will be presented elsewhere, and we simply 
report here our initial findings on the Forensic Glass problem (Table 2). This is a 6 
class problem, consisting of 214 examples containing 9 attributes. The performance 
is estimated using 10 fold cross validation. Computing the MAP estimate took m 
24 hours and gave a classification error of 23.3%, comparable with the best of the 
other presented methods. 
4 DISCUSSION 
We have extended the work of Williams and Rasmussen (1996) to classification 
problems, and have demonstrated that it performs well on the datasets we have 
tried so far. One of the main advantages of this approach is that the number of 
parameters used in specifying the covariance function is typically much smaller than 
the number of weights and hyperparameters that are used in a neural network, and 
this greatly facilitates the implementation of Monte Carlo methods. Furthermore, 
because the Gaussian Process is a prior on function space (albeit in the activation 
function space), we are able to interpret our prior more readily than for a model 
in which the priors are on the parametrization of the function space, as in neural 
network models. Some of the elegance that is present using Gaussian Processes 
for regression is lost due to the inability to perform the required marginalisation 
exactly. Nevertheless, our simulation results suggest that Laplace's approximation 
is accurate enough to yield good results in practice. As methods based on GPs 
require the inversion of n x n matrices, where n is the number of training examples, 
we are looking into methods such as query selection for large dataset problems. 
Other future research directions include the investigation of different covariance 
functions and improvements on the approximations employed. 
We hope to make our MATLAB code available from http://www.ncrg.aston.ac.uk/ 
Acknowledgement s 
We thank Prof. B. Ripley for making available the Leptograpsus crabs and Pima Indian 
diabetes datasets. This work was partially supported by EPSRC grant GR/J75425, "Novel 
Developments in Learning Theory for Neural Networks". 
References 
Duane, S., A.D. Kennedy, B. J. Pendleton, and D. Roweth (1987). Hybrid Monte Carlo. 
Physics Letters B 195, 216-222. 
Green, P. J.and Silverman, B. W. (1994). Nonparametric regression and generalized 
linear models. Chapman and Hall. 
Neal, R. M. (1996). Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer. Lecture Notes in 
Statistics 118. 
Ripley, B. (1996). Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge. 
RipIcy, B. D. (1994). Flexible Non-linear Approaches to Classification. In V. Cherkassy, 
J. H. Friedman, and H. Wechsler (Eds.), From Statistics to Neural Networks, pp. 
105-126. Springer. 
Sacks, J., W. J. Welch, T. J. Mitchell, and H. P. Wynn (1989). Design and analysis of 
computer experiments. Statistical Science 4(4), 409-435. 
Williams, C. K. I. Computing with infinite networks. This volume. 
Williams, C. K. I. and C. E. Rasmussen (1996). Gaussian processes for regression. In 
D. S. Touretzky, M. C. Moze.r, and M. E. Hasselmo (Eds.), Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 8, pp. 514-520. MIT Press. 
