$patiotemporal Coupling and Scaling of 
Natural Images and Human Visual 
Sensitivities 
Dawei W. Dong 
California Institute of Technology 
Mail Code 139-74 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
dawei@hope.caltech.edu 
Abstract 
We study the spatiotemporal correlation in natural time-varying 
images and explore the hypothesis that the visual system is con- 
cerned with the optimal coding of visual representation through 
spatiotemporal decorrelation of the input signal. Based on the 
measured spatiotemporal power spectrum, the transform needed to 
decorrelate input signal is derived analytically and then compared 
with the actual processing observed in psychophysical experiments. 
1 Introduction 
The visual system is concerned with the perception of objects in a dynamic world. 
A significant fact about natural time-varying images is that they do not change ran- 
domly over space-time; instead image intensities at different times and/or spatial 
positions are highly correlated. We measured the spatiotemporal correlation func- 
tion - equivalently the power spectrum - of natural images and we find that it is 
non-separable, i.e., coupled in space and time, and exhibits a very interesting scaling 
behaviour. When expressed as a function of an appropriately scaled frequency vari- 
able, the spatiotemporal power spectrum is given by a simple power-law. We point 
out that the same kind of spatiotemporal coupling and scaling exists in human vi- 
sual sensitivity measured in psychophysical experiments. This poses the intriguing 
question of whether there is a quantitative relationship between the power spectrum 
of natural images and visual sensitivity. We answer this question by showing that 
the latter can be predicted from measurements of the power spectrum. 
860 D. W. Dong 
2 Spatioternporal Coupling and Scaling 
Interest in properties of time-varying images dates back to the early days of develop- 
ment of the television [1]. But systematic studies have not been possible previously 
primarily due to technical obstacles, and our knowledge of the regularities of time- 
varying images has so far been very limited. 
Figure 1: Natural time-varying images are highly correlated in space and time. Shown on 
the top are two frames of a motion scene separated by thirty three milliseconds. These 
two frames are highly repetitive, in fact the light intensities of most corresponding pixels 
are similar. Shown on the bottom are light increase (on the left) and light decrease (on 
the right) between the above two snapshots indicated by greyscale of pixels (white means 
no change). One can immediately see that only a small portion of the image changes 
significantly over this time scale. Our methods have been described previously [3]. To 
summerize, more than one thousand segments of videos on 8ram video tape (NTSC format 
RGB) are digitized to 8 bits greyscale using a Silicon Graphics Video board with default 
factory settings. Two types of segments are analyzed. The first are segments from movies 
on video tapes (e.g. "Raiders of the Lost Ark", "Uncommon Valor"). The second type of 
segments that we analyzed are videos made by the authors. The scene of the moving egret 
shown here is taken at Central Park in New York City. 
We have systematically measured the two point correlation matrix or covariance 
matrix of 10 ø x 10 ø x 2s (horizontalx vertical x temporal digitized to 64 x 64 x 64) seg- 
ments of natural time-varying images by averaging over 1049 movie segments. An 
example of two consecutive frames from a typical segment is given in Figure 1. The 
Fourier transform of the correlation matrix, or the power spectrum, turns out to 
be a non-separable function of spatial and temporal frequencies and exhibits an 
interesting scaling behaviour. From our measurements (see Figure 2) we find 
where f, is a scaled frequency which is simply the spatial frequency f scaled by 
G(w/.f), a function of the ratio of temporal and spatial frequencies, i.e., f, - 
G(w/.f).f. This behaviour is revealed most clearly by plotting the power spectrum 
as a function of f for fixed w/f ratio: the curves for different w/f ratios are just a 
horizontal shift from each other. 
Spatiotemporal Coupling/Scaling of Natural Images & Visual Sensitivity 861 
10 -1 w = 0.9 Hz 
10-2 w 3 Hz 
10-3 w 1 
10-4 
0.1 1 
Spatial Frequency f (cycle/degree) 
B 
10-1 
10-2 
10-3 
10-4 
w/f = ?ø/s 
lf = 2.søls 
 0'8ø /  
0.1 1 
Spatial Frequency f (cycle/degree) 
Figure 2: Spatiotemporal power spectra of natural time-varying images. (A) plotted as a 
function of spatial frequency for three temporal frequencies (0.9, 3, 10) Hz; (B) plotted for 
three velocities -- ratios of temporal and spatial frequencies -- (0.8, 2.3, 7) degree/second. 
There are some important conclusions that can be drawn from this measurement. First, 
it is obvious that the power spectrum cannot be separated into pure spatial and pure 
temporal parts; space and time are coupled in a non-trivial way. The power spectrum at 
low temporal frequency decreases more rapidly with increasing spatial frequency. Second, 
underlying this data is an interesting scaling behaviour which can be easily seen from the 
curves for constant w/f ratios: each curve is simply shifted horizontally from each other in 
the log-log plot. Thus curves for constant w/f ratio overlap with each other when shifted 
by an amount of G(w/f), i.e., when plotted against a scaled frequency fw = G(w/f)f. 
The similar spario-temporal coupling and scaling for hunam visual sensitivity is shown in 
Figure 3. 
Interestingly, the human visual system seems to be designed to take advantage 
of such regularity in natural images. The spatiotemporal contrast sensitivity of 
human K(f, w), i.e., the visual responses to a sinewave grating of spatial frequency 
f modulated at temporal frequency w, exhibits the same kind of spatiotemporal 
coupling and scaling (see Figure 3), 
K(f,w) = 
Again, when the contrast sensitivity curves are plotted as a function of f for fixed 
w/f ratios, the curves have the same shape and are only shifted from each other [2]. 
A 
lOO 
0.1 I 10 
Spatial Frequency f (cycle/degree) 
lOO 
lO 
o.1 I lO 
Spatial Frequency f (cycle/degree) 
Figure 3: Spatiotemporal contrast sensitivities of human vision. (A) plotted as a function 
of spatial frequency for two temporal frequencies (2, 13) Hz; (B) plotted for two w/f 
ratios (0.15, 3) degree/second. The solid lines in both A and B are the empirical fits. 
The experimental data points and empirical fitting curves are from reference [2]. First, 
it can be seen that the human visual sensitivity curve is band-pass filter at low temporal 
frequency and approaches low-pass filter for higher temporal frequency. The space and 
time are coupled. Second, it is clear that the curves for different w/f ratios have the same 
shape and are only shifted horizontally from each other in the log-log plot. Again, curves 
for constant w/f ratio overlap with each other when shifted by an amount of G(w/f), 
i.e., when plotted against a scaled frequency fw = G(w/f)f. The similar behaviour of 
spatiotemporal coupling and scaling for the power spectra of natural images is shown in 
Figure 2. 
862 D. W. Dong 
3 Relative Motion of Visual Scene 
Why does the human visual sensitivity have the same spatiotemporal coupling and 
scaling as natural images? 
The intuition underlying the spatiotemporal coupling and scaling of natural images 
is that when viewing a real visual scene the natural eye and/or body movements 
translate the entire scene across the retina and every spatial Fourier component 
of the scene moves at the same velocity. Thus it is reasonable to assume that 
for constant velocity, i.e., w/f ratio, the power spectrum show the same universal 
behaviour. This assumption is tested quantitatively in the following. 
Our measurements reveal that the spatiotemporal power spectrum has a simple 
form 
R(fw)  
which is shown in Figure 6A. This behaviour can be accounted for if the dominant 
component in the temporal signal comes from motion of objects with static power 
spectra of Rs (f) f-2. The static power spectra for the same collection of images is 
measured by treating frames as snapshots (Figure 4A); the measurement confirmed 
the above assumption and is in agreement with earlier works on the statistical 
properties of static natural images [5, 6, 7]. 
It is easy to derive that for a rotationally symmetric static spectrum Rs (f) = K/f  
(K is a constant), the spatiotemporal power spectrum of moving images is 
K p(), (1) 
R(f, m) = 
where P() is the function of velocity distribution, which is shown as the solid curve 
in Figure 4B (measured independently from the optical flows between frames). 
A 
101 
10 o 
10-1 
10-2 
0.1 
i I 10 
Spatial Frequency f (cycle/degree) 
v, w / f (degree/second) 
Figure 4: Spatial power spectrum and velocity distribution. (A) the measured spatial 
power spectrum of snap shot images, which shows that Rs (f) ,.o K/f 2 is a good approx- 
imation to the spectrum; (B) the measured velocity distribution P(v) (solid curve), in 
which the data of Figure 2 for the power spectrum were replotted as a function of w/f 
after multiplication by fs __ all the data points fall on the P(v) curve. 
In summary, the measured spatiotemporal power spectrum is dominated by images 
of spatial power spectrum  1If  moving with a velocity distribution P(v) ,,0 
1/(v + co)  (similar velocity distribution has been proposed earlier [8, 3] Thus 
R(f,w) = K/f3(w/f + vo)  and G(w/f)  (w/f + vo) /3. 
Spatiotemporal Coupling/Scaling of Natural Images & Visual Sensitivity 863 
Based on the assumption that the visual system is optimized to transmit information 
from natural scenes, we have derived and pointed out in references [3, 4] that the 
spatiotemporal contrast sensitivity K is a function of the power spectrum R, and 
thus the spatiotemporal coupling and scaling of R of natural images translates 
directly to the spatiotemporal coupling and scaling of K of visual sensitivity i.e., R 
is a function of fw only, so is K. 
4 Spatiotemporal Decorrelation 
The theory of spatiotemporal decorrelation is based on ideas of optimal coding from 
information theory: decorrelation of inputs to make statistically independent repre- 
sentations when signal is strong and smoothing where noise is significant. The end 
result is that by chosing the correct degree of decorrelation the signal is compressed 
by elimination of what is irrelevant without significant loss of information. 
The following relationship can be derived for the visual sensitivity K and the power 
spectrum R in the presence of noise power N: 
K = R-/2(1 + N/R) -a/2 
The figure below illustrates the predicted filter for the case of white noise (constant 
N). 
0.1 
0.01 
0.1 1 10 
Figure 5: Predicted optimal filter (curve I): in the low noise regime, it is given by whitening 
filter R -1/2 (curve II), which achieves spatiotemporal decorrelation; while at high noise 
regime it asymptotes the low-pass filter (curve III) which suppresses noise. 
As shown in Figure 6, the relation between the contrast sensitivity and the power 
spectrum predicts 
3 
K(fw) + 
in which N is the power of the white noise. This prediction is compared with psy- 
chophysical data in Figure 6B where we have used the scaling function G(w/f) = 
(w/f + vo) 2/a which has the same asymptotic behaviour as we have shown for the 
natural time-varying images [3]. We find that for v0 = I degree/second, the human 
864 D. W. Dong 
contrast sensitivity curves for w/f from 0.1 to 4 degree/second, measured in refer- 
ence [2], overlap very well with the theoretical prediction from the power spectrum 
of our measurements. 
A 
10 -1 
10-2 
10 -3 
10 -4 
B 
10 
0.1 0.1 
I 10 
Scaled Frequency 
Scaled Frequency 
Figure 6: Relation between the power spectrum of natural images and the human visual 
sensitivities. (A) the measured spatiotemporal power spectrum (Figure 2B) replotted as 
a function of the scaled frequency can be fit very well by R - fs (solid line); (B) the 
spatiotemporal contrast sensitivities of human vision (Figure 3B) replotted as a function 
of the scaled frequency ca be fit very well by our theoretical prediction (solid line). 
Our theory on the relation between the visual sensitivity K and the power spectrum of 
natural time-varying images R in the presence of noise power N has been described in 
detail in reference [4]. To summarize, the visual sensitivity in Fourier space is simply 
K - R-1/2(1 -N/R) -s/2. In a linear system, this is proportional to the visual response 
to a sinewave of spatial frequency f modulated at temporal frequency w, i.e., the contrast 
sensitivity curves shown in Figure 3. In the case of white noise, i.e., N is independent of 
f and w, K depends on f and w through the power spectrum R. Since R is a function 
of the scaled frequency fw only, so is K. From our measurement R - fw  , thus K - 
fw/2(1 - NfwS)-3/. This curve is plotted in the figure as the solid line with N ---- 0.01. 
The agreement is very good. 
5 Conclusions and Discussions 
A simple relationshi p is revealed between the statistical structure of natural time- 
varying images and the spatiotemporal sensitivity of human vision. The existence 
of this relationship supports the hypothesis that visual processing is optimized to 
compress as much information as possible about the outside world into the limited 
dynamic range of the visual channels. 
We should point out that this scaling behaviour is expected to break down for very 
high temporal and spatial frequency where the effect of the temporal and spatial 
modulation function of the eye [9, 10] cannot be ignored. 
Finally while our predictions show that, in general, the human visual sensitivity 
is strongly space-time coupled, we do predict a regime where decoupling is a good 
approximation. This is based on the fact that in the regime of relatively high 
temporal frequency and relatively low spatial frequency we find that the power 
spectrum of natural images is separable into spatial and temporal parts [3]. In a 
previous work we have used this decoupling to model response properties of cat 
LGN cells where we have shown that these can be accounted for by the theoretical 
prediction based on the power spectrum in that regime [4]. 
Acknowledgements 
The author gratefully acknowledges the discussions with Dr. Joseph Atick. 
Spatiotemporal Coupling/Scaling of Natural Images & Visual Sensitivity 865 
References 
[1] Kretzmer ER, 1952. Statistics of television signals. The bell system technical 
journal. 751-763. 
[2] Kelly DH, 1979 Motion and vision. II. Stabilized spatie, temporal threshold 
surface. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 69, 1340-1349. 
[3] Dong DW, Atick J J, 1995 Statistics of natural time-varying images. Network: 
Computation in Neural Systems, 6, 345-358. 
[4] 
Dong DW, Atick J J, 1995 Temporal decorrelation: a theory of lagged and 
nonlagged responses in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Network: Computation 
in Neural Systems, 6, 159-178. 
[5] Burton G J, Moorhead IR, 1987. Color and spatial structure in natural scenes. 
Applied Optics. 26(1): 157-170. 
[6] Field D J, 1987. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the 
response properties of cortical cells.. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4: 2379-2394. 
[7] Ruderman DL, Bialek W, 1994. Statistics of natura.1 images: scaling in the 
woods. Phy. Rev. Let. 73(6): 814-817. 
[8] Van Hateren JH, 1993. Spatiotemporal Contrast sensitivity of early vision. 
Vision Res. 33(2): 257-267. 
[9] Campbell FW, Gubisch RW, 1966. Optical quality of the human eye. J. Phys- 
iol. 186: 558-578. 
[10] Schnapf JL, Baylor DA, 1987. How photoreceptor cells respond to light. Sci- 
entific American 256(4): 40-47. 
