Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic 
Channel Allocation in Cellular Telephone 
Systems 
Satinder Singh 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0430 
bavej a@cs. colorado.edu 
Dimitri Bertsekas 
Lab. for Info. and Decision Sciences 
MIT 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
bertsekas@lids.mit.edu 
Abstract 
In cellular telephone systems, an important problem is to dynami- 
cally allocate the communication resource (channels) so as to max- 
imize service in a stochastic caller environment. This problem is 
naturally formulated as a dynamic programming problem and we 
use a reinforcement learning (RL) method to find dynamic channel 
allocation policies that are better than previous heuristic solutions. 
The policies obtained perform well for a broad variety of call traf- 
fic patterns. We present results on a large cellular system with 
approximately 4949 states. 
In cellular communication systems, an important problem is to allocate the com- 
munication resource (bandwidth) so as to maximize the service provided to a set of 
mobile callers whose demand for service changes stochastically. A given geograph- 
ical area is divided into mutually disjoint cells, and each cell serves the calls that 
are within its boundaries (see Figure la). The total. system bandwidth is divided 
into channels, with each channel centered around a frequency. Each channel can be 
used simultaneously at different cells, provided these cells are sufficiently separated 
spatially, so that there is no interference between them. The minimum separation 
distance between simultaneous reuse of the same channel is called the channel reuse 
constraint. 
When a call requests service in a given cell either a free channel (one that does not 
violate the channel reuse constraint) may be assigned to the call, or else the call is 
blocked from the system; this will happen if no free channel can be found. Also, 
when a mobile caller crosses from one cell to another, the call is "handed off" to the 
cell of entry; that is, a new free channel is provided to the call at the new cell. If no 
such channel is available, the call must be dropped/disconnected from the system. 
RL for Dynamic ChanneI Allocation 975 
One objective of a channel allocation policy is to allocate the available channels 
to calls so that the number of blocked calls is minimized. An additional objective 
is to minimize the number of calls that are dropped when they are handed off to 
a busy cell. These two objectives must be weighted appropriately to reflect their 
relative importance, since dropping existing calls is generally more undesirable than 
blocking new calls. 
To illustrate the qualitative nature of the channel assignment decisions, suppose 
that there are only two channels and three cells arranged in a line. Assume a 
channel reuse constraint of 2, i.e., a channel may be used simultaneously in cells 
i and 3, but may not be used in channel 2 if it is already used in cell i or in cell 
3. Suppose that the system is serving one call in cell i and another call in cell 
3. Then serving both calls on the same channel results in a better channel usage 
pattern than serving them on different channels, since in the former case the other 
channel is free to be used in cell 2. The purpose of the channel assignment and 
channel rearrangement strategy is, roughly speaking, to create such favorable usage 
patterns that minimize the likelihood of calls being blocked. 
We formulate the channel assignment problem as a dynamic programming problem, 
which, however, is too complex to be solved exactly. We introduce approximations 
based on the methodology of reinforcement learning (RL) (e.g., Barto, Bradtke and 
Singh, 1995, or the recent textbook by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996). Our method 
learns channel allocation policies that outperform not only the most commonly used 
policy in cellular systems, but also the best heuristic policy we could find in the 
literature. 
I CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT POLICIES 
Many cellular systems are based on a fixed assignment (FA) channel allocation; that 
is, the set of channels is partitioned, and the partitions are permanently assigned 
to cells so that all cells can use all the channels assigned to them simultaneously 
without interference (see Figure l a). When a call arrives in a cell, if any pre- 
assigned channel is unused; it is assigned, else the call is blocked. No rearrangement 
is done when a call terminates. Such a policy is static and cannot take advantage of 
temporary stochastic variations in demand for service. More efficient are dynamic 
channel allocation policies, which assign channels to different cells, so that every 
channel is available to every cell on a need basis, unless the channel is used in a 
nearby cell and the reuse constraint is violated. 
The best existing dynamic channel allocation policy we found in the literature is 
Borrowing with Directional Channel Locking (BDCL) of Zhang & Yum (1989). It 
numbers the channels from i to N, partitions and assigns them to cells as in FA. 
The channels assigned to a cell are its nominal channels. If a nominal channel 
is available when a call arrives in a cell, the smallest numbered such channel is 
assigned to the call. If no nominal channel is available, then the largest numbered 
free channel is borrowed from the neighbour with the most free channels. When a 
channel is borrowed, careful accounting of the directional effect of which cells can 
no longer use that channel because of interference is done. The call is blocked if 
there are no free channels at all. When a call terminates in a cell and the channel 
so freed is a nominal channel, say numbered i, of that cell, then if there is a call 
in that cell on a borrowed channel, the call on the smallest numbered borrowed 
channel is reassigned to i and the borrowed channel is returned to the appropriate 
cell. If there is no call on a borrowed channel, then if there is a call on a nominal 
channel numbered larger than i, the call on the highest numbered nominal channel 
is reassigned to i. If the call just terminated was itself on a borrowed channel, the 
976 S. Singh and D. Bertsekas 
call on the smallest numbered borrowed channel is reassigned to it and that channel 
is returned to the cell from which it was borrowed. Notice that when a borrowed 
channel is returned to its original cell, a nominal channel becomes free in that cell 
and triggers a reassignment. Thus, in the worst case a call termination in one cell 
can sequentially cause reassignments in arbitrarily far away cells -- making BDCL 
somewhat impractical. 
BDCL is quite sophisticated and combines the notions of channel-ordering, nominal 
channels, and channel borrowing. Zhang and Yum (1989) show that BDCL is 
superior to its competitors, including FA. Generally, BDCL has continued to be 
highly regarded in the literature as a powerful heuristic (Enrico et.al., 1996). In 
this paper, we compare the performance of dynamic channel allocation policies 
learned by RL with both FA and BDCL. 
1.1 DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING FORMULATION 
We can formulate the dynamic channel allocation problem using dynamic program- 
ming (e.g., Bertsekas, 1995). State transitions occur when channels become free due 
to call departures, or when a call arrives at a given cell and wishes to be assigned 
a channel, or when there is a handoff, which can be viewed as a simultaneous call 
departure from one cell and a call arrival at another cell. The state at each time 
consists of two components: 
(1) The list of occupied and unoccupied channels at each cell. We call this the 
configuration of the cellular system. It is ecponential in the number of cells. 
(2) The event that causes the state transition (arrival, departure, or handoff). This 
component of the state is uncontrollable. 
The decision/control applied at the time of a call departure is the rearrangement 
of the channels in use with the aim of creating a more favorable channel packing 
pattern among the cells (one that will leave more channels free for future assign- 
ments). Unlike BDCL, our RL solution will restrict this rearrangement to the cell 
with the current call departure. The control exercised at the time of a call arrival 
is the assignment of a free channel, or the blocking of the call if no free channel is 
currently available. In general, it may also be useful to do admission control, i.e., 
to allow the possibility of not accepting a new call even when there exists a free 
channel to minimize the dropping of ongoing calls during handoff in the future. We 
address admission control in a separate paper and here restrict ourselves to always 
accepting a call if a free channel is available. The objective is to learn a policy that 
assigns decisions (assignment or rearrangement depending on event) to each state 
so as to mai:imize 
J = E e -c(t)dt , 
where E{-} is the expectation operator, c(t) is the number of ongoing calls at time 
t, and  is a discount factor that makes immediate profit more valuable than future 
profit. Maximizing J is equivalent to minimizing the expected (discounted) number 
of blocked calls over an infinite horizon. 
2 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING SOLUTION 
RL methods solve optimal control (or dynamic programming) problems by learning 
good approximations to the optimal value function, J*, given by the solution to 
RL for Dynamic Channel Allocation 977 
the Bellman optimality equation which takes the following form for the dynamic 
channel allocation problem: 
J(x) = Ee { max [Eat{c(x,a, At)+7(At)J(y)}]} 
aA(z,e) ' 
(1) 
where x is a configuration, e is the random event (a call arrival or departure), A(x, e) 
is the set of actions available in the current state (x, e), At is the random time until 
the next event, c(x, a, At) is the effective immediate payoff with the discounting, 
and 7(At) is the effective discount for the next configuration y. 
RL learns approximations to J* using Sutton's (1988) temporal difference (TD(0)) 
algorithm. A fixed feature extractor is used to form an approximate compact rep- 
resentation of the exponential configuration of the cellular array. This approxi- 
mate representation forms the input to a function approximator (see Figure 1) that 
learns/stores estimates of J*. No partitioning of channels is done; all channels are 
available in each cell. On each event, the estimates of J* are used both to make 
decisions and to update the estimates themselves as follows: 
Call Arrival: When a call arrives, evaluate the next configuration for each free 
channel and assign the channel that leads to the configuration with the largest 
estimated value. If there is no free channel at all, no decision has to be made. 
Call Termination: When a call terminates, one by one each ongoing call in that 
cell is considered for reassignment to the just freed channel; the resulting configu- 
rations are evaluated and compared to the value of not doing any reassignment at 
all. The action that leads to the highest value configuration is then executed. 
On call arrival, as long as there is a free channel, the number of ongoing calls and the 
time to next event do not depend on the free channel assigned. Similarly, the number 
of ongoing calls and the time to next event do not depend on the rearrangement done 
on call departure. Therefore, both the sample immediate payoff which depends on 
the number of ongoing calls and the time to next event, and the effective discount 
factor which depends only on the time to next event are independent of the choice 
of action. Thus one can choose the current best action by simply considering the 
estimated values of the next configurations. The next configuration for each action 
is deterministic and trivial to compute. 
When the next random event occurs, the sample payoff and the discount factor be- 
come available and are used to update the value function as follows: on a transition 
from configuration x to y on action a in time At, 
J.e,.() = (1 - a)Jotd(') + a (C(X, a, At) + 7(At)Jotd()) 
(2) 
where & is used to indicate the approximate feature-based representation of x. The 
parameters of the function approximator are then updated to best represent Jnew (') 
using gradient descent in mean-squared error (Jnew(')- Jotd(')) 2. 
3 SIMULATION RESULTS 
Call arrivals are modeled as Poisson processes with a separate mean for each cell, 
and call durations are modeled with an exponential distribution. The first set of 
results are on the 7 by 7 cellular array of Figure ??a with 70 channels (roughly 
7049 configurations) and a channel reuse constraint of 3 (this problem is borrowed 
from Zhang and Yum's (1989) paper on an empirical comparison of BDCL and its 
competitors). Figures 2a, b & c are for uniform call arrival rates of 150, 200, and 
350 calls/hr respectively in each cell. The mean call duration for all the experiments 
978 S. Singh and D. Bertsekas 
reported here is 3 minutes. Figure 2d is for non-uniform call arrival rates. Each 
curve plots the cumulative empirical blocking probability as a function of simulated 
time. Each data point is therefore the percentage of system-wide calls that were 
blocked up until that point in time. All simulations start with no ongoing calls. 
a) 
b) 
Configuration[ Feature 
-[ fixtrator 
Features 
(Availability 
and 
Packing ) 
TD(O) Training 
/ -- 
/ 
/ 
_! Furtion i Value 
-I Apoximator  
Figure 1: a) Cellular Array. The market area is divided up into cells, shown here as 
hexagons. The available bandwidth is divided into channels. Each cell has a base sta- 
tion responsible for calls within its area. Calls arrive randomly, have random durations 
and callers may move around in the market area creating handoffs. The channel reuse 
constraint requires that there be a minimum distance between simultaneous reuse of the 
same channel. In a fixed assignment channel allocation policy (assuming a channel reuse 
constraint of 3), the channels are partitioned into 7 lots labeled I to 7 and assigned to the 
cells in the compact pattern shown here. Note that the minimum distance between cells 
with the same number is at least three. b) A block diagram of the RL system. The ex- 
ponential configuration is mapped into a feature-based approximate representation which 
forms the input to a function approximation system that learns values for configurations. 
The parameters of the function approximator are trained using gradient descent on the 
squared TD(0) error in value function estimates (c.f. Equation 2). 
The RL system uses a linear neural network and two sets of features as input: one 
availability feature for each cell and one packing feature for each cell-channel pair. 
The availability feature for a cell is the number of free channels in that cell, while the 
packing feature for a cell-channel pair is the number of times that channel is used 
in a 4 cell radius. Other packing features were tried but are not reported because 
they were insignificant. The RL curves in Figure 2 show the empirical blocking 
probability whilst learning. Note that learning is quite rapid. As the mean call 
arrival rate is increased the relative difference between the 3 algorithms decreases. 
In fact, FA can be shown to be optimal in the limit of infinite call arrival rates 
(see McEliece and Sivarajan, 1994). With so many customers in every cell there 
are no short-term fluctuations to exploit. However, as demonstrated in Figure 2, 
for practical traffic rates RL consistently gives a big win over FA and a smaller win 
over BDCL. 
One difference between RL and BDCL is that while the BDCL policy is independent 
of call traffic, RL adapts its policy to the particulars of the call traffic it is trained 
on and should therefore be less sensitive to different patterns of non-uniformity of 
call traffic across cells. Figure 3b presents multiple sets of bar-graphs of asymptotic 
blocking probabilities for the three algorithms on a 20 by I cellular array with 24 
channels and a channel reuse constraint of 3. For each set, the average per-cell call 
arrival rate is the same (120 calls/hr; mean duration of 3 minutes), but the pattern 
of call arrival rates across the 20 cells is varied. The patterns are shown on the left 
of the bar-graphs and are explained in the caption of Figure 3b. From Figure 3b 
it is apparent that RL is much less sensitive to varied patterns of non-uniformity 
than both BDCL and FA. 
We have showed that RL with a linear function approximator is able to find better 
dynamic channel allocation policies than the BDCL and FA policies. Using nonlin- 
ear neural networks as function approximators for RL did in some cases improve 
RL for Dynamic ChanneI Allocation 979 
L) 150 calls/hr 
c) 
0.10 
0.0 
O0 
', 0.10 
E 
oo 
oo 
BIlL 
- IlL 
'nO.O 5000.0 
FA BDCL 
b) 
d) 
1 0.10 
.- 
E 
02O 
0.10 
200 c811hr 
BIlL 
IlL 
0.0% ) ' ' 
ß ,nO. 0 
Non-Unilorrn 
5000.0 
BDCL 
'nO.O 500.0 g500. O 
Time Time 
500.0 
Figure 2: a), b), c) & d) These figures compare performance of RL, FA, and BDCL on the 7 
by 7 cellular array of Figure la. The means of the call arrival (Poisson) processes are shown 
in the graph titles. Each curve presents the cumulative empirical blocking probability as 
a function of time elapsed in minutes. All simulations start with no ongoing calls and 
therefore the blocking probabilities are low in the early minutes of the performance curves. 
The RL curves presented here are for a linear function approximator and show performance 
while learning. Note that learning is quite rapid. 
performance over linear networks by a small amount but at the cost of a big in- 
crease in training time. We chose to present results for linear networks because they 
have the advantage that even though training is centralized, the policy so learned 
is decentralized because the features are local and therefore just the weights from 
the local features in the trained linear network can be used to choose actions in 
each cell. For large cellular arrays, training itself could be decentralized because 
the choice of action in a particular cell has a minor effect on far away cells. We will 
explore the effect of decentralized training in future work. 
4 CONCLUSION 
The dynamic channel allocation problem is naturally formulated as an optimal con- 
trol or dynamic programming problem, albeit one with very large state spaces. Tra- 
ditional dynamic programming techniques are computationally infeasible for such 
large-scale problems. Therefore, knowledge-intensive heuristic solutions that ig- 
nore the optimal control framework have been developed. Recent approximations 
to dynamic programming introduced in the reinforcement learning (RL) commu- 
nity make it possible to go back to the channel assignment problem and solve it 
as an optimal control problem, in the process finding better solutions than previ- 
ously available. We presented such a solution using Sutton's (1988) TD(0) with a 
feature-based linear network and demonstrated its superiority on a problem with 
approximately 7049 states. Other recent examples of similar successes are the game 
980 S. Singh and D. Bertsekas 
-I 
Pstterrle 
(11dlhlllllhllMIIdl) 
(hhlhhlhhlhhlhhlhh IM ) 
(1111hlllhllllldll) 
(hlhlMdhhlhhlhhlM) 
 I FA 
Figure 3: a) Screen dump of a Java Demonstration available pubhcly at http:// 
www.cs.colorado.edu/baveja/Demo.html b) Sensitivity of channel assignment methods to 
non-uniform traffic patterns. This figure plots asymptotic empirical blocking probabihty 
for RL, BDCL, and FA for a hnear array of cells with different patterns (shown at left) of 
mean call arrival rates -- chosen so that the average per cell call arrival rate is the same 
across patterns. The symbol I is for low, rn for medium, and h for high. The numeric 
values of l, h, and rn are chosen separately for each pattern to ensure that the average per 
cell rate of arrival is 120 calls/hr. The results show that RL is able to adapt its allocation 
strategy and thereby is better able to exploit the non-uniform call arrival rates. 
of backgammon (Tesauro, 1992), elevator-scheduling (Crites & Barto, 1995), and 
job-shop scheduling (Zhang & Dietterich, 1995). The neuro-dynamiq programming 
textbook (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996) presents a variety of related case studies. 
References 
Barto, A.G., Bradtke, S.J. & Singh, S. (1995) Learning to act using real-time dynamic 
programming. Artificial Intelligence, 72:81-138. 
Bertsekas, D.P. (1995) Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control: Vols 1 and 2. Athena- 
Scientific, Belmont, MA. 
Bertsekas, D.P. & Tsitsildis, J. (1996) Neuro-Dynamic Programming Athena-Scientific, 
Belmont, MA. 
Crites, R.H. & Barto, A.G. (1996) Improving elevator performance using reinforcement 
learning. In Advances is Neural Information Processing Systems 8. 
Del Re, W., Fantacci, R. & Ronga, L. (1996) A dynamic channel allocation technique 
based on Hopfield Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 45:1. 
McEliece, R.J. &; Sivarajah, K.N. (1994), Performance hmits for channelized cellular tele- 
phone systems. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 21-34, Jan. 
Sutton, R.S. (1988) Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine 
Learning, 3:9-44. 
Tesauro, G.J. (1992) Practical issues in temporal difference learning. Machine Learning, 
8(3/4):257-277. 
Zhang, M. & Yum, T.P. (1989) Comparisons of Channel-Assignment Strategies in Cellular 
Mobile Telephone Systems. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology Vol. 38, No. 4. 
Zhang, W. & Dietterich, T.G. (1996) High-performance job-shop scheduling with a time- 
dday TD(lambda) network. In Advances is Neural Information Processing Systems 8. 
