28 Lockery, Fang and Sejnowski 
I I II I I II II 
Neural Network Analysis of 
Distributed Representations of Dynmnicai 
Sensory-Motor Transformations in the Leech 
Shawn R. Lockery, Yah Fang, and Terrence J. 
Computational Neurobiology Laboratory 
Salk Institute for Biological Studies 
Box 85800, San Diego, CA 92138 
Sejnowski 
ABSTRACT 
Interneurons in leech ganglia receive multiple sensory inputs and make 
synaptic contacts with many motor neurons. These "hidden" units 
coordinate several different behaviors. We used physiological and 
anatomical constraints to construct a model of the local bending reflex. 
Dynamical networks were trained on experimentally derived input-output 
patterns using recurrent back-propagation. Units in the model were 
modified to include electrical synapses and multiple synaptic time 
constants. The properties of the hidden units that emerged in the 
simulations matched those in the leech. The model and data support 
distributed rather than 1ocalist representations in the local bending reflex. 
These results also explain counterintuitive aspects of the local bending 
circuitry. 
INTRODUCTION 
Neural network modeling techniques have recently been used to predict and analyze the 
connectivity of biological neural circuits (Zipser and Andersen, 1988; Lehky and 
Sejnowski, 1988; Anastasio and Robinson, 1989). Neurons are represented as simplified 
processing units and arranged into model networks that are then trained to reproduce the 
input-output function of the reflex or brain region of interest. After training, the 
receptive and projecfive field of hidden units in the network often bear striking similarities 
to actual neurons and can suggest functional roles of neurons with inputs and outputs that 
are hard to grasp intuitively. We applied this approach to the local bending reflex of the 
leech, a three-layered, feed-forward network comprising a small number of identifiable 
Neural Network Analysis of Distributed Representations in the Leech 29 
neurons whose connectivity and input-output function have been determined 
physiologically. We found that model local bending networks trained using recurrent 
back-propagation (Pineda, 1987; Pearlmutter, 1989) to reproduce a physiologically 
determined input-output function contained hidden units whose connectivity and temporal 
response properties closely resembled those of identified neurons in the biological 
network. The similarity between model and actual neurons suggested that local bending 
is produced by distributed representations of sensory and motor information. 
THE LOCAL BENDING REFLEX 
In response to a mechanical stimulus, the leech withdraws from the site of contact (Fig. 
la). This is accomplished by contraction of longitudinal muscles beneath the stimulus 
and relaxation of longitudinal muscles on the opposite side of the body, resulting in a U- 
shaped local bend (Kristan, 1982). The form of the response is independent of the site of 
stimulation: dorsal, ventral, and lateral stimuli produce an appropriately oriented 
a b 
Re. ting Lft Right 
neurons 
Dorsal __ 
-''/< ' .... - Interneurons o o o o- o o o o- 
Ventral 
Lateral 
Motor 
neurons v( 
Dorsal 
{ {   -- local bending 
interneurons 
Unidentified 
0 0 0 0 '"' local bending 
interneurons 
 excato/ 
ß -- inhitory 
 electrical 
Figure 1: a. Local bending behavior. Partial view of a leech in the resting position 
and in response to dorsal, ventral, and lateral stimuli. b. Local bending circuit. The main 
input to the reflex is provided by the dorsal and ventral P cells (PD and PV). Control of 
local bending is largely provided by motor neurons whose field of innervation is restricted 
to single left-right, dorsal-ventral quadrants of the body; dorsal and ventral quadrants are 
innervated by both excitatory (DE and VE) and inhibitory (DI and VI) motor neurons. 
Motor neurons are connected by electrical and chemical synapses. Sensory input to motor 
neurons is mediated by a layer of interneurons. Interneurons that were excited by PD and 
which in turn excite DE have been identified (hatched); other types of interneurons 
remain to be identified (open). 
30 Lockery, Fang and Sejnowski 
withdrawal. Major input to the local bending reflex is provided by four pressure sensitive 
mechanoreceptors called P cells, each with a receptive field confined to a single quadrant 
of the body wall (Fig. lb). Output to the muscles is provided by eight types of 
longitudinal muscle motor neurons, one to four excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons 
for each body wall quadrant (Stuart, 1970; Ort et al., 1974). Motor neurons are connected 
by chemical and electrical synapses that introduce the possibility of feedback among the 
motor neurons. 
Dorsal, ventral, and lateral stimuli each produce a pattern of P cell activation that results 
in a unique pattern of activation and inhibition of the motor neurons (Lockery and 
Kristan, 1990a). Connections between sensory and motor neurons are mediated by a layer 
of interneurons (Kristan, 1982). Nine types of local bending interneurons have been 
identified (Lockery and Kristan, 1990b). These comprise the subset of the local bending 
interneurons which contribute to dorsal local bending because they are excited by the 
dorsal P cell and in turn excite the dorsal excitatory motor neuron. There appear to be no 
functional connections between interneurons. Other intemeurons remain to be identified, 
such as those which inhibit the dorsal excitatory motor neurons. 
Interneuron input connections were determined by recording the amplitude of the 
postsynapfic potential in an interneuron while each of the P cells was stimulated with a 
standard train of impulses (Lockery and Kristan, 1990b). Output connections were 
determined by recording the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential in each motor neuron 
when an interneuron was stimulated with a standard current pulse. Interneuron input and 
output connections are shown in Figure 2, where white squares are excitatory 
connections, black squares are inhibitory connections, and the size of each square indicates 
connection strength. Most interneurons received substantial input from three or four P 
cells, indicating that the local bending network forms a distributed representation of 
sensory input. 
dorsal 
ventral 
left right 
\ / 
Figure 2: Input and output connections of the nine types of dorsal local bending 
interneurons. Within each gray box, the upper panel shows input connections from 
sensory neurons, the middle panel shows output connections to inhibitory motor 
neurons, and the lower panel shows output connections to excitatory motor neurons. 
Side-length of each box is proportional to the amplitude of the connection determined 
from intracellular recordings of interneurons or motor neurons. White boxes indicate 
excitatory connections and black boxes indicated inhibitory connections. Blank spaces 
denote conections whose strength has not been determined for technical reasons. 
Neural Network Analysis of Distributed Representations in the Leech 31 
NEURAL NETWORK MODEL 
Because sensory input is represented in a distributed fashion, most interneurons are active 
in all forms of local bending. Thus, in addition to contributing to dorsal local bending, 
most interneurons are also active during ventral and lateral bending when some or all of 
their output effects are inappropriate to the observed behavioral response. This suggests 
that the inappropriate effects of the dorsal bending intemeurons must be offset by other as 
yet unidentified interneurons and raises the possibility that local bending is the result of 
simultaneous activation of a population of interneurons with multiple sensory inputs and 
both appropriate and inappropriate effects on many motor neurons. It was not obvious, 
however, that such a population was sufficient, given the well-known nonlinearities of 
neural elements and constraints imposed by the input-output function and connections 
known to exist in the network. The possibility remained that interneurons specific for 
each form of the behavior were required to produce each output pattern. To address this 
issue, we used recurrent back-propagation (Pearlmutter, 1989) to train a dynamical 
network of model neurons (Fig 3a). 
a 
Left Right 
Sensory ( ) 
neurons ;u/O 
Interneurons  
Motor 
neurons 
The network had four input units representing the 
b 
Bofore After Target 
8 - V 
excitetory ,,---inhibitory  electicaJ Slim ß t , _ JlO mV 
5 sec 
Figure 3: a. The local bending network model. Four sensory neurons were connected to 
eight motor neurons via a layer of 10 interneurons. Neurons were represented as single 
electrical compartments whose voltage varied as a function of time (see tex0. Known 
electrical and chemical connections among motor neurons were assigned fixed connection 
strengths (g's and w's) determined from intracellular recordings. Interneuron input and 
output connections were adjusted by recurrent back-propagation. Chemical synaptic 
delays were implemented by inserting s-units between chemically connected pairs of 
neurons. S-units with different time constants were inserted between sensory and 
interneurons to account for fast and slow components of synaptic potentials recorded in 
interneurons. b. Output of the model network in response to simultaneous activation of 
both PDs (stim). The response of each motor neuron (rows) is shown before and after 
training. The desired response contained in the training set is shown on the right for 
comparison (target). 
32 Lockery, Fang and Sejnowski 
four P cells, and eight output units representing the eight motor neuron types. Between 
input and output units was a single layer of 10 hidden units representing the interneurons. 
Neurons were represented as single electrical compartments with an input resistance and 
time constant. The membrane potential (Vi) of each neuron was given by 
Ti dVi/dt = -Vi + Ri(Ie + Ic) 
where Ti and Ri are the time constant and input resistance of the neuron and Ie and Ic are 
the sum of the electrical and chemical synaptic currents from presynapfic neurons. 
Current due to electrical synapses was given by 
Ie = Ej gij (Vj-Vi) 
where gij is the coupling conductance between neuron i and j. To implement the delay 
associated with chemical synapses, synapse units (s-units) were inserted between between 
pairs of neurons connected by chemical synapses. The activation of each s-unit was given 
by 
Tij dSij/dt = -Sij + f(Vj) 
where Tij is the synaptic time constant and f(Vj) was a physiologically determined 
sigmoidal function (0 < f < 1) relating pre- and postsynapfic membrane potential at an 
identified monosynaptic connection in the leech (Granzow et al., 1985). Current due to 
chemical synapses was given by 
Ic = wij Sij 
where wij is the strength of the chemical synapse between units i and j. Thus, synaptic 
current is a graded function of presynapfic voltage, a common feature of neurons in the 
leech (Friesen, 1985; Granzow et al., 1985; Thompson and Stent, 1976) and other 
invertebrates CKatz and Miledi, 1967; Burrows and Siegler, 1978; Nagayama and Hisada, 
1987). 
Chemical and electrical synaptic strengths between motor neurons were determined by 
recording from pairs of motor neurons and were not adjusted by the training algorithm. 
Interneuron input and output connections were given small initial values that were 
randomly assigned and subsequently adjusted during mining. During training, input 
connections were constrained to be positive to reflect the fact that only excitatory 
interneuron input connections were seen (Fig. 2), but no constraints were placed on the 
number of input or output connections. Synapfic time constants were assigned fixed val- 
ues. These were adjusted by hand to fit the time course of motor neuron synaptic 
potentials (Lockery and Kristan, 1990a), or determined from pairwise motor neuron 
recordings (Granzow et al., 1985). 
Neural Network Analysis of Distributed Representations in the Leech 33 
a 
dorsal 
ventral 
b 
left 
Hght 
/ 
Data 
Slow 
Model 
Fast 
Mixed 
- __ _ f l lOO mV 
Stim Slim 400 ms 
Figure 4: a. Input and output connections of model local bending interneurons. Model 
interneurons, like the actual interneurons, received substantial inputs from three or four 
sensory neurons and had significant effects on most of the motor neurons. Symbols as in 
figure 2. b. Actual (data) and simulated (model) synaptic potentials recorded from three 
types of interneuron. Actual synaptic potentials were recorded in response to a train of P 
cell impulses. Simulated synaptic potentials were recorded in response to a pulse of 
current in the P cell which simulates a step change in P cell firing frequency. 
RESULTS 
Model networks were trained to produce the amplitude and time course of synaptic 
potentials recorded in all eight motor neurons in response to trains of P cell impulses 
34 Lockery, Fang and Sejnowski 
(Lockery and Kristan, 1990a). The training set included the response of all eight motor 
neurons when each P cell was stimulated alone and when P cells were stimulated in pairs. 
After 6,000 - 10,000 training epochs, the output of the model closely matched the desired 
output for aH patterns in the training set (Fig. 3b). To compare interneurons in the model 
network to actual interneurons, simulated physiological experiments were performed. 
Interneuron input connections were determined by recording the amplitude of the 
postsynaptic potential in a model interneuron while each of the P cells was stimulated 
with a standard current pulse. Output connections were determined by recording the 
amplitude of the postsynaptic potential in each motor neuron when an interneuron was 
stimulated with a standard current pulse. Model interneurons, like those in the real 
network, received three or four substantial connections from P cells and had significant 
effects on most of the motor neurons (Fig. 4a). Most model interneurons were active 
during each form of the behavior and the output connections of the interneurons were only 
partially consistent with each form of the local bending response. Thus, the appropriate 
motor neuron responses were produced by the summation of many appropriate and 
inappropriate interneuron effects. This result explains the appropriate and inappropriate 
effects of interneurons in the leech. 
There was also agreement between the time course of the response of model and actual 
interneurons to P cell stimulation (Fig. 4b). In the actual network, interneuron synapfic 
potentials in response to trains of P cell impulses had a fast and slow component. Some 
interneurons showed only the fast component, some only the slow, and some showed 
both components (mixed). Although no constraints were placed on the temporal response 
properties of interneurons, the same three types of interneuron were found in the model 
network. The three different types of interneuron temporal response were due to different 
relative connection strengths of fast and slow s-units impinging on a given interneuron 
(Fig. 3a). 
CONCLUSION 
Our results show that the network modeling approach can be adapted to models with more 
realistic neurons and synapfic connections, including electrical connections, which occur 
in both invertebrates and vertebrates. The qualitative similarity between model and actual 
interneurons demonstrates that a population of interneurons resembling the identified 
dorsal local bending intemeurons could mediate local bending in a distributed processing 
system without additional interneurons specific for different forms of local bending. 
Interneurons in the model also displayed the diversity in temporal responses seen in 
interneurons in the leech. Clearly, the training algorithm did not produce exact matches 
between model and actual interneurons, but this was not surprising since the identified 
local bending interneurons represent only a subset of the interneurons in the reflex. More 
exact matches could be obtained by using two pools of model interneurons, one to 
represent identified neurons, the other to represent unidentified neurons. Model neurons in 
the latter pool would constitute testable physiological predictions of the connectivity of 
unidentified local bending intemeurons. 
Acknowledgements 
Supported by the Bank of America-Giannini Foundation, the Drown Foundation, and the 
Mathers Foundation. 
Neural Network Analysis of Distributed Representations in the Leech 35 
References 
Anastasio, T. and Robinson, D. A. (1989) Distributed parallel processing in the 
vestibulo-oculomotor system. Neural Comp. 1:230-241. 
Burrows, M., and M.V.S. Siegler (1978) Graded synaptic transmission between local 
interneurones and motor neurones in the metathoracic ganglion of the locust. J. 
Physiol. 285:231-255. 
Friesen, W.O. (1985) Neuronal control of leech swimming movements: interactions 
between cell 60 and previously described oscillator neurons. J. Comp. Physiol. 
156:231-242. 
Granzow, B., W.O. Friesen, and W.B. Kristan Jr. (1985) Physiological and 
morphological analysis of synaptic transmission between leech motor neurons. 
J.Neurosci. 5:2035-2050. 
Katz, B., and Miledi, R. (1967) Synaptic transmission in the absence of nerve impulses. 
J. Physiol. 192:407-436. 
Kristan Jr., W.B. (1982) Sensory and motor neurons responsible for the local bending 
response in leeches. J. Exp. Biol. 96:161-180. 
Kristan, W.B. Jr., S.J. McGirr, and G.V. Simpson (1982) Behavioral and 
mechanosensory neurone responses to skin stimulation in leeches. J. Exp. Biol. 
96:143-160. 
Lehky, S.R., and T.J. Sejnowski (1988) Network model of shape-from-shading: neural 
function arises from both receptive and projective fields. Nature 333:452-454. 
Lockery, S.R., and W.B. Kristan Jr. (1990) Distributed processing of sensory information 
in the leech. I. Input-output relations of the local bending reflex. J. Neurosci. (in 
press). 
Lockery, S.R., and W.B. Kristan Jr. (1990) Distributed processing of sensory information 
in the leech. II. Identification of interneurons contributing to the local bending 
reflex. J. Neurosci. (in press). 
Nagayama, T., and M. Hisada (1987) Opposing parallel connections through crayfish 
local nonspiking interneurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 257:347-358. 
Nicholls, J.G., and D. Purves (1970) Monosynaptic chemical and electrical connexions 
between sensory and motor cells in the central nervous system of the leech. J. 
Physiol. 209:647-667. 
Nicholls, J.G., and B.G. Wallace (1978) Quantal analysis of transmitter release an in 
inhibitory synapse in the CNS. J. Physiol. 281:157-170. 
Ort, C.A., W.B. Kristan Jr., and G.S. Stent (1974) Neuronal control of swimming in the 
medicinal leech. II. Identification and connections of motor neurones. J. Comp. 
Physiol. 94:121-154. 
Stuart, A.E. (1970) Physiological and morphological properties of motoneurones in the 
central nervous system of the leech. J. Physiol. 209:627-646. 
Thompson, WJ., and G.S. Stent (1976) Neuronal control of heartbeat in the medicinal 
leech. J. Comp. Physiol. 111:309-333. 
Zipset, D., and R.A. Andersen (1988) A back-propagation programmed network that 
simulates response properties of a subset of posterior parietal neurons Nature 
331:679-684. 
