44 Beer and Chiei 
Neural 
Implementation of Motivated Behavior: 
Feeding in an Artificial Insect 
Randall D. Beer t,2 and Hillel J. Chiel 2 
Departments of t Computer Engineering and Science, and 2Biology 
and the Center for Automation and Intelligent Systems Research 
Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, OH 44106 
ABSTRACT 
Most complex behaviors appear to be governed by internal moti- 
vational states or drives that modify an animal's responses to its 
environment. It is therefore of considerable interest to understand 
the neural basis of these motivational states. Drawing upon work 
on the neural basis of feeding in the marine mollusc Aplysia, we 
have developed a heterogeneous artificial neural network for con- 
trolling the feeding behavior of a simulated insect. We demonstrate 
that feeding in this artificial insect shares many characteristics with 
the motivated behavior of natural animals. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
While an animal's external environment certainly plays an extremely important role 
in shaping its actions, the behavior of even simpler animals is by no means solely 
reactive. The response of an animal to food, for example, cannot be explained only 
in terms of the physical stimuli involved. On two different occasions, the very same 
animal may behave in completely different ways when presented with seemingly 
identical pieces of food (e.g. hungrily consuming it in one case and ignoring or 
even avoiding it in another). To account for these differences, behavioral scientists 
hypothesize internal motivational states or drives which modulate an animal's re- 
sponse to its environment. These internal factors play a particularly important role 
in complex behavior, but are present to some degree in nearly all animal behav- 
ior. Behaviors which exhibit an extensive dependence on motivational variables are 
termed motivated behaviors. 
Neural Implementation of Motivated Behavior: Feeding in an Artificial Insect 45 
While a rigorous definition is difficult to state, behaviors spoken of as motivated gen- 
erally exhibit some subset of the following six characteristics (Kupfermann, 1974): 
(1) grouping and sequencing of component behaviors in time, (2) goal-directedness: 
the sequence of component behaviors generated can often be understood only by ref- 
erence to some internal goal, (3) spontaneity: the behavior can occur in the absence 
of any recognizable eliciting stimuli, (4) changes in responsiveness: the effect of a 
motivational state varies depending upon an animal's level of arousal, (5) persis- 
tence: the behavior can greatly outlast any initiating stimulus, and (6) associative 
learning. 
Motivational states are pervasive in mammalian behavior. However, they have 
also proven to be essential for explaining the behavior of simpler animals as well. 
Unfortunately, the explanatory utility of these internal factors is limited by the fact 
that they are hypothetical constructs, inferred by the theorist to intervene between 
stimulus and action in order to account for otherwise inexplicable responses. What 
might be the neural basis of these motivational states? 
In order to explore this question, we have drawn upon work on the neural basis 
of feeding in the marine mollusc Aplysia to implement feeding in a simulated in- 
sect. Feeding is a prototypical motivated behavior in which attainment of the goal 
object (food) is clearly crucial to an animal's survival. In this case, the relevant 
motivational state is hunger. When an animal is hungry, it will exhibit a sequence 
of appetitive behaviors which serve to identify and properly orient the animal to 
food. Once food is available, consummatory behaviors are generated to ingest it. 
On the other hand, a satiated animal may ignore or even avoid sensory stimuli 
which suggest the presence of food (Kupfermann, 1974). 
This effort is part of a larger project aimed at designing artificial nervous systems 
for the flexible control of complete autonomous agents (Beer, 1989). In addition 
to feeding, this artificial insect is currently capable of locomotion (Beer, Chiel, and 
Sterling, 1989; Chiel and Beer, 1989), wandering, and edge-following, and possesses 
a simple behavioral hierarchy as well. A central theme of this work has been the 
utilization of biologically-inspired architectures in our neural network designs. To 
support this capability, we make use of model neurons which capture some of the 
intrinsic properties of nerve cells. 
The simulated insect and the environment in which it exists is designed as fol- 
lows. The insect has six legs, and is capable of statically stable locomotion and 
turning. Its head contains a mouth which can open and close, and its mouth and 
two antennae possess tactile and chemical sensors. The insect possesses an internal 
energy supply which is depleted at a fixed rate. The simulated environment also 
contains unmovable obstacles and circular food patches. The food patches emit an 
odor whose intensity is proportional to the size of the patch. As this odor diffuses 
through the environment, its intensity falls off as the inverse square of the distance 
from the center of the patch. Whenever the insect's mouth closes over a patch of 
food, a fixed amount of energy is transferred from the patch to the insect. 
46 Beer and Chiel 
Anlenna Chemical Sensor Antenna Chemical Sensor 
Left rength 
œeTurn Search Command '( 
Righi Turn 
 Feeding Arousal 
Energy Sensor 
Figure 1: Appetitive Controller 
2 APPETITIVE COMPONENT 
The appetitive component of feeding is responsible for getting a hungry insect to a 
food patch. To accomplish this task, it utilizes the locomotion, wandering, and edge- 
following capabilities of the insect. The interactions between the neural circuitry 
underlying these behaviors and the feeding controller presented in this paper are 
described elsewhere (Beer, 1989). Assuming that the insect is already close enough 
to a food patch that the chemical sensors in its antennae can detect an odor signal, 
there are two separate issues which must be addressed by this phase of the behavior. 
First, the insect must use the information from the chemical sensors in its antennae 
to turn itself toward the food patch as it walks. Second, this orientation should only 
occur when the insect is actually in need of energy. Correspondingly, the appetitive 
neural controller (Figure 1) consists of two distinct components. 
The orientation component is comprised of the upper six neurons in Figure 1. The 
odor signals detected by the chemical sensors in each antenna (ACS) are compared 
(by LOS and ROS), and the difference between them is used to generate a turn 
toward the stronger side by exciting the corresponding turn interneuron (LT or RT) 
by an amount proportional to the size of the difference. These turn interneurons 
connect to the motor neurons controlling the lateral extension of each front leg. 
The second component is responsible for controlling whether or not the insect ac- 
Neural Implementation of Motivated Behavior: Feeding in an Artificial Insect 47 
tually orients to a nearby patch of food. This decision depends upon its internal 
energy level, and is controlled by the bottom three neurons in Figure 1. Though the 
odor gradient is continuously being sensed, the connections to the turn interneurons 
are normally disabled, preventing access of this information to the motor appara- 
tus which turns the insect. As the insect's energy level falls, however, so does the 
activity of its energy sensor (ES). This decreasing activity gradually releases the 
spontaneously active feeding arousal neuron (FA) from inhibition. When activity 
in FA becomes sufficient to fire the search command neuron (SC), the connections 
between the odor strength neurons and the turn neurons are enabled by gating 
connections from SC, and the insect begins to orient to food. 
3 CONSUMMATORY COMPONENT 
Once the appetitive controller has successfully oriented the insect to food, the con- 
summatory component of the behavior is triggered. This phase consists of rhythmic 
biting movements which persist until sufficient food has been ingested. Like the ap- 
petitive phase, consummatory behavior should only be released when the insect is 
in need of energy. In addition, an animal's interest in feeding (its feeding arousal, 
may be a function of more than just its energy requirements. Other factors, such as 
the exposure of an animal to the taste, odor, or tactile sensations of food, can signif- 
icantly increase its feeding arousal. This relationship between feeding and arousal, 
in which the very act of feeding further enhances an animal's interest in feeding, 
leads to a form of behavioral hysteresis. Once food is encountered, an animal may 
feed well beyond the internal energy requirements which initiated the behavior. In 
many animals, this hysteresis is thought to play a role in the patterning of feeding 
behavior into discrete meals rather than continuous grazing (Susswein, Weiss, and 
Kupfermann, 1978). At some point, of course, the ingested food must be capable 
of overriding the arousing effects of consummatory behavior, or the animal would 
never cease to feed. 
The neural controller for the consummatory phase of feeding is shown in Figure 
2. When chemical (MCS) and tactile (MTS) sensors in the mouth signal that 
food is present (FP), and the insect is sufficiently aroused to feeding (FA), the 
consummatory command neuron (CC) fires. The conjunction of tactile and chemical 
signals is required in order to prevent attempts to ingest nonfood patches and, due 
to the diffusion of odors, to prevent biting from beginning before the food patch 
is actually reached. Once CC fires, it triggers the bite pacemaker neuron (BP) 
to generate rhythmic bursts which cause a motor neuron (MO) to open and close 
the mouth. Because the threshold of the consummatory command neuron (CC) is 
somewhat lower than that of the search command neuron (SC), an insect which 
is not sufficiently aroused to orient to food may nevertheless consume food that is 
directly presented to its mouth. 
The motor neuron controlling the mouth also makes an excitatory connection onto 
the feeding arousal neuron (FA), which in turn makes an excitatory modulatory 
synapse onto the connection between the consummatory command neuron (CC) 
48 Beer and Chiei 
Moulh Tactile Sensor Moulh Chemical Sensor 
Mouth Open 
Feeding Arousal 
Energy Sensor 
Figure 2: Consummatory Controller 
and the bite pacemaker (BP). The net effect of these excitatory connections is a 
positive feedback loop: biting movements excite FA, which causes BP to cause more 
frequent biting movements, which further excites FA until its activity saturates. 
This neural positive feedback loop is inspired by work on the neural basis of feeding 
arousal maintenance in Apltsia (Weiss, Chiel, Koch, and Kupfermann, 1986). 
As the insect consumes food, its energy level begins to rise. This leads to increased 
activity in ES which both directly inhibits FA, and also decreases the gain of the 
positive feedback loop via an inhibitory modulatory synapse onto the connection 
between MO and FA. At some point, these inhibitory effects will overcome the 
positive feedback and activity in FA will drop low enough to terminate the feeding 
behavior. This neural mechanism is based upon a similar one hypothesized to 
underlie satiation in Aplysia (Weiss, Chiel, and Kupfermann, 1986). 
4 RESULTS 
With the neural controllers described above, we have found that feeding behavior 
in the artificial insect exhibits four of the six characteristics of motivated behavior 
which were described by Kupfermann (1974): 
Neural Implementation of Motivated Behavior: Feeding in an Artificial Insect 49 
Grouping and sequencing of behavior in time. When the artificial insect 
is "hungry", it generates appetitive and consummatory behaviors with the proper 
sequence, timing, and intensity in order to obtain food. 
Goal-Directedness. Regardless of its environmental situation, a hungry insect 
will generate movements which serve to obtain food. Therefore, the behavior of a 
hungry insect can only be understood by reference to an internal goal. Due to the 
internal effects of the energy sensor (ES) and feeding arousal (FA) neurons on the 
controllers, the insect's external stimuli are insufficient to account for its behavior. 
Changes in responsiveness due to a change in internal state. While a 
hungry insect will attempt to orient to and consume any nearby food, a satiated 
one will ignore it. In addition, once a hungry insect has consumed sufficient food, it 
will simply walk over the food patch which initially attracted it. We will examine 
the arousal and satiation of feeding in this artificial insect in more detail below. 
Persistence. If a hungry insect is removed from food before it has fed to satiation, 
its feeding arousal will persist, and it will continue to exhibit feeding movements. 
One technique that has been applied to the study of feeding arousal in natural an- 
imals is the examination of the time interval between successive bites as an animal 
feeds under various conditions. In Aplysia, for example, the interbite interval pro- 
gressively decreases as an animal begins to feed (showing a build-up of arousal), 
and increases as the animal satiates. In addition, the rate of rise and fall of arousal 
depends upon the initial degree of satiation (Susswein, Weiss, and Kupfermann, 
In order to examine the role of feeding arousal in the artificial insect, we performed 
a similar set of experiments. Food was directly presented to insects with differ- 
ing degrees of initial satiation, and the time interval between successive bites was 
recorded for the entire resulting consummatory response. Above an energy level 
of approximately 80% of capacity, insects could not be induced to bite. Below 
this level, however, insects began to consume the food. As these insects fed, the 
interbite interval decreased as their feeding arousal built up until some minimum 
interval was achieved (Figure 3). The rate of build-up of arousal was slowest for 
those insects with the highest initial degree of satiation. In fact, an insect whose 
energy level was already 75% of capacity never achieved full arousal. As the feeding 
insects neared satiation, their interbite interval increased as arousal waned. It is 
interesting to note that, regardless of the initial degree of satiation, all insects in 
which biting was triggered fed until their energy stores were approximately 99% 
full. The appropriate number of bites to achieve this were generated in all cases. 
What is the neural basis of these arousal and satiation phenomena? Clearly, the 
answer lies in the interactions between the internal energy sensor and the positive 
feedback loop mediated by the feeding arousal neuron, but the precise nature of 
the interaction is not at all clear from the qualitative descriptions of the neural 
controllers given earlier. In order to more carefully examine this interaction, we 
produced a phase plot of the activity in these two neurons under the experimental 
50 Beer and Chiel 
oo] 
400 
300 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Bite Number 
Figure 3: Build-Up of Arousal and Satiation 
ß 25% Sa,.Jation 
o 50% Sa,.Jatioa 
ß  60% Satiation 
o..-- 75% Satiation 
conditions described above (Figure 4). 
An insect with a full complement of energy begins at the lower right-hand corner of 
the diagram, with maximum activity in ES and no activity in FA. As the insect's 
energy begins to fall, it moves to the left on the ES axis until the inhibition from 
ES is insufficient to hold FA below threshold. At this point, activity in FA begins 
to increase. Since the positive feedback loop is not yet active because no biting has 
occurred, a linear decrease in energy results in a linear increase in FA activity. If 
no food is consumed, the insect continues to move along this line toward the upper 
left of the diagram until its energy is exhausted. 
However, if biting is triggered by the presence of food at the mouth, the relationship 
between FA and ES changes drastically. As the insect begins consuming food, 
activity in FA initially increases as arousal builds up, and then later decreases as 
the insect satiates. Each "bump" corresponds to the arousing effects on FA of one 
bite via the positive feedback loop and to the small increase of energy from the food 
consumed in that bite. Trajectories are shown for energy levels of 25%, 50%, 60%, 
65%, and 75% of capacity. The shape of these trajectories depend upon the activity 
level of FA and the gain of the positive feedback loop in which it is embedded, 
both of which in turn depend upon the negative feedback from the energy sensor. 
We must therefore conclude that, even in this simple artificial insect, there is no 
single neural correlate to "hunger". Instead, this motivational state is the result of 
the complex dynamics of interaction between the feeding arousal neuron and the 
internal energy sensor. 
References 
Beer, R. D. (1989). Intelligence as Adaptive Behavior: An Experiment in Compu- 
tational Neuroethology. Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Computer Engineering and 
Science, Case Western Reserve University. Also available as Technical Report TR 
Neural Implementation of Motivated Behavior: Feeding in an Artificial Insect 51 
60C 
ES Activity 
Figure 4: Phase Plot of FAvs. ES Activity 
89-118, Center for Automation and Intelligent Systems Research. 
Beer, R. D., Chiel, H. J. and Sterling, L. S. (1989). Heterogeneous Neural Net- 
works for Adaptive Behavior in Dynamic Environments. In D.S. Touretzky (Ed.), 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1 (pp. 577-585). San Mateo, 
CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
Chiel, H. J. and Beer, R. D. (1989). A lesion study of a heterogeneous neural 
network for hexapod locomotion. Proceedings of the International Joint Conference 
on Neural Networks (IJCNN 89), pp. 407-414. 
Kupfermann, I. J. (1974). Feeding behavior in Aplysia: A simple system for the 
study of motivation. Behavioral Biology 10:1-26. 
Susswein, A. J., Weiss, K. R. and Kupfermann, I. (1978). The effects of food arousal 
on the latency of biting in Aplysia. J. Comp. Physiol. 123:31-41. 
Weiss, K. It., Chiel, II. J., Koch, U. and Kupfermann, I. (1986). Activity of an 
identified histaminergic neuron, and its possible role in arousal of feeding behavior 
in semi-intact Aplysia. J. Neuroscience 6(8):2403-2415. 
Weiss, K. R., Chiel, II. J. and Kupfermann, I. (1986). Sensory function and gating 
of histaminergic neuron C2 in Aplysia. J. Neuroscience 6(8):2416-2426. 
