100 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: 
From Unit to System Behavior 
David Servan-Schreiber, Harry Printz and Jonathan D. Cohen 
School of Computer Science and Department of Psychology 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ABSTRACT 
At the level of individual neurons, catecholamine release increases the 
responsivity of cells to excitatory and inhibitory inputs. We present a 
model of catecholamine effects in a network of neural-like elements. 
We argue that changes in the responsivity of individual elements do 
not affect their ability to detect a signal and ignore noise. However, 
the same changes in cell responsivity in a network of such elements do 
improve the signal detection performance of the network as a whole. We 
show how this result can be used in a computer simulation of behavior 
to account for the effect of CNS stimulants on the signal detection 
performance of human subjects. 
1 Introduction 
The catecholaminesmnorepinephrine and dopamine---are neuroactive substances that are 
presumed to modulate information processing in the brain, rather than to convey discrete 
sensory or motor signals. Release of norepinephrine and dopamine occurs over wide 
areas of the central nervous system, and their post-synaptic effects are long lasting. 
These effects consist primarily of an enhancement of the response of target cells to other 
afferent inputs, inhibitory as well as excitatory (see [4] for a review). 
Increases or decreases in catecholaminergic tone have many behavioral consequences 
including effects on motivated behaviors, attention, learning and memory, and motor 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 101 
behavior. At the information processing level, catecholamines appear to affect the ability 
to detect a signal when it is imbedded in noise (see review in [3]). 
In terms of signal detection theory, this is described as a change in the performance of the 
system. However, there is no adequate account of how these changes at the system level 
relate to the effect of catecholamines on individual cells. Several investigators [5,12,2] 
have suggested that catecholamine-mediated increases in a cell's responsivity can be 
interpreted as a change in the cell's signal-to-noise ratio. By analogy, they proposed that 
this change at the unit level may account for changes in signal detection performance at 
the behavioral level. 
In the first part of this paper we analyze the relation between unit responsivity, signal-to- 
noise ratio and signal detection performance in a network of neural elements. We start 
by showing that the changes in unit responsivity induced by catecholamines do not result 
in changes in signal detection performance of a single unit. We then explain how, in 
spite of this fact, the aggregrate effect of such changes in a chain of units can lead to 
improvements in the signal detection performance of the entire network. 
In the second part, we show how changes in gain - which lead to an increase in the 
signal detection performance of the network - can account for a behavioral phenomenon. 
We describe a computer simulation of a network performing a signal detection task that 
has been applied extensively to behavioral research: the continuous performance test. 
In this simulation, increasing the responsivity of individual units leads to improvements 
in performance that closely approximate the improvement observed in human subjects 
under conditions of increased catecholaminergic tone. 
2 Effect of Gain on a Single Element 
We assume that the response of a typical neuron can be described by a strictly increasing 
function fG(x) from real-valued inputs to the interval (0, 1). This function relates the 
strength of a neuron's net afferent input x to its probability of firing, or activation. We 
do not require thatfG is either continuous or differentiable. 
For instance, the family of logistics, given by 
1 + e- 
has been proposed as a model of neural activation functions [7,1]. These functions are 
all strictly increasing, for each value of the gain G > 0, and all values of the bias B. 
The potentiating effect of catecholamines on responsivity can be modelled as a change 
in the shape of its activation function. In the case of the logistic, this is achieved by 
increasing the value of G, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, our analysis applies to 
any suitable family of functions, {fa}. We require only that each member function fa 
is strictly increasing, and that as G  c,c, the family {fa} converges monotonically to 
102 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
l.O 
o.o 
.6.o 
6D 
Input) 
Figure 1: Logistic Activation Function, Used to Model the Response Function of Neurons. Positive 
net inputs correspond to excitatory stimuli, negative net inputs correspond to inhibitory stimuli. 
For the graphs drawn here, we set the bias B to -1. The asymmetry arising from a negative bias 
is often found in the response function of actual neurons [6]. 
the unit step function u0 almost everywhere.  Here, u0 is defined as 
u0(x)={ 0 for x_<0 
1 for x > 0 
This means that as G increases, the value fa(x) gets steadily closer to 1 if x > 0, and 
steadily closer to 0 if x _< 0. 
2.1 Gain Does Not Affect Signal Detection Performance 
Consider the signal detection performance of a network in which the response of a single 
unit is compared with a threshold to determine the presence or absence of a signal. We 
assume that in the presence of the signal, this unit receives a positive (excitatory) net 
afferent input xs, and in the absence of the signal it receives a null or negative (inhibitory) 
input XA. When zero-mean noise is added to this quantity, in the presence as well as the 
absence of the signal, the unit's net input in each case is distributed around Xs or XA 
respectively. Therefore its response is distributed around fa(xs) or fa(XA) respectively 
(see Figure 2). 
In other words, the input in the case where the signal is present is a random variable 
Xs, with probability density function (pdf) Pxs and mean xs, and in the absence of the 
signal it is the random variable XA, with pdf PxA and mean XA. These then determine 
the random variables Yas = fa(Xs) and Yon = fa(Xa), with pdfs Pros and Prc, which 
represent the response in the presence or absence of the signal for a given value of the 
gain. Figure 2 shows examples of Pros and Pr for two different values of G, in the case 
where fa is the biased logistic. 
If the input pdfs PXs and PxA overlap, the output pdfs Pros and Pra will also overlap. 
Thus for any given threshold 0 on the y-axis used to categorize the output as "signal 
present" or "signal absent," there will be some misses and some false alarms. The best 
A sequence of functions {gn} converges almost everywhere to the function g if the set of points where it 
diverges, or converges to the wrong value, is of measure zero. 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 103 
O'-06D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
z (Ntt Input) 
-6D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
x (Ntt Input) 
Figure 2: Input and Output Probability Density Functions. The curves at the bottom are the pdfs 
of the net input in the signal absent (left) and signal present (right) cases. The curves along the 
y-axis are the response pdfs for each case; they are functions of the activation y, and represent the 
distribution of outputs. The top graph shows the logistic and response pdfs for G = 0.5, B = -1; 
the bottom graph shows them for G = 1.0, B = -1. 
the system can do is to select a threshold that optimizes performance. More precisely, 
the expected payoff or performance of the unit is given by 
E(O) =  + ct . Pr(Ys _> O) - fl. Pr(Yaa >_ O) 
where A, ct, and 3 are constants that together reflect the prior probability of the signal, 
and the payoffs associated with correct detections or hits, correct ignores, false alarms 
and misses. Note that Pr(YGs > O) and Pr(YGA _> O) are the probabilities of a hit and a 
false alarm, respectively. 
By solving the equation dE/dO = 0 we can determine the value 0* that maximizes E. We 
call 0* the optimal threshold. Our first result is that for any activation function f that 
satisfies our assumptions, and any fixed input pclfs Pxs and PxA the unit's performance at 
optimal threshold is the same. We call this the Constant Optimal Performance Theorem, 
which is stated and proved in [10]. In particular, for the logistic, increasing the gain 
G does not induce better performance. It may change the value of the threshold that 
yields optimal performance, but it does not change the actual performance at optimum. 
This is because a strictly increasing activation function produces a point-to-point mapping 
between the distributions of input and output values. Since the amount of overlap between 
104 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
the two input pdfs Pxs and PxA does not change as the gain varies, the amount of overlap 
in the response pdfs does not change either, even though the shape of the response pdfs 
does change when gain increases (see Figure 2). 2 
3 Effect of Gain on a Chain of Elements 
Although increasing the gain does not affect the signal detection performance of a single 
element, it does improve the performance of a chain of such elements. By a chain, we 
mean an arrangement in which the output of the first unit provides the input to another 
unit (see Figure 3). Let us call this second element the response unit. We monitor the 
output of this second unit to determine the presence or absence of a signal. 
x 
Input Unit Response Unit 
Figure 3: A Chain of Units. The output of the unit receiving the signal is combined with noise 
to provide input to a second unit, called the response unit. The activation of the response unit is 
compared to a threshold to determine the presence or absence of the signal. 
As in the previous discussion, noise is added to the net input to each unit in the chain 
in the presence as well as in the absence of a signal. We represent noise as a random 
variable V, with pdf pv that we assume to be independent of gain. As in the single-unit 
case, the input to the first unit is a random variable Xs, with pdf PXs in the presence 
of the signal and a random variable XA, with pdf PxA in the absence of the signal. The 
output of the first unit is described by the random variables Yas and YaA with pdfs PYas 
and Prc- Now, because noise is added to the net input of the response unit as well, the 
input of the response unit is the random variable Zas = Yas + V or ZGA = YGA + V, again 
depending on whether the signal is present or absent. We write Pzas and Pz for the 
pdfs of these random variables. PZs is the convolution of Pros and pv, and pz is the 
convolution of Prm and Pv. The effect of convolving the output pdfs of the input unit 
with the noise distribution is to increase the overlap between the resulting distributions 
(Pzas and Pz), and therefore decrease the discriminability of the input to the response 
unit. 
How are these distributions affected by an increase in gain on the input unit? By the 
Constant Optimal Performance Theorem, we already know that the overlap between Pras 
and Prc remains constant as gain increases. Furthermore, as stated above, we have 
assumed that the noise distribution is independent of gain. It would therefore seem that 
a change in gain should not affect the overlap between Pz and pz. However, it is 
awe present the intuitions madeflying our results in trms of the overlap between the pdfs. However, the 
proofs themselves are analytical. 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 105 
possible to show that, under very general conditions, the overlap between pz and pz 
decreases when the gain of the input unit increases, thereby improving performance of the 
two-layered system. We call this the chain effect; the Chain Performance Theorem [10] 
gives sufficient conditions for its appearance. 3 
Paradoxically, the chain effect arises because the noise added to the net input of the 
response unit is not affected by variations in the gain. As we mentioned before, increasing 
the gain separates the means of the output pdfs of the input unit, I(Yas) and P(YaA) 
(eventhough this does not affect the performance of the first unit). Suppose all the 
probability mass were concentrated at these means. Then pz would be a copy of pv 
centered at/(Yas), and PzA would be a copy of pv centered at I(Yas). Thus in this case, 
increasing the gain does correspond to rigidly translating Pz and pzA apart, thereby 
reducing their overlap and improving performance. 
0.0 
-6D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
x (Net Input) 
o.o 
-6D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
x (Net Input) 
P ,,, 
Figure 4: Dependence of Chain Output Pdfs Upon Gain. These graphs use the same conventions 
and input pdfs as Figure 2. They depict the output pdfs, in the presence of additive Gaussian noise, 
for G = 0.5 (top) and G = 1.0 (bottom). 
A similar effect arises in more general circumstances, when P¾c,s and py are not con- 
centrated at their means. Figure 4 provides an example, illustrating PZc and pz for 
three different values of the gain. The first unit outputs are the same as in Figure 2, but 
3In this discussion, we have assumed that the same noise was added to the net input into each unit of a 
chain. However, the improvement in performance of a chain of units with increasing gain does not depend on 
this particular assumption. 
106 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
these have been convolved with the pdf pv of a Gaussian random variable to obtain the 
curves shown. Careful inspection of the figure will reveal that the overlap between Pz 
and Pza, decreases as the gain rises. 
4 Simulation of the Continuous Performance Test 
The above analysis has shown that increasing the gain of the response function of in- 
dividual units in a very simple network can improve signal detection performance. We 
now present computer simulation results showing that this phenomenon may account for 
improvements of performance with catecholamine agonists in a common behavioral test 
of signal detection. 
The continous performance test (CPT) has been used extensively to study attention and 
vigilance in behavioral and clinical research. Performance on this task has been shown to 
be sensitive to drugs or pathological conditions affecting catecholamine systems [11,8,9]. 
In this task, individual letters are displayed tachystoscopically in a sequence on a computer 
monitor. In one common version of the task, a target event is to be reported when two 
consecutive letters are identical. During baseline performance, subjects typically fail to 
report 10 to 20% of targets ("misses") and inappropriately report a target during 0.5 to 
1% of the remaining events ("false alarms"). Following the administration of agents 
that directly release catecholamines from synaptic terminals and block re-uptake from 
the synaptic cleft (i.e., CNS stimulants such as amphetamines or methylphenidate) the 
number of misses decreases, while the number of false alarms remains approximately the 
same. Using standard signal detection theory measures, investigators have claimed that 
this pattern of results reflects an improvement in the discrimination between signal and 
non-signal events (d'), while the response criterion (/3) does not vary significantly [11,8,9]. 
We used the backpropagation learning algorithm to train a recurrent three layer network 
to perform the CPT (see Figure 5). In this model, several simplifyng assumptions made 
in the preceding section are removed: in contrast to the simple two-unit assembly, the 
network contains three layers of units (input layer, intermediate - or hidden - layer, and 
output layer) with some recurrent connections; connection weights between these layers 
are developed entirely by the training procedure; as a result, the activation patterns on 
the intermediate layer that are evoked by the presence or absence of a signal are also 
determined solely by the training procedure; finally, the representation of the signal is 
distributed over an ensemble of units rather than determined by a single unit. 
Following training, Gaussian noise with zero mean was added to the net input of each unit 
in the intermediate and output layers as each letter was presented. The overall standard 
deviation of the noise distribution and the threshold of the response unit were adjusted 
to produce a performance equivalent to that of subjects under baseline conditions (13.0% 
misses and 0.75% false alarms). We then increased the gain of all the intermediate 
and output units from 1.0 to 1.1 to simulate the effect of catecholamine release in the 
network. This manipulation resulted in rates of 6.6% misses and 0.78% false alarms. 
The correspondence between the network's behavior and empirical data is illustrated in 
Figure 5. 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 107 
Letter Identlflrtlon Module 
ReiporlM Modula 
t s' I 
Felturl Input Module 
½ .- 
Figure 5: Simulation of the Continuous Performance Task. Left panel: The recurrent three-layer 
network (12 input units, 30 intermediate units, 10 output units and 1 response unit). Each unit 
projects to all units in the subsequent layer. In addition, each output unit alo projects to each unit 
in the intermediate layer. The gain parameter G is the same for all intermediate and output units. 
In the simulation of the placebo condition, G = 1; in the simulation of the drug condition, G = 1.1. 
The bias B = - 1 in both conditions. Right panel: Performance of human subjects [9], and of the 
simulation, on the CPT. With methylphenidate misses dropped from 11.7% to 5.5%, false alarms 
decreased from 0.6% to 0.5% (non-significant). 
The enhancement of signal detection performance in the simulation is a robust effect. It 
appears when gain is increased in the intermediate layer only, in the output layer only, 
or in both layers. Because of the recurrent connections between the output layer and 
the intermediate layer, a chain effect occurs between these two layers when the gain is 
increased over any one of them, or both of them. The impact of the chain effect is to 
reduce the distortion, due to internal noise, of the distributed representation on the layer 
receiving inputs from the layer where gain is increased. Note also that the improvement 
takes place even though there is no noise added to the input of the response unit. The 
response unit in this network acts only as an indicator of the strength of the signal in 
the intermediate layer. Finally, as the Constant Optimal Performance Theorem predicts, 
increasing the gain only on the response unit does not affect the performance of the 
network. 
5 Conclusion 
Fluctuations in catecholaminergic tone accompany psychological states such as arousal, 
motivation and stress. Furthermore, dysfunctions of catecholamine systems are implicated 
in several of the major psychiatric disorders. However, in the absence of models relating 
changes in cell function to changes in system performance, the relation of catecholamines 
to behavior has remained obscure. The findings reported in this paper suggest that the 
behavioral impact of catecholamines depend on their effects on an ensemble of units 
operating in the presence of noise, and not just on changes in individual unit responses. 
108 Se'van-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
Furthermore, they indicate how neuromodulatory effects can be incorporated in parallel 
distributed processing models of behavior. 
References 
[1] Y. Burnod and H. Korn. Consequences of stochastic release of neurotransmitters 
for network computation in the central nervous system. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science, 86:352-356, 1988. 
[2] L. A. Chiodo and T. W. Berger. Interactions between dopamine and amino acid- 
induced excitation and inhibition in the striatum. Brain Research, 375:198-203, 
1986. 
[3] 
C. R. Clark, G. M. Geffen, and L. B. Geffen. Catecholamines and attention ii: 
pharmacological studies in normal humans. Neuroscience and Behavioral Reviews, 
11:353-364, 1987. 
[4] S. L. Foote. Extrathalamic modulation of cortical function. Ann. Rev. Neurosci., 
10:67-95, 1987. 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
S. L. Foote, R. Freedman, and A. P. Olivier. Effects of putative neurotransmitters 
on neuronal activity in monkey auditory cortex. Brain Research, 86:229-242, 1975. 
W. J. Freeman. Nonlinear gain mediating cortical stimulus-response relations. Bio- 
logical Cybernetics, 33:243-247, 1979. 
G. E Hinton and Sejnowski T. J. Analyzing cooperative computation. Proceedings 
of the Cognitive Science Society, 1983. 
R. Klorman, L. O. Bauer, H. W. Coons, J. L. Lewis, L. J. Peloquin, R. A. Perimutter, 
R. M. Ryan, L. F. Salzman, and J. Strauss. Enhancing effects of methylphenidate 
on normal young adults cognitive processes. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 20:3-9, 
1984. 
[91 
[10] 
L. J. Peloquin and R. Klorman. Effects of methylphenidate on normal children's 
mood, event-related potentials, and performance in memory scanning and vigilance. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95:88-98, 1986. 
H. Printz and D. Servan-Schreiber. Foundations of a Computational Theory of Cat- 
echolamine Effects. Technical Report CMU-CS-90-105, Carnegie Mellon, School 
of Computer Science, 1990. 
[11] 
J. Rapoport, M. S. Buchsbaum, H. Weingartner, T. P. Zahn, C. Ludlow, J. Bartko, 
E. J. Mikkelsen, D. H. Langer, and Bunney W. E. Dextroamphetamine: cognitive 
and behavioral effects in normal and hyperactive boys and normal adult males. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 37:933-943, 1980. 
[12] M. Segal. Mechanisms of action of noradrenaline in the brain. Physiological Psy- 
chology, 13:172-178, 1985. 
