364 Jain and Waibel 
Incremental Parsing by Modular Recurrent 
Connectionist Networks 
Ajay N. Jain Alex H. Waibel 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ABSTRACT 
We present a novel, modular, recurrent connectionist network architec- 
ture which learns to robustly perform incremental parsing of complex 
sentences. From sequential input, one word at a time, our networks 
learn to do semantic role assignment, noun phrase attachment, and 
clause saucture recognition for sentences with passive consauctions and 
center embedded clauses. The networks make syntactic and semantic 
predictions at every point in time, and previous predictions are revised 
as expectations are affirmed or violated with the arrival of new infoma- 
rion. Our networks induce their own "grammar rules" for dynamically 
transforming an input sequence of words into a syntactic/semantic in- 
terpretafion. These networks generalize and display tolerance to input 
which has been corrupted in ways common in spoken language. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Previously, we have reported on experiments using connectionist models for a small pars- 
ing task using a new network formalism which extends back-propagation to better fit the 
needs of sequential symbolic domains such as parsing (Jain, 1989). We showed that con- 
nectionist networks could learn the complex dynamic behavior needed in parsing. The 
task included passive sentences which require dynamic incorporation of previously un- 
seen right context information into partially built syntactic/semantic interpretations. The 
trained parsing network exhibited predictive behavior and was able to modify or confirm 
Incremental Parsing by Modular Recurrent Connectionist Networks 365 
Interclause Units 
Clause 1 
Phrase 
Word Level 
Clause Structure Units ]1 
! 
I I 
Phrase N J 
Word Units 
Figure 1: High-level Parsing Architecture. 
hypotheses as sentences were sequentially processed. It was also able to generalize well 
and tolerate ill-formed input. 
In this paper, we describe work on extending our parsing architecture to grammatically 
complex sentences. 1 The paper is organized as follows. First, we briefly outline the 
network formalism and the general architecture. Second, the parsing task is defined and 
the procedure for constructing and training the parser is presented. Then the dynamic 
behavior of the parser is illustrated, and the performance is characterized. 
2 NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
We have developed an extension to back-propagation networks which is specifically 
designed to perform tasks in sequential domains requiring symbol manipulation (Jain, 
1989). It is substantially different from other connectionist approaches to sequential 
problems (e.g. Elman, 1988; Jordan, 1986; Waibel et al., 1989). There are four major 
features of this formalism. One, units retain partial activation between updates. They 
can respond to repetitive weak stimuli as well as singular sharp stimuli. Two, units 
are responsive to both static activation values of other units and their dynamic changes. 
Three, well-behaved symbol buffers can be constructed using groups of units whose 
connections are gated by other units. Four, the formalism supports recurrent networks. 
The networks are able to learn complex time-varying behavior using a gradient descent 
procedure via error back-propagation. 
Figure 1 shows a high-level diagram of the general parsing architecture. It is organized 
into five hierarchical levels: Word, Phrase, Clause Structure, Clause Roles, and Inter- 
1Another presentation of this work appears in Jain and Waibel (1990). 
366 Jain and Waibel 
clause. The description will proceed bottom up. A word is presented to the network by 
stimulating its associated word unit for a short time. This produces a pattern of activation 
across the feature units which represents the meaning of the word. The connections from 
the word units to the feature units which encode semantic and syntactic information about 
words are compiled into the network and are fixed. 2 The Phrase level uses the sequence 
of word representations from the Word level to build contiguous phrases. Connections 
from the Word level to the Phrase level are modulated by gating units which learn the 
required conditional assignment behavior. The Clause Structure level maps phrases into 
the constituent clauses of the input sentence. The Clause Roles level describes the roles 
and relationships of the phrases in each clause of the sentence. The final level, Inter- 
clause, represents the interrelationships among the clauses. The following section defines 
a parsing task and gives a detailed description of the construction and training of a parsing 
network which performs the task. 
3 INCREMENTAL PARSING 
In parsing spoken language, it is desirable to process input one word at a time as words 
are produced by the speaker and to incrementally build an output representation. This 
allows tight bi-directional coupling of the parser to the underlying speech recognition 
system. In such a system, the parser processes information as soon as it is produced and 
provides predictive information to the recognition system based on a rich representation 
of the current context. As mentioned earlier, our previous work applying connectionist ar- 
chitectures to a parsing task was promising. The experiment described below extends our 
previous work to grammatically complex sentences requiting a significant scale increase. 
3.1 Parsing Task 
The domain for the experiment was sentences with up to three clauses including non- 
trivial center-embedding and passive constructions? Here are some example sentences: 
ß Fido dug up a bone near the tree in the garden. 
ß I know the man who John says Mary gave the book. 
ß The dog who ate the snake was given a bone. 
Given sequential input, one word at a time, the task is to incrementally build a represen- 
tation of the input sentence which includes the following information: phrase structure, 
clause structure, semantic role assignment, and interclause relationships. Figure 2 shows 
a representation of the desired parse of the last sentence in the list above. 
2Conneaionist networks have been used for lexical acquisition successfully (Miikkulainen and Dyer, 1989). 
However, in building large systems, it makes sense from an efficiency perspective to precompile as much lexical 
information as possible into a network. This is a pragmatic design choice in building large systems. 
3The training set contained over 200 sentences. These are a subset of the sentences which form the example 
set of a parser based on a left associative grammar (Hausser, 1988). These sentences are grammatically 
interesting, but they do not reflect the statistical structure of common speech. 
Incremental Parsing by Modular Recurrent Connectionist Networks 367 
[Clause 1: 
[Clause 2: 
[The dog RECIP] [was given ACTION] [a bone PATIENT]] 
[who AGENT] [ate ACTION] [the snake PATIENT] 
(RELATIVE to Clause 1, Phrase 1)] 
Figure 2: Representation of an Example Sentence. 
3.2 Constructing the Parser 
The architecture for the network follows that given in Figure 1. The following paragraphs 
describe the detailed network structure bottom up. The constraints on the numbers of 
objects and labels are fixed for a particular network, but the architecture itself is scalable. 
Wherever possible in the network consauction, modularity and architectural constraints 
have been exploited to minimize training time and maximize generalization. A network 
was constructed from three separate recurrent subnetworks trained to perform a portion 
of the parsing task on the training sentences. The performance of the full network will 
be discussed in detail in the next section. 
The Phrase level contains three types of units: phrase block units, gating units, and hidden 
units. There are 10 phrase blocks, each being able to capture up to 4 words forming 
a phrase. The phrase blocks contain sets of units (called slots) whose target activation 
patterns correspond to word feature patterns of words in phrases. Each slot has an 
associated gating unit which learns to conditionally assign an activation pattern from the 
feature units of the Word level to the slot. The gating units have input connections from 
the hidden units. The hidden units have input connections from the feature units, gating 
units, and phrase block units. The direct recurrence between the gating and hidden units 
allows the gating units to learn to inhibit and compete with one another. The indirect 
recurrence arising from the connections between the phrase blocks and the hidden units 
provides the context of the current input word. The target activation values for each 
gating unit are dynamically calculated during training; each gating unit must learn to 
become active at the proper time in order to perform the phrasal parsing. Each phrase 
block with its associated gating and hidden units has its weights slaved to the other phrase 
blocks in the Phrase level. Thus, if a particular phrase cons auction is only present in one 
position in the training set, all of the phrase blocks still learn to parse the consauction. 
The Clause Roles level also has shared weights among separate clause modules. This 
level is trained by simulating the sequential building and mapping of clauses to sets of 
units containing the phrase blocks for each clause (see Figure 1). There are two types 
of units in this level: labeling units and hidden units. The labeling units learn to label 
the phrases of the clauses with semantic roles and attach phrases to other (within-clause) 
phrases. For each clause, there is a set of units which assigns role labels (agent, patient, 
recipient, action) to phrases. There is also a set of units indicating phrasal modification. 
The hidden units are recurrently connected to the labeling units to provide context and 
competition as with the Phrase level; they also have input connections from the phrase 
blocks of a single clause. During training, the targets for the labeling units are set at 
the beginning of the input presentation and remain static. In order to minimize global 
error across the training set, the units must learn to become active or inactive as soon as 
368 Jain and Waibel 
possible in the input. This forces the network to learn to be predictive. 
The Clause Structure and Interclause levels are trained simultaneously as a single module. 
There are three types of units at this level: mapping, labeling, and hidden units. The 
mapping units assign phrase blocks to clauses. The labeling units indicate relative clause 
and a subordinate clause relationships. The mapping and labeling units are recurrently 
connected to the hidden units which also have input connections from the phrase blocks 
of the Phrase level. The behavior of the Phrase level is simulated during training of this 
module. This module utilizes no weight sharing techniques. As with the Clause Roles 
level, the targets for the labeling and mapping units are set at the beginning of input 
presentation, thus inducing the same type of predictive behavior. 
4 PARSING PERFORMANCE 
The separately trained submodules described above were assembled into a single network 
which performs the full parsing task. No additional training was needed to fine-tune the 
full parsing network despite significant differences between actual subnetwork perfor- 
mance and the simulated subnetwork performance used during training. The network 
successfully modeled the large diverse training set. This section discusses three aspects 
of the parsing network's performance: dynamic behavior of the integrated network, gen- 
eralization, and tolerance to noisy input. 
4.1 Dynamic Behavior 
The dynamic behavior of the network will be illustrated on the example sentence from 
Figure 2: "The dog who ate the snake was given a bone." This sentence was not in 
the training set. Due to space limitations, actual plots of network behavior will only be 
presented for a small portion of the network. 
Initially, all of the units in the network are at their resting values. The units of the phrase 
blocks all have low activation. The word unit corresponding to "the" is stimulated, 
causing its word feature representation to become active across the feature units of the 
Word level. The gating unit associated with the slot 1 of phrase block 1 becomes active, 
and the feature representation of "the" is assigned to the slot; the gate closes as the next 
word is presented. The remaining words of the sentence are processed similarly, resulting 
in the final Phrase level representation shown in Figure 2. While this is occurring, the 
higher levels of the network are processing the evolving Phrase level representation. 
The behavior of some of the mapping units of the Clause Structure Level is shown 
in Figure 3. Early in the presentation of the first word, the Clause Structure level 
hypothesizes that the first 4 phrase blocks will belong to the first clause reflecting 
the dominance of single clause sentences in the training set. After "the" is assigned 
to the first phrase block, this hypothesis is revised. The network then believes that 
there is an embedded clause of 3 (,possibly 4) phrases following the first phrase. This 
predictive behavior emerged spontaneously from the training procedure (a large majority 
of sentences in the training set beginning with a determiner had embedded clauses after 
the first phrase). The next two words (''dog who") confirm the network's expectation. The 
word "ate" allows the network to firmly decide on an embedded clause of 3 phrases within 
Incremental Parsing by Modular Recurrent Connectionist Networks 369 
The do9 uho at.e the snake as 9tven 
1111 
œ1ause_2 
The doo Oho at.e t, he snake uas 9tven 
Figure 3: Example of Clause Structure Dynamic Behavior. 
the main clause. This is the correct clausal structure of the sentence and is confirmed by 
the remainder of the input. The Interclause level indicates the appropriate relative clause 
relationship during the initial hypothesis of the embedded clause. 
The Clause Roles level processes the individual clauses as they get mapped through 
the Clause Structure level. The labeling units for clause 1 initially hypothesize an 
Agent/Action/Patient role structure with some competition from a Rec/Act/Pat role struc- 
ture (the Agent and Patient units' activation traces for clause 1, phrase 1 are shown in 
Figure 4). This prediction occurs because active constructs outnumbered passive ones 
during training. The final decision about role structure is postponed until just after the 
embedded clause is presented. The verb phrase "was given" immediately causes the 
Rec/Act/Pat role structure to dominate. Also, the network indicates that a fourth phrase 
(e.g. "by Mary") is expected to be the Agent. As with the first clause, an Ag/Act/Pat 
role structure is predicted for clause 2; this time the prediction is borne out. 
4.2 Generalization 
One type of generalization is automatic. A detail of the word representation scheme was 
omitted from the previous discussion. The feature patterns have two parts: a syntac- 
tic/semantic part and an identification part. The representations of "John" and "Peter" 
differ only in their ID parts. Units in the network which learn do not have any input 
connections from the ID portions of the word units. Thus, when the network learns to 
370 Jain and Waibel 
CLGIOSEI_PHRIqI .... CTHE_I)OG] 
The do9 ao ate the snake as 9iven a bone 
.11111]]l]111il]11111111111111111111111111111119111111mmmlllmll,,,,,,,,,, .................... 
Figure 4: Example of Clause Roles Dynamic Behavior. 
parse "John gave the bone to the dog," it will know how to parse "Peter promised the 
mitt to the boy." This type of generalization is extremely useful, both for addition of 
new words to the network and for processing many sentences not explicitly trained on. 
The network also generalizes to correctly process truly novel sentences--sentences which 
are distinct (ignoring ID features) from those in the training set. The weight sharing tech- 
niques at the Phrase and Clause Saucture levels have an impact here. While being difficult 
to measure generalization quantitatively, some statements can be made about the types 
of novel sentences which can be correctly processed relative to the training sentences. 
Substitution of single words resulting in a meaningful sentence is tolerated almost with- 
out exception. Substitution of entire phrases by different phrases causes some errors in 
structural parsing on sentences which have few similar training exemplars. However, the 
network does quite well on sentences which can be formed from composition between 
familiar sentences (e.g. interchanging clauses). 
4.3 Tolerance to Noise 
Several types of noise tolerance are interesting to analyze: ungrammaticality, word dele- 
tions (especially poorly articulated short function words), variance in word speed, inter- 
word silences, interjections, word/phrase repetitions, etc. The effects of noise were 
simulated by testing the parsing network on training sentences which had been corrupted 
in the ways listed above. Note that the parser was trained only on well-formed sentences. 
Sentences in which verbs were made ungrammatical were processed without difficulty 
(e.g. "We am happy."). Sentences in which verb phrases were badly corrupted produced 
reasonable interpretations. For example, the sentence "Peter was gave a bone to Fido," 
received an Ag/Act/Pat/Rec role structure as if "was gave" was supposed to be either 
"gave" or "has given". Interpretation of corrupted verb phrases was context dependent. 
Single clause sentences in which determiners were randomly deleted to simulate speech 
recognition errors were processed correctly 85 percent of the time. Multiple clause 
sentences degraded in a similar manner produced more parsing errors. There were fewer 
examples of multi-clause sentence types, and this hurt performance. Deletion of function 
words such as prepositions beginning prepositional phrases produced few errors, but 
deletions of critical function words such as "to" in infinitive consauctions introducing 
subordinate clauses caused serious problems. 
Incremental Parsing by Modular Recurrent Connectionist Networks 371 
The network was somewhat sensitive to variations in word presentation speed (it was 
trained on a constant speed), but tolerated inter-word silences. Interjections of "ahh" and 
partial phrase repetitions were also tested. The network did not perform as well on these 
sentences as other networks trained for less complex parsing tasks. One possibility is 
that the weight sharing is preventing the formation of strong attractors for the training 
sentences. There appears to be a tradeoff between generalization and noise tolerance. 
5 CONCLUSION 
We have presented a novel connectionist network architecture and its application to a 
non-trivial parsing task. A hierarchical, modular, recurrent connecfionist network was 
constructed which successfully learned to parse grammatically complex sentences. The 
parser exhibited predictive behavior and was able to dynamically revise hypotheses. 
Techniques for maximizing generalization were also discussed. Network performance 
on novel sentences was impressive. Results of testing the parser's sensitivity to several 
types of noise were somewhat mixed, but the parser performed well on ungrammafical 
sentences and sentences with non-critical function word deletions. 
Acknowledgments 
This research was funded by grants from ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Labora- 
tories and the National Science Foundation under grant number EET-8716324. We thank 
Dave Touretzky for helpful comments and discussions. 
References 
J. L. Elman. (1988) Finding Structure in Time. Tech. Rep. 8801, Center for Research 
in Language, University of California, San Diego. 
R. Hausser. (1988) Computation of Language. Springer-Verlag. 
A. N. Jain. (1989) A Connectionist Architecture for Sequential Symbolic Domains. Tech. 
Rep. CMU-CS-89-187, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. 
A. N. Jain and A. H. Waibel. (1990) Robust connectionist parsing of spoken language. 
In Proceedings of the 1990 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, 
and Signal Processing. 
M. I. Jordan. (1986) Serial Order: A Parallel Distributed Processing Approach. Tech. 
Rep. 8604, Institute for Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego. 
R. Miikkulainen and M. G. Dyer. (1989) Encoding input/output representations in 
connectionist cognitive systems. In D. Touretzky, G. Hinton, and T. Sejnowski 
(eds.), Proceedings of the 1988 Connectionist Models Summer School, pp. 347- 
356, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. Lang. (1989) Phoneme recog- 
nition using time-delay neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, 
and Signal Processing 37(3):328-339. 
