380 Giles, Sun, Chen, Lee and Chen 
HIGHER ORDER RECURRENT NETWORKS 
& GRAMMATICAL INFERENCE 
C. L. Giles*, G. Z. Sun, H. H. Chen, Y. C. Lee, D. Chen 
Department of Physics and Astronomy 
and 
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
A higher 
simulate 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 
* NEC Research Institute 
4 Independence Way, Princeton, N.J. 08540 
ABSTRACT 
order single layer recursive network easily learns to 
a deterministic finite state machine and recognize regular 
grammars. When an enhanced version of this neural net state machine 
is connected through a common error term to an external analog stack 
memory, the combination can be interpreted as a neural net pushdown 
automata. The neural net finite state machine is given the primitives, 
push and pop, and is able to read the top of the stack. Through a 
gradient descent learning rule derived from the common error 
function, the hybrid network learns to effectively use the stack 
actions to manipulate the stack memory and to learn simple context- 
free grammars. 
INTRODUCTION 
Biological networks readily and easily process temporal information; artificial neural 
networks should do the same. Recurrent neural network models permit the encoding 
and learning of temporal sequences. There are many recurrent neural net models, for ex- 
ample see [Jordan 1986, Pineda 1987, Williams & Zipser 1988]. Nearly all encode the 
current state representation of the models in the activity of the neuron and the next 
state is determined by the current state and input. From an automata perspective, this 
dynamical structure is a state machine. One formal model of sequences and machines 
that generate and recognize them are formal grammars and their respective automata. 
These models formalize some of the foundations of computer science. In the Chomsky 
hierarchy of formal grammars [Hopcroft & Ullman 1979] the simplest level of com- 
plexity is deftned by the finite state machine and its regular grammars. {All machines 
Higher Order Recurrent Networks and Grammatical Inference 381 
and grammars described here are deterministic.} The next level of complexity is de- 
scribed by pushdown automata and their associated context-free grammars. The push- 
down automaton is a finite state machine with the added power to use a stack memory. 
Neural networks should be able to perform the same type of computation and thus 
solve such learning problems as grammatical inference [Fu 1982]. 
Simple grammatical inference is defined as the problem of finding 0earning) a grammar 
from a finite set of strings, often called the teaching sample. Recall that a grammar 
{phrase-structured} is defined as a 4-tuple ( N, V, P, S) where N and V are a nontermi- 
nal and terminal vocabularies, P is a finite set of production rules and S is the start sym- 
bol. Here grammatical inference is also defined as the learning of the machine that 
recognizes the teaching and testing samples. Potential applications of grammatical in- 
ference include such various areas as pattern recognition, information retrieval, pro- 
gramming language design, translation and compiling and graphics languages [Fu 1982]. 
There has been a great deal of interest in teaching neural nets to recognize grammars and 
simulate automata [Allen 1989, Jordan 1986, Pollack 1989, Servant-Schreiber et. al. 
1989,Williams & Zipset 1988]. Some important extensions of that work are discussed 
here. In particular we construct recurrent higher order neural net state machines which 
have no hidden layers and seem to be at least as powerful as any neural net multilayer 
state machine discussed so far. For example, the learning time and training sample size 
are significantly reduced. In addition, we integrate this neural net finite state machine 
with an external stack memory and inform the network through a common objective 
function that it has at its disposal the symbol at the top of the stack and the operation 
primitives of push and pop. By devising a common error function which integrates the 
stack and the neural net state machine, this hybrid structure learns to effectively use the 
stack to recognize context-free grammars. In the interesting work of [Williams & 
Zipset 1988] a recurrent net learns only the state machine part of a Turing Machine, 
since the associated move, read, write operations for each input string are known and are 
given as part of the training set. However, the model we present learns how to manipu- 
late the push, pop, and read primitives of an external stack memory plus learns the ad- 
ditional necessary state operations and structure. 
HIGHER ORDER RECURRENT NETWORK 
The recurrent neural network utilized can be considered as a higher order modification 
of the network model developed by [Williams & Zipset 1988]. Recall that in a recur- 
rent net the activation state S of the neurons at time (t+l) is defined as in a state ma- 
chine automata: 
S(t+l) = F { S(t), I(0; W } , (1) 
where F maps the state S and the input I at time t to the next state. The weight matrix 
W forms the mapping and is usually learned. We use a higher order form for this map- 
ping: 
Si(t+l) = g{ ; Wij k Sj(0 Ik(0 } , (2) 
382 Giles, Sun, Chen, Lee and Chen 
where the range of i, j is the number of state neurons and k the number of input neurons; 
g is defined as g(x)=l/(l+exp(-x)). In order to use the net for grammatical inference, a 
learning rule must be devised. To learn the mapping F and the weight matrix W, given 
a sample set of P strings of the grammar, we construct the following error function E: 
E = 2 = ( Tr- S 0%) ) 2 (3) 
where the sum is over P samples. The error function is evaluated at the end of a present- 
ed sequence of length tp and S o is the activity of the output neuron. For a recurrent net, 
the output neuron is a designated member of the state neurons. The target value of any 
pattern is 1 for a legal string and 0 for an illegal one. Using a gradient descent proce- 
dure, we minimize the error E function for only the rth pattern. The weight update rule 
becomes 
AWij k = -T I 7wE = T I E r { )So(tp) / )Wij k } , (4) 
where T I is the learning rate. Using eq. (2), )So(tp) / )Wij k is easily calculated using 
the recursion relationship and the choice of an initial value for Si(t = 0)/Wij k, 
Sl(t+l)/Wijk = hi (Sl(t+l)) { /Jli Sj(t) Ik(0 + lg Wlm n In( 0 Sm(t)fOWij k } (5) 
where h(x) = dg/dx. Note that this requires )Si(0 / )Wij k be updated as each element 
of each string is presented and to have a known initj_a_! value. Given an adequate network 
topology, the above neural net state machine should be capable of learning any regular 
grammar of arbitrary string length or a more complex grammar of finite length. 
FINITE STATE MACHINE SIMULATION 
In order to see how such a net performs, we trained the net on a regular grammar, the du- 
al parity grammar. An arbitrary length string of O's and l's has dual parity if the 
string contains an even number of O's and an even number of l's. The network architec- 
ture was 3 input neurons and either 3, 4, or 5 state neurons with fully connected second 
order interconnection weights. The string vocabulary 0,1,e (end symbol) used a unary 
representation. The init_ia! training set consisted of 30 positive and negative strings of 
increasing sting length up to length 4. After including in the training all strings up to 
length 10 which resulted in misclassification(about 30 strings), the neural net state ma- 
chine perfectly recognized on all strings up to length 20. Total training time was usual- 
ly 500 epochs or less. 
By looking closely at the dynamics of learning, it was discovered that for different in- 
puts the states of the network tended to cluster around three values plus the initial 
state. These four states can be considered as possible states of an actual finite state ma- 
chine and the movement between these states as a function of input can be interpreted as 
the state transitions of a state machine. Constructing a state machine yields a perfect 
four state machine which will recognize any dual parity grammar. Using minimization 
procedures [Fu 1982], the extraneous state transitions can be reduced to the minimal 4- 
Higher Order Recurrent Networks and Grammatical Inference 383 
state machine. The extracted state machine is shown in Fig. 1. However, for more com- 
plicated grammars and different initial conditions, it might be difficult to extract the 
finite state machine. When different initial weights were chosen, different extraneous 
transition diagrams with more states resulted. What is interesting is that the neural 
net finite state machine learned this simple grammar perfectly. A first order net can al- 
so learn this problem; the higher order net learns it much faster. It is easy to prove that 
there are finite sate machines that cannot be represented by fffst order, single layer re- 
current nets [Minsky 1967]. For further discussion of higher order state machines, see 
[Liu, et. al. 1990]. 
0 
FIGURE 1: A learned four state machine; state 1 is both the start 
and the final state. 
NEURAL NET PUSHDOWN AUTOMATA 
In order to easily learn more complex deterministic grammars, the neural net must 
somehow develop and/or learn to use some type of memory, the simplest being a stack 
memory. Two approaches easily come to mind. Teach the additional weight structure in 
a multilayer neural network to serve as memory [Pollack 1989] or teach the neural net 
to use an external memory source. The latter is appealing because it is well known 
from formal language theory that a finite stack machine requires significantly fewer re- 
sources than a finite state machine for bounded problems such as recognizing a f'mite 
length context-free grammar. To teach a neural net to use a stack memory poses at least 
three problems: 1) how to construct the stack memory, 2) how to couple the stack mem- 
ory to the neural net state machine, and 3) how to formulate the objective function such 
that its optimization will yield effective learning rules. 
Most straight-forward is formulating the objective function so that the stack is cou- 
pled to the neural net state machine. The most stringent condition for a pushdown au- 
tomata to accept a context-free grammar is that the pushdown automata be in a final 
state and the stack be empty. Thus, the error function of eq. (3) above is modified to in- 
clude both final state and stack length terms: 
384 Giles, Sun, Chen, Lee and Chen 
where L(tp) is the final stack length at time tp, i.e. the time at which the last symbol of 
the string is presented. Therefore, for legal strings E = 0, if the pushdown automata is 
in a final state and the stack is empty. 
Now consider how the stack can be connected to the neural net state machine. Recall 
that for a pushdown automata [Fu 1982], the state transition mapping of eq. (1) includes 
an additional argument, the symbol R(0 read from the top of the stack and an additional 
stack action mapping. An obvious approach to connecting the stack to the neural net is to 
let the activity level of certain neurons represent the symbol at the top of the stack and 
others represent the action on the stack. The pushdown automata has an additional stack 
action of reading or writing to the top of the stack based on the current state, input, and 
top stack symbol. One interpretation of these mappings would be extensions of eq. (2): 
Si(t+l) = g( E wsijk Sj(0 Vk(0 } 
Ai(t+l ) = f{ E waijk Sj(0 Vk(0} 
[ st+ l At+ l 
recswn / i  xv. I Higher ..Order 
I OC ...o 
 st i t R t 
(7) 
(8) 
FIGURE 2:. Single layer higher order recursive neural network that is connected 
to a stack memory. A represents action neurons connected to the stack; R represents 
memory buffer neurons which read the top of the stack. The activation proceeds up- 
ward from states, input, and stack top at time t to states and action at time t+l. 
The recursion replaces the states in the bottom layer with the states in the top layer. 
where Aj(t) are output neurons controlling the action of the stack; Vk( 0 is either the 
input neuron value Ik(0 or the connected stack memory neuron value Rk( 0, dependent 
on the index k; and f=2g-1. The current values S j(0, Ik(0, and Rk(0 are all fully con- 
nected through 2nd order weights with no hidden neurons. The mappings of eqs. (7) and 
(8) define the recursire network and can be implemented concurrently and in parallel. 
Let A(t=0) & R(t=0)= 0. The neuron state values range continuously from 0 to 1 while 
the neuron action values range from - 1 to 1. The neural network part of the architecture 
Higher Order Recurrent Networks and Grammatical Inference 385 
is depicted in Fig. 2. The number of read neurons is equal to the coding representation of 
the stack. For most applications, one action neuron suffices. 
In order to use the gradient descent learning rule described in eq. (4), the stack length 
must have continuous values. (Other types of learning algorithms may not require a 
continuous stack.) We now explain how a continuous stack is used and connected to the 
action and read neurons. Interpret the stack actions as follows: push (A>0), pop (A<0), 
no action (A--O). For simplicity, only the current input symbol is pushed; then the 
number of input and stack memory neurons are equal. (If the input symbol is a, then 
only Aa of that value is pushed into the stack) T he stack consists of a summation of ana- 
log symbols. By definition, all symbols up in unit depth one are in the read neuron R at 
time t.. If A<0 (pop), a depth of IAI of all symbols in that depth is removed from the 
stack. In the next time step what remains in R is a unit length from the current stack 
top. An attempt to pop an empty stack occurs if not enough remains in the stack to pop 
depth IAI. Further description of this operation with examples can be found in [Sun, et. 
al.1990]. Since the action operation A removes or adds to the stack, the stack length at 
time t+ 1 is L(t+ 1) = L(t) + A(t), where L(t=0) = 0. 
With the recursion relations, stack construction, and error function defined, the learn- 
ing algorithms may be derived from eqs. (4) & (6) 
AWij k = q Er { 3Sl(tp)/3Wijk ' 3L(tp)/3Wij ß (9) 
The derivative terms may be derived from the recurrent relations eqs. (7) & (8) and the 
stack length equation. They are 
8Sl(t+l)/SWij k = h 1Sl(t+l) {/5il Sj(t) Vk(t ) + Z Wlm n Vn(t) 8Sm(t)fOWij k + 
l Wlm n Sm(t ) 8Rn(t)fOWij k } (10) 
and 
L(t+l)/0Wijk= 0L(t)/OWij k + OA(t)/OWij k . (11) 
Since the change )Rk(t)/)Wij k must contain information about past changes in action 
A, we have 
&Rk(t)/&Wij k = Z &Rk(t)/&A(t ) &A(t)f0Wij k _= A R &A(t)/&Wij k (12) 
where A R = 0,1, or -1 and depends on the top and bottom symbols read in R(0. This ap- 
proximation assumes that the read changes are only effected by actions which occurred 
in the recent past. The change in action with respect to the weights is defined by a recur- 
sion derived from eq. (8) and has the same form as eq. (10). For the case of popping an 
empty stack, the weight change increases the stack length for a legal string; otherwise 
nothing happens. It appears that all these derivatives are necessary to adequately inte- 
grate the neural net to the continuous stack memory. 
PUSHDOWN AUTOMATA SIMULATIONS 
To test this theoretical development, we trained the neural net pushdown automaton on 
386 Giles, Sun, Chen, Lee and Chen 
two context-free grammars, ln0 n and the parenthesis grammar (balanced strings of 
parentheses). For the parenthesis grammar, the net architecture consisted of a 2nd order 
fully interconnected single layer net with 3 state neurons, 3 input neurons, and 2 action 
neurons (one for push & one for pop). In 20 epochs with fifty positive and negative 
training samples of increasing length up to length eight, the network learned how to be 
a perfect pushdown automaton. We concluded this after testing on all strings up to 
length 20 and through a similar analysis of emergent state-stack values. Using a 
similar clustering analysis and heuristic reduction approach, the minimal pushdown 
automaton emerges. It should be noted that for this pushdown automaton, the state 
machine does very little and is easily learned Fig. 3 shows the pushdown automaton 
that emerged; the 3-tuple represents (input symbol, stack symbol, action of push or 
pop). The l n0 n was also successfully trained with a small training set and a few 
hundred epochs of learning. This should be compared to the more computationally 
intense learning of layered networks [Allen 1989]. A minimal pushdown automaton 
was also derived. For further details of the learning and emergent pushdown automata, 
see [Sun, et. al. 1990]. 
(0,,-1) (0,,-1) 
(e,y  (e,l,,) 
(1,1,1) 
(0,1,-1) 
(1,,1) 
FIGURE 3: Learned neural network pushdown automaton for parenthesis 
balance checker where the numerical results for states (1), (2), (3), and (4) 
are (1,0,0), (.9,.2,.2), (.89,.17,.48) and (.79,.25,.70). State (1) is the start 
state. State (3) is a legal end state. Before feeding the end symbol, a legal 
string must end at state (2) with empty stack. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work presents a different approach to incorporating and using memory in a neural 
network. A recurrent higher order net learned to effectively employ an external stack 
Higher Order Recurrent Networks and Grammatical Inference 387 
memory to learn simple context-free grammars. However, to do so required the cre- 
ation of a continuous stack structure. Since it was possible to reduce the neural network 
to the ideal pushdown automaton, the neural network can be said to have "perfectly" 
learned these simple grammars. Though the simulations appear very promising, many 
questions remain. Besides extending the simulations to more complex grammars, them 
are questions of how well such architectures will scale for "real" problems. What be- 
came evident was the power of the higher order network; again demonstrating its sp .eeA 
of learning and sparseness of training sets. Will the same be true for more complex 
problems is a question for further work. 
REFERENCES 
R.A. Allen, Adaptive Training for Connectionist State Machines, ACM Computer 
Conference, Louisville, p.428, (1989). 
D. Angluin & C.H. Smith, Inductive Inference: Theory and Methods, ACM Computing 
Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 3, p. 237, (1983). 
K.S. Fu, Syntactic Pattern Recognition and Applications, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ. (1982). 
J.E. Hopcroft & J.D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Corn- 
putation, Addison Wesley, Reading, Ma. (1979). 
M.I. Jordan, Attractor Dynamics and Parallelism in a Connectionist Sequential Ma- 
chine, Proceedings of the Eigtht Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Amherst, 
Ma, p. 531 (1986). 
Y.D. Liu, G.Z. Sun, H.H. Chen, Y.C. Lee, C.L. Giles, Grammatical Inference and Neu- 
ral Network State Machines, Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neu- 
ral Networks, M. Caudill (ed), Lawerence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J., vol 1. p.285 
(1990). 
ML. Minsky, Computation: Finite and Infinite Machines, Prentice-Hall, Englewood, 
NJ., p. 55 (1967). 
FJ. Pineda, Generalization of Backpropagation to Recurrent Neural Networks, Phys. 
Rev. Lett., vol 18, p. 2229 (1987). 
J.B. Pollack, Implications of Recursive Distributed Representations, Advances in Neu- 
ral Information Systems 1, D.S. Touretzky (ed), Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, Ca, p. 
527 (1989). 
D. Servan-Schreiber, A. Cleeremans & JJ. McClelland, Encoding Sequential Structure 
in Simple Recurrent Networks, Advances in Neural Information Systems 1, D.S. 
Touretzky (ed), Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, Ca, p. 643 (1989). 
G.Z. Sun, H.H. Chen, C.L. Giles, Y.C. Lee, D. Chen, Connectionist Pushdown Autom- 
ata that Learn Context-free Grammars, Proceedings of the International Joint Confer- 
ence on Neural Networks, M. Caudill (ed), Lawerence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J., vol 
1. p.577 (1990). 
R. J. Williams & D. Zipser, A Learning Algorithm for Continually Running Fully Re- 
current Neural Networks, Institute for Cognitive Science Report 8805, U. of CA, San 
Diego, LaJolla, Ca 92093, (1988). 
