614 Gish and B!anz 
Comparing the Performance of Connectionist 
and Statistical Classifiers on an Image 
Segmentation Problem 
Sheri L. Gish W.E. Blanz 
IBM Ahnaden Research Center 
650 Harry Road 
San Jose, CA 95120 
ABSTRACT 
ht the development of an image segmentation system for real time 
image processing applications, we apply the classical decision anal- 
ysis paradigan by viewing inmge segmentation as a pixel classifica- 
tion task. We use supervised training to derive a classifier for our 
system from a set of examples of a particular pixel classification 
problem. In this study, we test the suitability of a connection- 
ist method against two statistical methods, Gaussian maximum 
likelihood classifier and first, second, and third degree polynomial 
classifiers, for the solution of a "real world" image segmentation 
problem taken from combustion research. Classifiers are derived 
using aH three methods, and the performance of all of the classi- 
fiers on the training data set as well as on 3 separate entire test 
images is measured. 
I Introduction 
We are applying the trainable machine paradigm in our development of m. image 
seganentation system to be used in real time image processing applications. We 
view image segnentation as a classical decision analysis task; each pixel in a scene 
is described by a set of measurements, and we use that set of measurements with 
a classifier of our choice to determine the region or object within a scene to which 
that pixel belongs. Performing image segunentation as a decision analysis task pro- 
vides several advmttages. We can exploit the inherent trainability found in decision 
Comparing the Performance of Connectionist and Statistical Classifiers 615 
analysis systems [1] aad use supervised training to derive a classifier front a set of 
examples of a particular pixel classification problem. Classifiers derived using the 
trainable maddne paradigm will exhibit the property of generalization, and thus can 
be applied to data representing a set of problems similar to the example problem. hx 
our pixel classification sdteme, the classifier can be derived solely front the quanti- 
tative characteristics of the problem data. Our approach eliminates the dependency 
on qualitative characteristics of the problent data which often is characteristic of 
explicitly derived classification algorithms [2,3]. 
Classical decision analysis methods employ statistical techniques. We have com- 
pared a connectionist system to a set of alternative statistical Inethods on classifi- 
cation problems in whidx the classifier is derived using supervised training, and have 
found that the connectionist alternative is comparable, and in some cases prefer- 
able, to the statistical alternatives in terms of performance on problems of varying 
complexity [4]. That comparison study also analyzed the alternative inethods in 
terms of cost of implementation of the solution architecture in digital LSI. hx terms 
of our cost analysis, the connectionist architectures were much simpler to implement 
than the statistical architectures for the more complex classification problems; this 
property of the connectionJar methods makes them very attractive implementation 
choices for systems requiring hardware implementations for difficult applications. 
ht this study, we evaluate the performance of a connectionist method and several 
statistical methods as the classifier component of our real time image segmentation 
system. The classification problem we use is a "real world" pixel classification task 
using images of the size (200 pixels by 200 pixels) and variable data quality typical 
of the problems a production system would be used to solve. We thus test the 
suitability of the connectionist method for incorporation in a system with the per- 
lornmace requirements of our system, as well as the feasibility of our exploiting the 
advantages the simple connectionist architectures provide for systems implemented 
in hardware. 
2 Methods 
2.1 The Image Segmentation System 
The intage segmentation system we use is described in [5], and suxmuarized in 
Figure 1. The system is designed to perform low level image segmentation in real 
time; for production, the feature extraction and classifier system components are 
implemented in hardware. The classifier parameters are derived during the Training 
Phase. A user at a workstation outlines the regions or objects of interest in a 
training image. The system performs low level feature extraction on the training 
image, and the results of the feature extraction plus the input front the user are 
combined automatically by the system to form a training data set. The system then 
applies a supervised training method making use of the training data set in order 
to derive the coefficients for the classifier whidx can perform the pixel classification 
task. The feature extraction process is capable of computing 14 classes of features 
for each pixel; up to 10 features with the highest discriminatory power are used to 
616 Gish and B!anz 
describe all of the pixels in the image. Tlds selection of features is based only on an 
analysis of the results of the feature extraction process and is independent of the 
supervised learning paradigm being used to derive the classifier [õ]. The identical 
feature extraction process is applied in both the Training and Running Phases for 
a partictdar image segmentation problem. 
I 
TRAINING 
PHASE 
Training Images 
, ExFraat , Segmented 
Image 
USER 
Coefficients 
 for 
Classifier 
RUNNING 
PHASE 
Test Image 
Figure 1: Diagram of the real time image segmentation system. 
2.2 The Image Segmentation Problem 
The image segmentation problem used in this study is from combustion research and 
is described in [3]. The images are from a series of images of  combustion chamber 
taken by a high speed camera during the infiaamnation process of a gas/air mix- 
ture. The segmentation task is to determine the area of inflamed gas in the huage; 
therefore, the pixels in the image are classified into 3 different classes: cylinder, 
uninflamed gas, and flamed gas (See Figure 2). Exact determination of the area 
of flamed gas is not possible using pixel classification alone, but the greater the 
success of the pixel classification step, the greater the likelihood that a real time 
image segmentation system could be used successfully on this problem. 
2.6 The Classifiers 
The set of classifiers used in this study is composed of a connectionJar classifier 
based on the Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) model described in [7] and two 
statistical methods: a Gaussian maximum likelihood classifier (a Bayes classifier), 
and a polynomial classifier based on first, second, and third degree polynoauials. 
This set of classifiers was used in a general study comparing the performtrace of 
Comparing the Performance of Connectionist and Statistical Classifiers 617 
cylinder 
uninfl. mned gas 
ß ' inflmned gas 
Figure 2: The image segmentation problem is to classify each image pixel into 1 
of 3 regions. 
the alternatives on a set of classification problems; all of the classifiers as well as 
adaptation procedures are described in detail in that study [4]. hnplementation 
and adaptation of all classifiers in this study was performed as software simulation. 
The connectionist classifier was implemented in CMU Common Lisp running on an 
IBM RT workstation. 
The connectionist classifier architecture is a nmlti-layer feedforward network with 
one hidden layer. The network is fully connected, but there are only connections 
between adjacent layers. The number of units in the input and output layers are 
determined by the number of features in the feature vector describing each pixel 
and a binary encoding scheme for the class to which the pixel belongs, respectively. 
The number of units in the hidden layer is an architectural "free parameter." The 
network used in this study has 10 units in the input layer, 12 units in the hidden 
layer, and 3 units in the output layer. 
Network activation is achieved by using the continuous, nonlinear logistic function 
defined in [8]. The connectionist adaptation procedure is the application of the 
backpropagation learning rule also defined in [8]. For this problem, the learning rate 
r/ = 0.01 and the momentran ot = 0.O; both terms were held constant throughout 
adaptation. The presentation of all of the patterns in the training data set is termed 
a trial; network weights and unit biases were updated after the presentation of each 
pattern during a trial. 
The training data set for this problem was generated automatically by the image 
seganentation system. This training data set consists of approximately 4,000 ten 
element (feature) vectors (each vector describes one pixel); each vector is labeled as 
belonging to one of the 3 regions of interest in the inmge. The training data set was 
constructed from one entire training image, and is composed of vectors statistically 
representative of the pixels in each of the 3 regions of interest in that image. 
618 Gish and B!anz 
All of the classifiers tested in this study were adapted from the same training data 
set. The connectionJar classifier was defined to be converged for tlfis problem before 
it was tested. Network convergence is determined from the results of two separate 
tests. In the first test, the difference between the network output and the target 
output averaged over the entire training data set has to reach a miniminn. In the 
second test, the performance of the network in classifying the training data set is 
measured, and the number of misclassifications made by the network has to reach 
a minimum. Actual network performance in classifying a pattern is measured after 
post-processing of the output vector. The real outputs of each unit in the output 
layer are assigaLed tile values of 0 or 1 by application of a 0.5 decision threshold. 
In our binary encoding scheme, the output vector should have only one element 
with the value 1; that element corresponds to one of the 3 classes. If the network 
produces an output vector with either more than one element with tile value ! or all 
elements with the value 0, the pattern generating that output is considered rejected. 
For the test problem in this study, all of the classifiers were set to reject patterns 
in the test data stunplea. All of the statistical classifiers had a rejection threshold 
set to 0.03. 
3 Results 
The performance of each of the classifiers (connectionist, Gaussian maximum like- 
lihood, and linear, quadratic, and cubic polynomial) was measured on the training 
data set and test data representing 3 entire images taken from the series of com- 
bustion chamber images. One of those images, labeled Inmge 1, is the image from 
whid the training data set was constructed. The performance of all of the classifiers 
is summarized in Table 1. 
Although all of the classifiers were able to classify the training data set with com- 
parably few misclassifications, the Gaussian maximum likehhood classifier and the 
quadratic polynomial classifier were unable to perform on any of the 3 entire test 
images. The connectionist classifier was the only alternative tested in this study to 
deliver acceptable performmce on all 3 test images; the connectionist classifier had 
lower error rates on the test images than it delivered on the training data sample. 
Both the linear polynomial and cubic polynomial classifiers performed acceptably 
on the test Image 2, but then both exhibited high error rates on the other two 
test images. For this image segmentation problem, only the connectionist method 
generalized from the training data set to a solution with acceptable performance. 
In Figure 3, the results from pixel classification performed by the connectionist and 
polynomial classifiers on all 3 test images are portrayed as segmented images. The 
actual test images are included at the left of the figure. 
4 Conclusions 
Our results demonstrate the feasibility of the apphcation of a connectionist decision 
analysis method to the solution of a "real world" image segmentation problem. The 
Comparing the Performance of Connectionist and Statistical Classifiers 619 
Data Set 
Training 
Data 
Image 
Image 
Image 3 
Connectlonlst 
Classifier 
Error  Reject b 
10.40% 1.64% 
8.84% 1.72% 
5.82% 1.53% 
6.31% 1.63% 
Classifier 
Degree Error Reject 
1 11.25% 
2 9.61% 
3 8.13% 
1 41.7055 
:2 57.55% 
3 25.86% 
I 12.0155 
2 68.01% 
3 4.68% 
1 19.68% 
2 45.89% 
3 25.75% 
Reject 
1.62% 
1.41% 
1.05% 
4.63% 
3.66% 
0.:28% 
2.00% 
0.58% 
0.26% 
5.43% 
1.41% 
0.28% 
Gaussian 
Classifier 
Error 
12.84% 0.12% 
94.27% 0.00% 
69.09% 0.01% 
88.35% 0.00% 
aPercent misclassificatlons for all patterns. 
bPercent of all patterns rejected. 
qmage from which training data set was taken. 
Table 1: A sununary of the performance of the classifiers. 
inclusion of a connectionist classifier in our supervised segmentation system will al- 
low us to meet our performance requirements under real world problem constraints. 
Although the application of connectionism to the solution of real time machine 
vision problems represents a new processing method, our solution strategy has re- 
mained consistent with the decision analysis paradigm. Our connectionist classifiers 
are derived solely from the quantitative characteristics of the problem data; our con- 
nectionist architecture thus remains simple and need not be re-designed according 
to qualitative characteristics of each specific problem to which it will be applied. 
Our connectionist architecture is independent of the image size; we have applied the 
identical architecture successfully to images which range in size from 200 pixels by 
200 pixels to 512 pixels by 512 pixels [9]. In most research to date in which neural 
networks are applied to machine vision, entire images explicitly are snapped to net- 
works by making each pixel in an image correspond to a different unit in a network 
layer (see [10,11] for examples). This "pixel snap" representation makes scaing up 
to larger image sizes from the idealized "toy" research images a significant problem. 
Most statistical pattern classification methods require that problem data satisfy 
the assumptions of statistical models; unfortunately, real world problem data are 
complex and of variable quality and thus rarely can be used to guide the choice of an 
appropriate method for the solution of a particular problem a priori. For the image 
seganentation problem reported in this study, our classifier performmtce results show 
that the problem data actually did not satisfy the assmnptions behind the statistical 
models underlying the Gaussian maximum likelihood classifier or the polynomial 
620 Gish and B!anz 
Original hnages connectionist linear poly. cubic poly. 
,; 
lana.ge 1 , 
hnage 2 
hnage 3 
! 
Figure 3: The grey levels assigated to each region are: Black -- cylinder, Light 
Grey -- uninfl. amed gas, Grey -- flamed gas. Original inmges are at the left of the 
figure. 
classifiers. It appears that the Gaussian model least fits our problem data, the 
polynomial classifiers provide a slightly better fit, and the connectionist method 
provides the fit required for the solution of the problem. It is also notable that all 
the alternative methods in this study could be adapted to perform acceptably on 
the training data set, but extensive testing on several different entire images was 
required in order to demonstrate the true performance of the alternative methods 
on the actual problem, rather than just on the training data set. 
These results show that a connectionist method is a viable choice for a system such 
as ours which requires a simple architecture readily implemented in hardware, the 
flcxibihty to handle complex problems described by large amounts of data, and the 
robustness to not require problem data to meet many model assumptions a priori. 
Comparing the Performance of Connectionist and Statistical Classifiers 621 
References 
[1] R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart. Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis. Wiley, 
New York, 1973. 
W. E. Blanz, J. L. C. Sanz, and D. Petkovic. Control-free low-level image 
segmentation: Theory, ard6teeture,and experimentation. In J. L. C. Sanz, 
editor, Advances o! Machine Vision, Applications and Architectures, Springer- 
Verlag, 1988. 
[3] 
B. Straub and W. E. Blanz. Combined decision theoretic and syntactic ap- 
proach to image seglnentation. Machine Vision and Applications, 2(1):17-30, 
1989. 
[41 
[5] 
[6] 
Sheri L. Gish and W. E. Blanz. Comparing a Connectiontat Trainable Classifier 
with Classical Statistical Decision Analysis Methods. Research Report RJ 6891 
(65717), IBM, Jmxe 1989. 
W. E. Blanz, B. Shung, C. Cox, W. Greiner, B. Dom, and D. Petkovi6. Design 
and implementation o] a low level image segmentation architecture - LISA. 
Research Report RJ 7194 (67673), IBM, December 1989. 
W. g. Blmxz. Non-parametric feature selection for multiple class processes. In 
Proc. 9th Int. Con]. Pattern Recognition, Rome, Italy, Nov. 14-17 1988. 
[7] David E. Rumelhart, Joanes L. McClelland, et al. Parallel Distributed Process- 
ing. MIT Press, Cronbridge, Massachusetts, 1986. 
[81 
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning in- 
ternal representations by error propagation. In David E. Rumelhart, James L. 
McClellmxd, et al., editors, Parallel Distributed Processing, chapter 8, MIT 
Press, Cainbridge, Massachusetts, 1986. 
[9] 
W. E. Blanz mxd Sheri L. Gish. A Connectiontat Classifier Architecture Applied 
To Image Segmentation. Research Report RJ 7193 (67672), IBM, December 
1989. 
[10] 
[11] 
K. Fukushima, S. Miyake, and T. Itc. Neocognitron: a neural network model 
for a mechanism of visual pattern recognition. [EEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-13(5):826-834, 1983. 
Y. Hirai. A model of hmnan associative processor. IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SM0-13(5):851-857, 1983. 
